 Story_ID: 168295 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Okay, my full name is William--(brief interruption)--my name is Grayson Mitchell, G-R-A-Y-S-O-N, last name Mitchell, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born the eighth day of March 1950 [March 8, 1950] in beautiful Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: All right now what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm chairman and CEO of a corporate communications and public affairs firm by the name of Summit Consulting Group. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were the press secretary for Harold Washington, right? Speaker 2: Yes I had the honor of serving as his press secretary in the general election campaign, and then once he became mayor [of Chicago, Illinois] and entered city hall in 1983 I went into city hall as press secretary where I remained for the first two years of his administration. Speaker 1: Okay, now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is December 12th, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, in the offices of-- Speaker 2: Strange questions, Larry. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Sounds like a shrink, where are we now. Speaker 1: (Laughter) How many fingers am I holding up? Speaker 2: Yeah, right where are we? I get nervous when you ask those questions. Story_ID: 168296 Speaker 1: Well, before we go into depth (laughter) there are five People magazine-ish type questions that only require a brief answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is macaroni and cheese. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favor color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is gray. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is spring. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Jamaica. Speaker 1: And lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No I don't. I don't, I don't have that. Story_ID: 168297 Speaker 1: Okay, well I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's side. We'll start with your mother's side of the family. Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Helen Bailey Mitchell, H-E-L-E-N, B-A-I-L-E-Y, Bailey, and Mitchell, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L. Speaker 1: And what is her place of birth and date of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Mobile, Alabama, and she was born in 1923. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If I'm correct. She was twenty-five years old when I was born, so 1925, I'm sorry. She was born in 1925, April 1 [April 1, 1925], Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, okay now what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace her side? Speaker 2: I can go back to her grandparents, which for me would be great-grandparents. Both her mother and her father were natives of Mobile, and the family was an old family. In the South, family history is pretty easy to document, especially where we grew up because families tended to be there for generations. And if you go to the Eastern Shore of Alabama today and ask about the Baileys or the Joneses, which was, and Jones was my mother's maternal family, and ask about the Joneses or the Baileys there are--I have lots of cousins who are still there. So, family, family roots run deep. Story_ID: 168298 Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me something about them? What, what did they do for a living, you know are there any-- Speaker 2: My parents? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah your great, your great-grandparents and your grandparents. Speaker 2: The story has been told to me that my great-grandmother was a Indian, Choctaw, and she married my great-grandfather, William Bailey. And the most I get from him that he was a very clever character. Never really held a steady job, but he was blessed enough to be able to read. He was taught reading some place during reconstruction and he literally earned the family's living by going to the dock every morning greeting the ferry that would come over in Mobile Bay from Mobile [Alabama] over to the Eeastern Shore and he would read for a fee. He would read mail to people who would pay him, and he would read the morning newspapers to people who'd gather around and that's how he earned a living. He had several children, and my grandfather, William Bailey, which is why I have the name William. It's been in our family as a sur--as a, as a first name for four generations. But William Bailey was a carpenter, very large man, and very spiritual. He was head of the deacon board at church, and the church that there has been our family church for four generations. And my, and his wife had a huge number of siblings, siblings, almost all had children, almost all of whom stayed or remained on the Eastern Shore in and around Mobile, so I grew up with a very large extended family most of whom are almost all dead at this point. 'Cause in those days my great-grandfather had like seven children. His son, who would be my grandfather, they had five children. My grandmother was one of about nine children. They had very large families. And with each successive generation you got smaller and smaller families to the point where my mother [Helen Bailey Mitchell] only had my sister and me and I have three other, I have three cousins to show you how the number--how the family tree gets smaller. Story_ID: 168299 Speaker 1: But, that's the, that's almost the extent of my knowledge. My, my grandmother lived with us, and I knew all of her siblings, Uncle Dock [ph.] and several of her, of her brothers and sisters, and all of whom I grew up around, I lived around. Only about one of the nine lived away from Mobile [Alabama]. The rest lived there and lived, lived very full lives. They all lived until their late seventies, early eighties. They were very healthy people, but it was frankly the lifestyle was conducive to that. Warm weather, lots of exercise. They all were tremendous swimmers, and one of the family rituals was after mass or after church on Sunday we all would go down to the family beach shacks there on the bay and we all would have Sunday picnics and Sunday picnics involved swimming competitions to see who could swim the furthest. And I remember some aunts, some great aunts even would be so far away from shore out in the bay swimming we would even lose sight of them. They were people who were very physically, stayed very physically active and they frankly ate very good food. All the food they didn't grow or a neighbor didn't catch from the water they didn't eat. We never, I never remembered canned goods or frozen foods being brought in my house ever, and again the eggs you ate you had to really go out and get those out of the nest yourself. The idea of buying eggs from, from the store was a taboo and if, if going with my grandmother you just didn't do that. The eggs, eggs are more than three to four days fresh she didn't eat them. She would just be appalled how we'd go into a food store and by eggs, not knowing the hen from which they came (laughter), let along buying some eggs and you didn't know how long it had been in the fridge. So, I guess it's not surprising they would live so long. But, they lived a long time and I remember the eldest of my generation of children. So I was, I was perhaps, I think I was like maybe in college when my grandmother died and in college and an adult out of college working when my great aunts and uncles died. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So they lived, they lived a long time. Story_ID: 168300 Speaker 1: Okay, tell, tell us about your father's side of the family? Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay, my father's full name is William Gray Mitchell, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Gray, G-R-A-Y, Mitchell, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born on May 19, 1923 in Rockford, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, well what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: I tend to know less, although I, I know my--I did not meet my grandmother before her death, or I did, but I was too small. She died in 1952. I was only two years old. My father's, my natural grandfather, Clifford Mitchell, died a year earlier, so I was only one when he died, but my grandmother I, I have a faint recollections of, but not a lot. And my father, it was also I [sic, he] had a stepfather named Bennett Frazier and I met him because he lived well into my early twenties, and he resided in Athens, Alabama, and Athens is a town right across the ridge from Huntsville, Alabama, and he raised my, my father and most of his brothers and sisters because my grandmother must have really been a character. She had six children and only two of whom had the same father, so she had three different men in her life. There were the Carters, there were the Mitchells, and there were the Fraziers. I remember Mr. Frazier who was the third and final husband that my grandmother had and his siblings for the most part lived here in Chicago [Illinois] and Louisville, Kentucky. I have two uncles who lived here. One is deceased. He lived here all of his life. And I have another uncle who lived here until very recently. He worked at Sears Roebuck [& Co.] for almost forty years. He now lives with his, with his youngest brother in Alabama. He is in his early eighties. And I had an aunt until recently, my father's only sister, Edith Jean Frazier [ph.], who lived in Louisville, Kentucky, but she died exactly about a year ago, and she died at about the age of sixty-seven or sixty-eight. Story_ID: 168301 Speaker 1: Okay, now was the family originally from Louisville [Kentucky] or? Speaker 2: No, there was no one really from Louisville. My Aunt Jean, Edith Jean Frazier [ph.], enrolled in college, so they thought. They gave her, her tuition and sent her off, and she went right out of the back door from the day she stepped in the school. So, she ran away with a guy who helped her live in Louisville. She never enrolled in school, took the tuition money, and partied. That's the story of my aunt and the story of how she got in Louisville, Kentucky. She was the only family member in Louisville. Most of my father's [William Gray Mitchell] family really was Chicago [Illinois]. Chicago was home to them, which is how I got here. Speaker 1: There's no tra-tradition of having come from any other place? Speaker 2: Rockford [Illinois], Chicago, and because Mr. Frazier and my father who must have been a teenager when his mother married Mr. Frazier and Mr. Frazier moved from Illinois to Alabama, which is how my father got there. My father went to the [U.S.] Army, came out, went to Alabama State College [later, Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] where he met my mother [Helen Bailey Mitchell], and they got married. He returned to Mobile [Alabama], didn't like it, didn't like the beach, didn't like the sand, didn't like seafood, so he was totally out of place. He was, he was, he was a big city guy, never really felt at home in that environment. So, after several years they left Mobile and they came to Chicago where he had two brothers and several great aunts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he always considered Chicago really to be his home. Story_ID: 168302 Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family that stick out that they told about the past? Speaker 2: Oh, they, they were quite some people. Compared to my mother's [Helen Bailey Mitchell] family, my mother's family--old southern black people who grew up around church, close family ties, owning substantial amounts of land, lived across the [Mobile] Bay in Eastern Shore across from Mobile [Alabama], one of the founding families of that village. Kind of impossible to pass through those towns without knowing the family. Very prominent. Very educated. Education was made a huge family priority. On my mother's side, all of my mother's sisters and brothers are college educated, master's degrees or above. Most of them were educators, very heavy focus on education. On my father's [William Gray Mitchell] side, tends to be more urban based, not as much of a strong emphasis on education. My father was the only one of his siblings who attended college and who had college degrees. He had a stepbrother who was a professor at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Other than the two of them, there was no one on my father's side of the family who had pursued that. They also were people who were not as closely knit as my mother's family. My mother's family had been essentially living in the same place for three generations, father's family quite different. My mother's family therefore thought my mother had married far beneath her station in life because once they met my father and realized that one, his brothers and sisters all have different surnames, different dads, and her side of the family that was, that spelled a loose network at best, so they never really--it's a total different, two different contrasts of how black people grew up. The South, the southern family was probably typical of my mother's family. In growing up in the Gulf Coast of Alabama where you didn't have the racism and you didn't have the brutality of segregation as worse there as you did in some places more identified with the South, they were able to make a living and able to protect themselves and able to really have a really productive full wholesome life. You know with beach cottages and vacations and lots of land and a pretty civil, a pretty civil way of living. Father's, my father's family had a different experience. One, one of his brothers was a postman. Another, another one worked at an unskilled job at Sears Roebuck [& Co.]. Another sister was a college dropout, went to live in Louisville, Kentucky, and had a very full romantic life, was always the subject of family gossip. So, there's a totally different, totally different contrast. Story_ID: 168303 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you grow up in Mobile [Alabama] or Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Stayed there [Mobile, Alabama] until I was--my family moved away when I was about fourteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The first fourteen years I did. Speaker 1: Okay, well let me ask you about your early life in Mobile. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Where I grew up and where we lived was across the [Mobile] Bay from Mobile, and we were physically about a quarter of a mile from the bay. In those days, unlike now, beach front property was undesirable. Nobody built on the beach. You always built inland, and the reason you built inland is because we had in those days hurricanes almost two and three a season. Also, people did not like the fact that you had septic tank problems when you built in the sand. So, the only thing people ever build down on the beach would be beach shacks or piers. So, all the houses, especially masonry house, which was what was the preferred building material back in my day in Alabama, you had to do that, do that inland. So, my family built a house, had it constructed architect designed and were very proud of it, and we lived right across the street from an Italian family whose father was the mayor of this little town called Daphne, Alabama. Daphne was a, essentially a small fishing village. Most of the people there--a small town maybe eight thousand to ten thousand people. We were physically about fifteen, eighteen miles from Mobile. We were about sixty miles from Pensacola [Florida]. Almost everybody worked in Mobile and commuted or you worked in fishing or you worked in agriculture or you were a small businessman. Now, it's like the, when I go back there now the Eastern Shore has become a very sort of elite extension of Mobile. There's a lot of fabulous houses and a lot of condos that snow birds go down and buy in retirement. Places where we used to play football and just lay around and have fun those places are now built up with condos. I'm looking at magazines and I see houses for sale across the street from where I have cousins still living. And the Target store is on land that my cousin is ground leasing to Target and Home Depot. 'Cause in my day, I mean, it was really a very small town with Catholic parishes where I started going to school, Greek Orthodox Church. There was a town that African Americans, about half the population I would say was African American, about half of them are cousins, and the Greeks and Italian families who had been there for generations and they are still there. They're slowly dying out, but basically the leadership of the town is far bigger now, a lot more people because frankly it's a very desirable place to live and your midway between New Orleans [Louisiana] and Pensacola on Highway 98 right there on the water, so you know they doing, they're doing well. Story_ID: 168304 Speaker 1: Now this is atypical of what people think about when they think of Mississippi, Greeks and Italians on a coast and people are coming and going and new people are coming in from the sea all the time, you know, did, did that make it a little bit different from the rest of Mississippi or did they-- Speaker 2: It made it a different experience because a lot of what we knew the South to be frankly was different for us. We had, I mean there's no question that segregation was enforced. It was a law of the State of Alabama and of the United States, but we didn't have the veracity that it had elsewhere. Some of that I think was mitigated because of the huge dominance the Catholic Church has and secondly another key reality is that the Creole culture and the, and Creole sociology frankly covers that whole southern Gulf Coast area. I had an aunt who frankly nobody knew if she was white or black. We didn't really know, we didn't confirm that until she actually died, Hattie Jones (ph.), because when we would go to Mobile [Alabama] on Saturdays we would sit there in Bellingrath [Gardens and Home, Mobile, Alabama], which is a central park in Mobile, and we needed something to eat we couldn't go to Woolworths stand and get it because it was segregated, but my aunt would go in and get us whatever we want. We also had friends in that town in Mobile who were very affluent people, even back then. The Coopers of Alabama, I mean the Coopers of Mobile was a family that was interrelated to family and they owned the big funeral home and they owned insurance companies and they owned a bunch of stuff, and they loaned the City of Mobile money at the turn of the century, so the city could pave the streets. And they had chauffeured Cadillacs and so we were always piggybacked with them 'cause when he got ready to go shopping in some of the better stores in Mobile, the stores would remain open for them after hours just so they could come in. So, in the South it, it was a little, it was a little different. And also, also you're dealing with families that frankly as I said, but mostly first, first generation immigrants. The Trioni's (ph.) who was probably the most prominent family in Alabama was close to my family, and the Yancey's. I'm thinking back to some of those family names, and it, it made a difference. It made a real difference. And also in the Eastern Shore of Alabama as it's true in southern Mississippi I don't really think and I'm not sure, sure if history would corroborate this though, but I'm going from family stories, slavery or plantations really did not extend that far south. So, what you had down there for the most part were Europeans 'cause when the French came in and the Louisiana Purchase that whole area had become what is now Louisiana and southern Mississippi and the French were the first who actually helped or at least gave black people a chance for self-definition and for some economic independence. That's why today you have more black owned business in New Orleans [Louisiana] than you may have any place else in the country. Charleston [South Carolina] would be another place like that too because you have people who have been third, fourth generation upholsterers, second, third generation mechanics because their forefathers were in those business because the French allowed that. If you go inland south, you won't find that. And I think it had everything to do with the fact that you had European influence and European settlers who were in charge of those territories and also back in my day, back in the '50s [1950s] there were so few people that really, I mean the population clearly was being driven by more than Alabama, Montgomery [Alabama], Birmingham [Alabama]. The only industries we really had there of which there was really any, of any consequence, we had a, an [U.S.] Air Force base called Brookley Air Force Base [Mobile, Alabama], and we had the shipping docks. The shipping docks brought in a large number of farness and brought in a large number of jobs for black people because in my, in my youth I, I would go and meet my uncle. Uncle Dock (ph.) who was a foreman at the, at the, at the pier and virtually every longshoreman in those days was black, and those were good paying jobs and relatively speaking. So you had, we had a chance to be able to carve out a life for yourself and because of the Air Force Base as soon as the federal government relaxed racial segregation in its own facilities that too became a little less onerous toward. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so I think, it's just a long way of explaining I think that the fabric of everyday life for black people in the South in 1950 on the Gulf Coast was really a different experience-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --than it may have been in Montgomery or Albany [Georgia] or Jackson [Mississippi] because of the European influence to be quite honest about it, and you can still see that today. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168305 Speaker 1: And you, you had a lot of interracial marriages almost in every family. Speaker 2: Really, really. Speaker 1: That was quite common. Speaker 2: Was it, well you know I know it was against the law in some of those states and I think it still is in some of them even though it's not enforced to do, do that. Speaker 1: Yeah, but I mean my Aunt Hattie [Jones (ph.)] I mean she married my great uncle and my great uncle was, was black as midnight. She married him and we always suspected she was white 'cause we could, after we got of some age we can look at her physically and then every now and then somebody would pull up in a big car and she'd go out and get in the car and talk, she'd come back in and we say, "Who is that Nanny?" and she'd say, "oh just some people stop by to see us." Well, when she died and went to the funeral we later found out those were her relatives, that in fact she was white and she had married my uncle like at some point back in the late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s] and had chosen to live openly with him and obviously people in our town in Mobile [Alabama] knew that because her family, even though they may have disowned her, they didn't disown her at the funeral and I found that to be so interesting. But, I also can remember in many families that I know in Biloxi [Mississippi], Gulfport [Mississippi], Mobile, Fort, Fort Morgan [Alabama] where you have people who looked, you couldn't tell if they were black or white physically because of the Creole influence. I mean, when you meet a person who is truly Creole you literally can't tell-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --what race they are and there are lots of folks like that. It was very common to have families whose skin complexion would vary from the darkest of brown all the way to auburn hair and green eyes, all in the same family. That's not atypical down in that part of the country. Story_ID: 168306 Speaker 1: Now what kind of little boy were you? What, what were you like when you were growing up? What did you like to do, what was your personality like? What were you interested in? Speaker 2: A classic, a classic bookworm, a nerd. I think back on that now and I laugh. And other cousins who I grew up with are absolutely floored that I turned out to be what they considered normal because both of parents were educators and their friends were educators. They groomed me to be their--I, I became an extension of their aspiration. My mother [Helen Bailey Mitchell] has had a professor in college, a guy named Edgar Epps who had a Ph.D. at the age I think of twenty-four and they knew, they had friends who were racing to get Ph.D.'s, and the thinking at the time was that the highest an African American could go to get a Ph.D. and teach in a college. In their minds, that was like, you know, that was the thing. So, they had programmed me to be that kind of a bookworm and it's amazing the kind of impact parents could have on children because I was perfectly the kind of one-sided unbalanced kid that would have gone on and very blindly pursued that. And as a matter of fact I did until I go to college. I was an early admission candidate in school. I, I enrolled in Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I had just turned fifteen. I left high school after ninth grade, so when I'm asked which high school did I graduate from well I didn't graduate from college [sic, high school], and I think back what a hell of a loss not to have gone through those high school years when you really begin to develop and go to the prom and you know all the things you want to do. Speaker 1: So, you, you, you entered Morehouse early you said. How old were you? Speaker 2: At fifteen. Speaker 1: At fifteen okay. Speaker 2: After the ninth grade. I completed ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, tenth, eleventh, twelfth grades I had missed. I spent those at Morehouse, and my family was so damned independent they had groomed me to be so independent 'cause even though I entered Morehouse at age fifteen, I already had nine credit hours. I had already--I, I entered under advanced freshmen at fifteen 'cause I had already done two summers at, in, in on a college campus and had gotten credits for it. I also had gotten a grant from IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] 'cause I had, I was, I had a heavy math aptitude at the time and I was developing a computer using, playing around with logarithms and it came to the attention of IBM. They had an office, a regional office there in Mobile [Alabama], and from that I got sent to a summer internship down at Florida State University [Tallahassee, Florida] where I was with a bunch of other kids who had high aptitude in math and computers were just beginning to kind of break out at that point-- Story_ID: 168307 Speaker 1: --Okay, now let's not go too far into college. I want to take you back to grade school-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know and what grade school did you attend? Speaker 2: School, I started out in Catholic school. In nursery school, kindergarten, and first grade was in a Catholic parish. Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: I can't remember. Speaker 1: Well we've got it written down here I think so. Speaker 2: Yeah I can find it. Speaker 1: It's alright. Speaker 2: I then I enrolled in public school from second grade on and it was called the Baldwin County Training School [Daphne, Alabama]. It was one, it was grade one through twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And training school was very common to the South at that point. There was always the, the conspicuous designation for an all-black school 'cause there was a Baldwin Counting School. That was the white school. And you had the Baldwin County Training School and that was a black school. And the entire enrollment of the school was probably three hundred, four hundred kids. Speaker 1: Yeah, the name seems to imply that you all were to be trained rather than educated. Speaker 2: Clearly, clearly that was the intention when, when they set it up. But, in this, in this case in Baldwin County Training School you probably had at least half of the kids who graduated every year--and the graduating classes would be forty to fifty kids, at least half would go on to college. And the only training I remember was performed there was that I was, I was obliged to take a course in vocational, where you use your hands, which was to me the worse course I ever had to take. I, I even hated to go outside and play as a kid. My father [William Gray Mitchell] would have to literally trick me outside the door and then when I got outside on the stoop he would lock the door and make me go out and play (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 168308 Speaker 1: How did you get that focused on indoor, I mean, reading and to--that you wouldn't-- Speaker 2: Because during the summers I'd spend most of my summers with my uncle and aunt down in Tallahassee [Florida], Dr. Charles Mason [ph.] and his wife. They were heavy academics and so were my parents [Helen Bailey Mitchell and William Gray Mitchell]. And they started--obviously I was bent towards it anyway, but I mean, I started reading getting into all kinds of books, doing Shakespeare when I was at a very young age and I enjoyed the attention that I was getting from the adults and the more they saw that I could absorb the more they put on me, so much so that I was actually teaching on the faculty of Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] when I was thirteen, the summer I was thirteen years old I was actually teaching. Speaker 1: What, what were you teaching? Speaker 2: I was teaching reading and English. My uncle was the summer dean of the, of that school. That's when speed reading was just coming in and reading and comprehension. You would read books on the computers or what they then called computers they were really just reading machines and we'd have bibliography and would have to discuss 'em. I actually had college freshmen and sophomores in my class. I was so embarrassed because the first day I walked in, of course, they laughed and asked me how old was I and they did that I'm sure for only one purpose to begin whetting my appetite for being that kind of academic they wanted me to be. So, they very methodically did it and I, I was certainly up--fit right into the role. I actually even tried to write a book. Story_ID: 168309 Speaker 1: I had authored a book like when I was around eleven or twelve, and actually, and actually met with a publisher. Speaker 2: Now what book was it? What was it about? Speaker 1: You know what I can't even remember now what the--it was, it was nonfiction and I had written about the South 'cause I was very shaken at that point because my mother [Helen Bailey Mitchell] had been a classmate of Ralph Abernathy who was very prominent in SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. So, he would come by the house a lot and on some of those occasions he would bring Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] with him. Through that connection, I also met Autherine Lucy and Autherine Lucy was the person whose now kind of forgotten, but she was the first black student to integrate the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] and having met those people and watch what would happen to them on the news I was very emotionally shaken by that. And I found myself writing about it, and I wrote. I remember about writing by hand on yellow legal pads and when I had finished I typed it up and I actually sent it to a publisher in New York [City] who actually came down to interview me with my parents not even knowing it. And then when he found out that my parent--when he found out how young I was he was at the Admiral Semmes Hotel [Mobile, Alabama] and I was supposed to go there for a two o'clock meeting, I'll never forget it, he sent a letter and everything and I asked my father [William Gray Mitchell] to drive me other there and that's the first time he knew that I had this meeting and the guy, and my father called the guy and, and my father asked him did he know I was just a kid, and the guy said no he didn't know I was a kid. So, my father said you know he can't come and meet without his parents. So, that was the end of that meeting. Yeah, but I mean I was a classic nerd. I mean, I didn't even like playing. I mean, I was non-athletic and didn't like going out of the house to play with other kids. Speaker 2: So, you didn't play baseball or basketball or-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --anything? Nothing outdoors? Speaker 1: No. I, I mean I was really a boring, one-dimensional kid. Speaker 2: Did you have any friends? Speaker 1: I did and now that I think back on it they were very tolerant because I must have been absolutely no fun because I was only into, into books, into reading, into, into being a bookworm because I really was trying to, trying to excel at that 'cause my goal was at that point to get through college as fast as I can and get a Ph.D. by the time I was twenty-one and then I was gonna come back and teach. That was my goal. So, I was in a race with that. Story_ID: 168310 Speaker 1: Okay now, now did you watch television? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Or listen to music, popular music? Speaker 2: Yeah, I listened to music, listened to the radio. My family were big and my aunt big jazz lovers. See, I always interacted with adults. I found kids to be very boring, so I found myself spending a lot of time around adults, either family members or just friends of mines parents. So, when I was in their presence we were listening to Dinah Washington, Brook Benton, Dakota Staton, and I had a, an aunt, Stella Jackson [ph.], who was married to a guy named Lewis Jackson [ph.] who was a club owner and a real man about town in Mobile [Alabama] and through him I got exposed to that side of life, drinking a scotch and milk and drinking martinis and knowing how to dress, knowing that there are summer white linens and there are winter white linens. He was that kind of a guy. We were at poker every, every Sunday night with the boys at the Elks Club there in Mobile. So, I always, I always loved being around that kind of company as opposed to around kids my own age. With the friends I had were most, most were family, distant cousins. As I said, in, in this town and on the Eastern Shore most of us were related because you only had a small number of families who had been there for generations. So, if you weren't second or third cousins, you probably were fourth, somebody had intermarried. There weren't many, there weren't many families there who were not in one of the original founding families. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, my next door neighbor was a guy named [HM] Bill Harvey [William R. Harvey] who, he went on to become the president of Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], the university. He's the president now, and Bill had come there to run a program for Tuskegee Institute [later, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], he and his wife [Norma Baker Harvey] lived next door to us. Story_ID: 168311 Speaker 1: Now, now did you go to church? Speaker 2: Every Sunday, every Sunday went to church. A lot of the, a lot of the life was around church. Speaker 1: So, what, what kind of church did you all attend? Speaker 2: It was interesting I started off because I attended Catholic school and most of my friends were Catholic and some of family members were Catholic, I started out in the Catholic Church and then I ended up as I got older in the Baptist Church, which is what my family's, my mother's [Helen Bailey Mitchell] family was Baptist, Macedonia Baptist Church [Mobile, Alabama] founded in 18--in the 1860s. It's an old church. And most of the ministers there have been people who've--we've only had a small number of ministers in all that time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: And almost all of the members there--I mean that's where my family has been going for generations. Story_ID: 168312 Speaker 1: Okay, now who were some of the people that impressed you growing up? Who were some of the adults, teachers, or church people or who-- Speaker 2: Teachers did, but I also had some family members. My Aunt Stella [Jackson (ph.)] and her husband [Lewis Jackson (ph.)] really did because they were real, they were, they were the direct opposite of my parents. My Aunt Stella owned a club. They were slick dressers, party people. They lived for the big party. Mardi Gras was always their thing. They had always a lot of fast slick talking people around them. I loved that, 'cause it was something that was completely different from what I was accustomed to and now that I think back on it they were clearly and intentionally trying to break me out of this, this damn bookworm mode that my parents had me in and try to give me some common sense and expose me to something beyond what my parents had. It's very clear now that I think back on it. So, when I would spend the weekends with them I would see a part of the life that I had never, you know I'd never seen through my parents and loved it. So, they had a big influence on me especially on values, 'cause I learned that for the first time that you know there's a lot more to living than just degrees, because the people I met through them I really liked and I noticed they're not academics. They're not teachers and I noticed that my parents didn't really think much of those people. There's a real class thing there that I noticed. I had a lot of trouble with that. I had another cousin named [Aura J.] Bucky Miller. To this day, Bucky Miller is a host of the Marriott Grand Hotel [Resort and Golf Club, Point Clear, Alabama], which sits at the mouth of the Mobile Bay and the Gulf of Mexico. It's been a five star resort for years. All of my family worked there at one time or the other. My mother [Helen Bailey Mitchell] worked there between, during summer breaks from college. In the old days, it was a place where all the Hollywood celebrities would visit, Bob Hope and Bing Crosby--it was that kind of a joint. The hotel now has become owned by a chain, but Bucky had been working there for over fifty years. Bucky Miller is quite a character. Small man, real has, has this voice, talks really hoarse, grows mint julep. He has a patch of mint julep that he grows and it's become--he has now--he is hybrid. He has hybrids of mint juleps and he has become known throughout that part of the country as a, as a quality mint julep grower. He and his wife live right there on the bay, and I used to go down there and sit with them and listen to Dinah Washington on the story--well the hi-fi in those days and sit there and drink scotch with them and watch the sun set. Speaker 1: Now how, how old were you when you-- Speaker 2: About eleven, twelve years old. Why was I drinking scotch at eleven or twelve, because they would give it to me. Because it is not uncommon in the family out on the Gulf Coast for, you know, wine, beer, but they were drinking scotch. I wanted to be like them, so I would drink scotch. So, to this day that's my drink of choice, 'cause all of them were scotch drinkers. Those were the men who had a great influence on me and they really were men who were just the opposite of my father [William Gray Mitchell]. Neither Bucky nor Beasley [ph.] had college degrees. They were men of life. They were fancy dressers. They taught me a lot about dressing, and, and they put a great premium on that. I think back now about some of the things that I laugh at with my own son because he'll ask me about certain things and I say well you know Beasley used to dress like this. And we always make a big joke about summer linens and winter linens 'cause that was a big thing for him. Even today I, I crave a Cadillac convertible 'cause that's what my Aunt Stella and Beasley used to own. Used to own--I can remember driving with them in the car of course. They had a white convertible Cadillac with blue leather interior. That was the car that I just craved. I'm gonna buy me one now 'cause I saw one that's available for sale. Story_ID: 168313 Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in your grade school [Baldwin County Training School, Daphne, Alabama] that you admired or who were particularly helpful? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a lady, Sarah Taylor [ph.], who was a guidance counselor. Her husband was the vice principal. She had a big influence on me. We used to, we used to spend time with her whenever she would allow me to visit her house on weekends or after school. We'd talk about events of the day. She would pick me up on Sunday and she would take me with her down to Fairhope [Alabama], which is the next town down from where I was on the coast and we'd buy the Sunday Atlanta [Journal] Constitution and eventually we were able to get the Sunday New York Times and every Sunday after church I would drive down and pick up those two papers. And that's where I developed a great love for that because she told me you can't be well read unless you read the Atlanta Constitution or the New York Times. Speaker 1: Now did, did you get the black papers? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did. Speaker 1: Did they come out like the-- Speaker 2: There was the Mobile [Alabama] paper, which we called the Mobile Beacon and we also used to get the Pittsburgh Courier. As a matter of fact for a brief time, I used to sell the Pittsburgh Courier. I think I did it for maybe about a year or so, and of course we had Jet magazine. But most of the news we consumed during those days we would get over either television or we would get through black weekly's, especially the Pittsburgh Courier, and to a certain extent the Chicago Defender. It, it would make its way down there although old and dated, it would. Story_ID: 168314 Speaker 1: You went to ninth grade at a local high school right in Mobile [Alabama]. Speaker 2: At Baldwin County Training School [Daphne, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Baldwin County, okay. So it went all the way through high school from first grade all the way through, all the way through? Speaker 2: Yeah from, well from second grade on. Through ninth grade I was there 'cause I was in the Catholic school through first grade. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay and-- Speaker 2: And, and another teacher, I had a number of teachers there who really had a big influence, Mrs. Hawthorne [ph.], Ethel Hawthorne who was a math, mathematics teacher. I really was into math, I loved it. I had a chemistry teacher, John Leonard [ph.], who was very good. I was really inclined more towards chemistry and math. So, I really loved my math and science teachers. And these were very, very smart people and very dedicated teachers. And I think back now to some of the things that they would do and the kind of hours and interest they were putting in would just be amazing. But, they were very good teachers and they stimulated me a great deal because I was, I was working probably way ahead of my class level and they managed to find time and were kind enough to be able to keep me interested and assign me other things to work on. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: As opposed to just seeing me be a pain in the butt. Story_ID: 168315 Speaker 1: You attend Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] in was it 1962 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I entered in '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], oh '65 [1965] okay, all right. You're fifteen in '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the Civil Rights Movement brewing in the South and-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah Atlanta [Georgia] was a hot spot. And I had seen, you know, I mean I, even though we didn't have that much action going on in Mobile [Alabama] it was all around us, Selma [Alabama], Anniston [Alabama], Birmingham [Alabama]. We had family friends who were involved in that. [HM] Angela Davis' family were friends of my, my parents from Birmingham. So, we also had, we knew people who were around Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Rev. [Reverend Ralph] Abernathy, anytime he would come past that way he would always stop because he and my mother [Helen Bailey Mitchell] were very close and I would develop a personal relationship with some of the people I heard him talk about and some of the things he would talk about. And the first time I met Dr. King I didn't know who he was, but I was very taken with him and you could, and I never forgot him because he had a, an aura around him that clearly set him apart. One his size, a very small man. And then I was very taken with the refinement of his diction. And he's the one who gave me my first clue that there was a school called Morehouse 'cause that was his school, and from then on that's where I wanted to go because even--now this was pre-bus boycott, right, right around the time of the bus boycott. Speaker 1: Okay around '56 [1956]. Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956], '57 [1957]. The times when Dr- Dr. King would be riding in the front seat of a car and Rev. Abernathy was driving just the two of them, so you can imagine on the roads of Alabama. So, we're talking about--I imagine I'm thinking back now before this, before the movement really reached its, its fever pitch. Speaker 1: Your five or six years old riding around listening to Dr. King and Dr. Abernathy. Speaker 2: And Dr. Abernathy remained a friend of mine until his death because I really did--he and my mother--I mean he told me many interesting stories about my mother, which is interesting. But, also once I got to Morehouse I was able to reestablish contact with Dr. King 'cause he didn't remember me, but I certainly remember, remembered him having stopped by my family's house and he did and once I was in Atlanta I got a chance to visit with Abernathys a lot. And the gentlemen who was the editor of the Atlanta--oh I forget the name of the black paper there in Atlanta [Atlanta Daily World], but he was a friend of my father [William Gray Mitchell]. They were in college together, so I was able to meet a lot of people through them. But Atlanta in 1965 was, it was the epicenter of the movement. I mean I loved it. That's what really--I'm very thankful that I went there when I did, because all of a sudden the bookworm saw the world and became a bookworm no more. Story_ID: 168316 Speaker 1: Okay now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because that just really woke me up. Oh yeah, I was totally fascinated. Speaker 1: The [Civil Rights] Movement basically? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Just the action. Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the people that you, that-- Speaker 2: Well, first of all let me, let me share this with you this because this tells you something about me and also something about my parents [Helen Bailey Mitchell and William Gray Mitchell]. When they sent me off to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], they took me out to [Chicago] O'Hare [International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] and put me on an airplane and they shipped me down to Atlanta [Georgia] by myself. When I arrived at Morehouse, I was so emotionally unprepared to be away and just so nervous. All of my luggage was in the--I had more, I had a trunk and suitcases. Some were in the trunk of the car and some were in the front seat, two suitcases were in the front seat. The only stuff that I had the presence of mind to get was the stuff in the trunk, so they cab pulled away with two of my suitcases. Speaker 1: Did you ever get them back? Speaker 2: No, I never got them back. And I think about it now, I said wow my folks, that was pretty cold sending a fifteen year old kid off to college. Then when I got there and all I saw all these people personally bringing their sons to school and unloading them, I said wow, I mean that's the first time I realized that that's what parents should have done. I never mentioned it to my parents because you know I grew up very independent anyway. They, they wanted me to be very independent at a very young age. Speaker 1: Is that why they didn't accompany you to school? Speaker 2: They just didn't, it just wasn't a priority, I mean other kids may have required that, but I didn't. So, I didn't even have that as an expectation until I arrived there and saw other parents there. And now that I'm a parent and I have, and when my kids were fifteen years old I couldn't imagine what they would be doing off on their own in college. And I try to think back on that and say wow, you know, I mean that takes a special kind of kid and takes a special kind of parent to do that. Story_ID: 168317 Speaker 1: So you're fifteen years old, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] started school when he was sixteen, I think it was, which was a little early, but it was a different age then, I guess, sort-- Speaker 2: At least Dr. King was at home too. That was a little different. See, but Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] during those days encouraged that. They had an early admissions program. Now I think it's been discontinued. And there really, there were some very hard, some very harsh stories that emanated from the kids who had gone into that because you clearly were offered no special support. I would think now if you were doing it they'd have you know psychological counseling and they would, and they wouldn't put you into the mainstream population without having some kind of mentorship or oversight, we had none. We were just thrown into the damn-- Speaker 1: So, there were others-- Speaker 2: There were five of us. They admitted five every year. And unfortunately two of those guys who became very close friends of mine died at very early ages. Because that's, that is very difficult to have a normal life when you're put in that kind of a situation really. I mean that's a very--I was able to finally discuss it with my parents [Helen Bailey Mitchell and William Gray Mitchell] before their death, and they really felt I could tell not--they never apologized for it, but clearly I think they would have done it differently if they had to do it over again because it's very difficult to come out with a normal emotional development on a kid when you just emphasize that to the detriment of everything else. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Morehouse just by accident provided a, a venue for me to break out of that and those girls at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. That was a big--I had never had girlfriends before, not serious girlfriends. You know I was a virgin until my sixteenth birthday. At a Howard Johnson's right outside Atlanta Airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] you know they had to throw a party so I could, you know, be properly christened by some girls at Spelman. And once I got a hold of that, some girls, I mean I just totally, you know--that's why I have a beard today 'cause I was always trying to look so much older 'cause I was ashamed of being so young 'cause you couldn't get any dates. And my voice slowly began to change the end of my freshman year. You know all the teenage pimples and all that stuff, and I, and I was really, I mean, it was very tough in the dorms because who wanted to be a roommate of a fifteen year old kid. They assigned me a crazy guy. A crazy guy from Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] was my freshman roommate. Speaker 1: How was he crazy? Speaker 2: Well I walked into the room and all the walls were plastered with Playboy centerfold pictures, almost every inch. I had never seen anything like that before. I hadn't been exposed to Playboy. I'm looking at all these nude women and I was like just really--and by that time he had picked out the best bed. He, he had the better bed. He had taken all the closet space and kind of left me with me, and I said okay. Then finally as the year progressed, he had turned our room into a venue for porn movies. He would shoot porn movies in the evening and charge for it. And, and I'd come to the door and knock and he says you can't come in now, come back in a couple of hours. So, I'd be walking around, at the library just waiting to get access to my room. Speaker 1: Did he feel you were too young? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean yeah, I mean, and he was right. Yeah, 'cause he, he was, he was an athlete. He played on the football team. He was a guy from Oklahoma City. Yeah, he was like eighteen years old and there I was. So, yeah he probably made the right decision. He made the right call. But, after I got there around '65 [1965] and kind of got my feet wet I, I began to wake up and see life and it changed, it totally changed my, my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In those days, you had a lot going on in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: What was your major? Speaker 2: Economics. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Economics. I'd always been heavily interested in math, but I'd also gotten very interested in business and economics. And the economics school at Morehouse was just at the time had some sensational professors. And I'd been doing enough reading in economics to know that was the first thing I was interested in, so I majored in economics. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had a lot of hours in math, in math and science too though. Heavy, a heavy math concentration. Story_ID: 168318 Speaker 1: And I wanted to ask you about Benjamin Mays on camera and what, what are your recollections of him back at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I have very, very vivid memories of Buck Benny [Dr. Benjamin Mays] because in those days Morehouse was such a small intimate student population. You had access to Dr. Mays twenty-four seven. Many afternoons in the spring we could see he and his wife [Sadie Mays] sitting there on the swing in their house. They lived right on campus and you could just walk up to him and start talking; he invited that. And I remember having many conversations with him because he was a kind gentleman who you just loved talking to. He was so smart and just so wise. And I would live for his presentations every spring. He'd come in the dining room whenever it was time to announce, it was usually like in late March, when they were announcing the scholarships, they awards, and Dr. Mays would get up and he would stand up on a chair and he'd stand up on a dining table and says, "Men of Morehouse give me your attention I am pleased to announce among us are men who have achieved great distinction," then he would tack of the date so and so has gotten a scholarship to some European university, somebody also is a Rhodes Scholar. He would read off a lot of these great honors and at the end of it he would always say every year, "And I say to you the others go yea and do likewise." That's Buck Benny. Everybody loved him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a quite a man because he so loved that school, and he had such a passion for building leaders. He used to always make us say--we'd had to always recite almost we build--other schools educate, at Morehouse we develop leaders. You must be a leader for black people. That was engrained in you. Getting an education was second. I mean, that, that's what you did to become a leader, but he clearly was trying to develop a leadership class. There is no way you could have come through Morehouse in his tenure with that not being the mission. He did everything necessary to have you fulfill that. It was about leading. He would, he would only, he would only try--and you could tell where his values were, college presidents, doctors. He never wanted Morehouse to produce less than 50 percent of all the African American positions in the country. Anything less than that was a blow to Morehouse. He never wanted a black college to have anybody running it but a Morehouse graduate. I mean, he just, he had these metrics that he used to measure, and, and over a gen- over the thirty or forty years he was there, he pretty much delivered on it. And I loved his values because for instance he hated collegiate sports. He wanted to ban all collegiate sports except intramural. His point is look we don't have money, we don't have the time to be distracted with sports. Sure athletics is fine for release and physical exertion, but we don't need to earn our reputation as being a football college. That was his point and we supported him in that. I actually at a point, I actually led a movement at Morehouse to ban the Greek fraternities from campus, and Dr. Mays secretly really kind of liked that. He couldn't publicly say it. Speaker 1: Yeah, because of alumni somewhere. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know he couldn't publicly say it, but he, he knew. He kind of looked at me. He always thought I was a little smart, but a little, had gotten mixed up with that movement crowd, and he's right. I had become mixed up with the movement crowd. Story_ID: 168319 Speaker 1: Now, was there a [Civil Rights] Movement crowd on campus [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah there was a movement crowd. And also because we had so much interaction with people who were moving in and out of Atlanta [Georgia], because I spent a lot of my evenings up at Paschal's Restaurant up there on Hunter Street. Speaker 1: That's right near the campus and that's where-- Speaker 2: Three blocks from the campus. Speaker 1: --black politicians and activists and-- Speaker 2: Everybody--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Everybody goes to Paschal's. Speaker 2: Plus I had the fortune of working trying to earn some extra money, I worked in the library, Trevor Arnett Library in the AU [Atlanta University] Center, and my boss was [HM] Mrs. [Julia Washington] Bond, [HM] Julian Bond's mother and Mrs. Bond and her husband Dr. Horace Mann Bond were you know touch folks. We're talking about first generation nationalists. Through her I met Julian. Julian had been at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] dropped out and was trying to run for state representative, so Ms. Bond got me to help in the campaign, so my boys and I we worked in Julian Bond's first campaign and got him elected to state rep. Story_ID: 168320 Speaker 1: We also-- Speaker 2: He [HM Julian Bond] had been in SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee] before and, and down in Mississippi. Speaker 1: He was in SNCC at the time. Speaker 2: Yeah, SNCC, yeah. Speaker 1: And through, and through that effort we met, I mean Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada], for instance, who at that point was in SNCC. All the SNCC guys were in Atlanta [Georgia], home based in Atlanta. Stokely [Carmichael, later, Kwame Ture] at the time. Stokely developed a really relationship that really extended from '65 [1965] and through the early '80s [1980s] after we moved to Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: And [H.] Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] was in Atlanta too. Speaker 1: Rap. Didn't see that much of Rap. Rap was more of the non-intellectual sector of the group. It, it went in, it went in two different camps, and Rap we didn't see a lot of. Willie Ricks we didn't see a lot of except he would come around because we just loved Willie. Willie was the guy who coined the term black power. That was really his invention. Never really got credit for. It was in the summer in Mississippi. Speaker 2: I think people see Stokely, you know, calling for in that rally and in that, that march. Speaker 1: Well, he stole it from Willie. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Willie was half crazy. I have to admit that now. People said it about him at the time, but he had been beaten up and been assault so much about the head and shoulders by state troopers. Willie was probably a little, he was half gone. Willie became our real tie to the grassroots and to the streets. And in the end Willie became our protector because we were with some people there who really could have easily gotten us in trouble. Story_ID: 168321 Speaker 1: 'Cause as I recall when we were getting ready to plan to take over the administration building. There was a huge discussion about should we go armed or should we go unarmed. And we actually met in the professor's house, and the guns were there and we were being essentially told which gun do you want. Speaker 2: And this is by a professor at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 1: Yeah I'm not gonna call and refer to his name because the professor is still around. He's not, he's no longer at Morehouse, but he stills is in, in academic institutions. Yeah, and we were like, you know, freshmen, sophomores, juniors. Speaker 2: That's an interesting story 'cause I heard that kind of story before about somebody on cam, campus in a responsible position offering the students guns when it's clearly not a case where they need 'em, you know. Speaker 1: What is so interesting though later in my, in my later life when I developed as a journalist and got to build some contacts and some information and his name came up in a list of alleged FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] informants, which I thought was quite interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, that's why I raised that 'cause I've heard this story before. It's not the first time I've heard this. It's kind of a story and usually the students are smart enough not to. Speaker 1: But, it was Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada] who cautioned us and said look ya'll are just mama's boys, okay you ain't got no business having no goddamn guns. If there's any gun play needed you call me, and sure enough we had to call Willie because after we took over the administration building and it was literally was Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] and [Arthur] T-Boy Ross who literally brought the chain and chained the doors and put the padlock on 'em. We held the administration building with the trustees inside for about twenty-two hours. Speaker 2: Now wait a minute, now let's go back and talk about why you all took it over. Speaker 1: We had a list of demands that as I recall was about nine that we said were non-negotiable. We wanted the board of trustees to be African American led. Up until that time, Morehouse was nearly one hundred years old and had never had an African American chairman. We also wanted there to be a black studies program introduced on campus in which there was none. Dr. [Benjamin] Mays believed very fervently in European history. Dr. Mays said there was no need to have black studies. Morehouse was a black study. You couldn't come there without absorbing, why did we need to have a class for it? We need to have a class in German. So, Morehouse had offered every--you had to have two years of a foreign language, but no African language was offered after two years of German. And in a lot of my economics courses I had to know German, so it was that kind of school. We also insisted that we have more black professors. During that period, Dr. Mays had had to resort to bringing in a lot of young white professors, especially from the West Coast. There was a group of people brought in from Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and from Stanford [University, Stanford, California], I guess they had come to get their southern experience, and very highly educated, but very inconsistent with his vision and what he was trying to get accomplished. And frankly even though we liked them we saw them as being having a very unhealthy influence on the development of the school. Speaker 2: In, in what respects? Speaker 1: They introduced to, tried to introduce into Morehouse the flavor that was then prevalent like at Berkeley. I remember once they brought Allen Ginsberg to, to campus. I mean, I could see, I could see how they were trying to broaden the educational exposure, but also though when it comes, when it came time to influencing the politics they were opposed to a lot of the old line black professors, because these were--there was a generational issue. These folks who were very new to the campus were in their early, late twenties, early thirties. We also didn't see them having a real commitment to the school. They were just there. Some of them were dodging the draft at the time. Some were there just because they were sort of passing through and we did not like, and there was more of them coming. Story_ID: 168322 Speaker 1: Were there, were there drug issues with these professors? Speaker 2: No, some of them were very, you know, some of them had improper relationships with students, but you find that on any campus probably. But, no--but see we, we really were, even though we would call ourselves revolutionaries what we were asking for was many of the old fashion values and standards of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. The only thing we really had on there that probably would be even construed to be revolutionary was a, was a black studies program and having an African American chairman of the board. I mean, we wanted higher standards in the school. I mean, frankly we sort of loved Dr. [Benjamin] Mays and we didn't love what Morehouse stood for. Speaker 1: So it wasn't a protest against Dr. Mays? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely not. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--okay. Speaker 2: No one would every protest, oh no, we wouldn't, no, no, no. As a matter of fact, we felt so badly that Dr. Mays was at the board meeting 'cause he had just turned over that job to Hugh Gloster who succeeded him who really thought Dr. Mays would not be present at that board meeting 'cause he already retired. Speaker 1: So Hugh Gloster was taking over as the new pre, president. Speaker 2: Hugh Gloster was--he had just taken over that spring when we took over the building, and we had a very low estimation of him. We thought he was an intellectual lightweight. We thought that he didn't have any of the leadership qualities of Dr. Mays, and we saw him giving in to some of the real reactionary factions on campus. Speaker 1: Yeah, there are, we've heard other stories about, of that change and it was kind of an unpleasant kind of change. Speaker 2: When we went in to take over the trustee meeting, we were shocked there was Dr. Mays, also Daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.] was there. Speaker 1: So, did you hold them ho, hostage too? Speaker 2: We held them for maybe the first eight hours. We forbid everybody going to the bathroom, but Dr. King--Daddy King and Buck Benny [Dr. Benjamin Mays]. Then, Mrs. King called--Daddy King's wife [Alberta King] called and begged us to let Daddy King out because he hadn't taken his medicine. He had a bad heart and could we please let her husband go. So, we caucused and said well you know this is the last guy we want to, you know he and Buck Benny we really should just let them go. Well, they refused to leave unless we let everybody go. Now by this time, one of our colleagues, a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] student, got up on the trustee board table and proceeded to curse all the trustees out profusely. Now even the guys were just appalled that you're doing that. I mean even, we said that this is just too goddamn much. Well, Dr. Mays was just absolutely just insulted and just floored and so was Daddy King. So, at that point they asked, they asked out. And he looked at me and I'll never forget what he said. He looked at us and he looked at everybody he says, "This is the most ignominious day in the history of this school." [HM] Julian [Bond] said I feel bad, but I mean it should have been done. So, Daddy King and Buck Benny go out and TV cameras are all there and then they, you know, they said everybody is fine and everybody is okay, we will solve this. This is a Morehouse issue. Daddy King on the other hand got a little taken away. They need to be locked up. This is just thuggery. You should have heard some of the things they were hurling at us. You know he kind of revved it up a little bit. But Dr. May was very calm, "We'll resolve this. There's no need to call in the police. This is a Morehouse matter. We will handle it internally." So, we went ahead into darkness. This was like the hour number twenty, same weekend as the takeover at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. We'd, we had kind of coordinated it. There was supposed to have been eight schools that were gonna take over the administration buildings over the same weekend. Story_ID: 168323 Speaker 1: Now were you all working in SOBU [Student Organization for Black Unity] or YOBU [Youth Organization for Black Unity] or one of those national black union groups? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember that even having-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --these were just--we, we knew, we, we had friends and we knew they were gonna do it at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] and then the Cornell guys--(unclear)-Howard [University, Washington. D.C.]. We kind of knew. I mean even when we were in the administration building we were talking to those campuses. We had open lines to Cornell and open lines to Howard, and there was a third school I think. I think it may have been Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa] or someplace, a smaller school. They didn't get as much press attention. But, we knew about the guys at Cornell 'cause we were on the line with them. It was the same weekend. So, they're the ones who told us they had just heard over the news that the Georgia State Police had been called in to drag us out of the administration building. Now, this is after all of the alumni from around the country had been summoned to Atlanta [Georgia]. They were arriving there by the dozens. We looked out of the administration building onto the front yard at Morehouse and they had literally went to our dormitory rooms and gotten as many of our possessions as they could and they sort of piled it up there in the middle of the lawn and they, hundreds of Morehouse guys had locked arms and swinging and singing 'Dear Old Morehouse.' It was a very emotional moment for Morehouse. We were not the, exactly the most favorite people. Anyway after twenty-one hours had passed, we decided we were going to step down, but during that period Dr. [Hugh] Gloster had just become the president resigned. He couldn't take the pressure. He wrote his resignation out on a napkin. And we thought we had really scored a tremendous victory, so with that I think somebody called Dr. [Benjamin] Mays at home to tell him that Gloster had resigned and we had his resignation. He had almost had an emotional breakdown, and if you could imagine a college president doing that. The other board members, one was a Rockefeller, one was Judge [Elbert] Tuttle, used to be the famous Judge Tuttle of the circuit out of federal appellate court judge. He was on the board. I'm forgetting some of the other board members. There were about eight members of the board who were there, but Dorsey [Hugh Gloster] resigned during the process, so we came down. We finally released them and came down and they'd agreed to grant us amnesty, which they did, but right before we came down there was a, they had called the state police and the new had to call Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada] and the Black Panthers came and came up, climbed up. They had been bringing us food for the last two or three hours. They came up the wall and they had the weapons and they were gonna protect us, and it was Willie and his boys and Stokely [Carmichael]. And we came down and we thought we had amnesty and we did until the very last day of the school year. The takeover takes place in April. It was April 12th [1969]. The last day of school was maybe May 15th, May 16th [1969]. Speaker 1: It was a month later then. Speaker 2: Told the campus the wounds were healing-- Speaker 1: So everything was back to normal basically? Speaker 2: Everything was back to normal. We had just finished, I'd just packed my Volkswagen up heading to drive, about the hit the highway to drive back to Chicago [Illinois]. I get this certified letter that said that I was hereby summoned to a disciplinary meeting. Failure to appear would result in automatic expulsion. But half the guys had already left. I was just late leaving. So, I immediately go down and to [HM] Howard Moore's office. Howard was [HM] Julian Bond's brother-in-law, a famous civil rights lawyer, and he and Julian decided Howard was gonna represent us. So, we go into the disciplinary hearing with the dean and the other professors and they ordered Howard to get off the campus. We couldn't have legal representation. And they called us in three or four at a time and they said were you present at this takeover on this date. I said yes. Did you, and they listed all the things, destroyed properly, insulted trustees, brought infamy to the Morehouse name. They said you are hereby expelled. You nor any of your male prodigy can ever seek matriculation at this institution. Story_ID: 168324 Speaker 1: Now what was interesting they also called our selective service boards 'cause at the time in '69 [1969] the draft was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --raging. Speaker 2: Vietnam War was raging, right. Speaker 1: Half of us got instantly drafted. I just happen to be too young for it, but half of them got immediately into the damn [U.S.] Army. I came back to Chicago [Illinois]. My mother [Helen Bailey Mitchell] was absolutely in tears, couldn't understand why I'd been expelled from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and she saw that letter they had sent. You'd thought I'd murdered somebody. I could never apply for readmission. This was a final decision from the board of trustees. I enrolled in UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], tried to enroll. I couldn't get my transcript. Morehouse refused to release my transcript. When they finally released it, it had a letter attached to it from the dean of students, two pages single spaced. I'll never forget it. It said, "To whom it may concern, Mr. Mitchell has been expelled. He does not belong in an academic setting." He, oh man they just wrote, and the letter was so hostile the dean over at UIC asked me what in the hell did you do. We've never seen a letter like this before. I said well I explained it to him. He said wow it's seems like a little overreaction. I said you have to understand this is Morehouse. So, I had to go out and get [HM] Mrs. [Julia Washington] Bond and I don't know how Mrs. Bond did it, [HM] Julian's [Bond] mother, to go over there and meet with the dean of students and essentially get them to write a more tranquil letter, a more, a more, you know, a more calmer letter and UIC admitted me, and that's when I ended up graduating from UIC. Story_ID: 168325 Speaker 1: But Atlanta [Georgia] was the place. Also during that time though that's when I developed a great accidental love for journalism. Looking for some sideline money, I begun working for a civil rights newspaper called the Southern Courier. The Southern Courier was funded by the Ford Foundation and run by the Harvard Crimson. It was a weekly published out of Montgomery, Alabama, and they would bring down essentially the editorial staff from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and they would report on all the civil rights activity around the South. This paper was so slanted and so pro-Civil Rights Movement it had no advertising, of course, but it had a large readership throughout the South. It pissed off the southern politician so badly they finally threatened on the floor of the U.S. Senate to remove the tax exempt status of the Ford Foundation if they wouldn't stop funding this paper. But, I was a correspondent. I became a correspondent for them because they'd pay you, it was fifty dollars a week, they'd give you a Nikon camera and you could, give you that, you have to take your own pictures and I loved having a Nikon camera, and you had a press pass, and they paid you three hundred dollars per story. For a college kid, that was great. So, I'd go all over the South on weekends and sometimes during the week covering stories. But, in the process of doing that--I'd never taken any journalism before, I'd just watched and read and figured it out. I figured out the format. In the process of doing that, I got a call one day, it was April '69 [1969] after I'd been kicked out of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], asking me if I wanted a job, a summer internship with Newsweek magazine. And I said well I don't have a job. I said I wouldn't mind. They said well it's here in Atlanta, you can't go back to Chicago [Illinois] and you go over there right now and talk to this guy named [Joseph] Joe [Cummings]. I said well who is referring me and I said how do you even know me? He says well you came to our attention because one of the guys working on the paper turned out to be the son of Katharine Graham, who was then the publisher and owner of The Washington Post Company which owns Newsweek. So, through that channel I'd gotten referred to Newsweek magazine. So, the summer of April of 60--the summer of 1969 I worked in the Atlanta Bureau for Newsweek magazine where they introduced me and taught me journalism and I just loved it. I had never had as much fun in my life and covered stories all over the South and had as mentors some of the most famous people in journalism like Jack Nelson, Pulitzer Prize winner who at that point was working as the Atlanta Bureau chief of the LA [Los Angeles] Times. Jim Wooten who now works for ABC, but at the time he worked for the New York Times in, in, in the bureau. I would travel all over the South with these guys. I covered the election of [Charles] Charlie Evers down in Fayetteville [sic, Fayette, Mississippi], covered the, the healthcare workers strike in Charleston, South Carolina, covered the marches and all the protests down in St. Augustine, Florida. I mean, really harrowing things and here I was at nineteen years old reporting for Newsweek and during those, during those days you had to literally type your story out on a manual typewriter, go to a Western Union office, and hope they'd send it to New York. Many southern Western Union offices didn't. Story_ID: 168326 Speaker 1: And I remember once I was run off of the highway in, in Mississippi. I was coming late, coming back into Jackson [Mississippi] and got run off by a pickup truck. It was rough in those days. And I remember going to cover the election of, of [Charles] Evers down in Fayetteville [sic, Fayette, Mississippi] and we all had to stay at a Holiday Inn and they put every out of town journalist next door to a Mississippi State Police for intimidation. So, we were all out there having beers by the pool late at night. We got a call from the front desk who was telling us they'd gotten a call that bombs had been placed underneath some unidentified cars in the parking lot and we needed to be careful. Yeah, it was, it was that kind, it was that kind of place. But I, I would take nothing for the experience. That's how I got into journalism was through that, that accidental engagement, but what a wonderful way to break into it. And once I got into it I really liked it, and my career took an entirely different path because of that. Story_ID: 168327 Speaker 1: So, when you came to Chicago [Illinois] and enrolled in UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] were you, did you have in your mind that you'd pursue journalism? Speaker 2: Well, actually when I, when I came back to Chicago it was only because frankly 'cause I really loved it. I loved the job. When the summer was over, the, the news bureau chief, [Joseph] Joe Cummings, said I could stay. I said, oh okay that would be hip. I was making more money that I'd ever made before, had an expense account for the first time, I loved it. I just loved that life, but the news editor of Newsweek was a guy named [Harold Robinson] Hal [Bruno, Jr.]--God I can't think of Hal's last name. Hal was an old Chicago journalist and he heard about me and what happened at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. He was a graduate of University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois]. He came down to Atlanta [Georgia] and he told me he says, "Look kid first of all this ain't the way you break into journalism. News magazines are a bad way to learn this business. You gotta go out and do fire trucks, and you gotta go out and cover, you know, you gotta work the streets. This is just magazine stuff. This is fluff. You do this after you've got the basics. He said you need to go back to Chicago, I need to call over there and get you into UIC, get your degree, but for one in order to give you"--he said, "in order to tempt you to do you can work part-time while you're there for the Newsweek bureau in Chicago," and that's what I did. I was assigned to the Newsweek bureau here in Chicago, and I worked there part-time while I completed my degree and worked with some great guys. Story_ID: 168328 Speaker 1: This was like '69 [1969]. This is now '70 [1970]. This is during the days of the Fred Hampton shooting '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Did you cover that? Did you work on that story? Speaker 1: I worked on that story. The whole bureau [Newsweek bureau, Chicago, Illinois] did. And there were some great guys, some great writing that was done and I got into the whole Chicago [Illinois] journalism tradition, which is back in those days was just fantastic. After I graduated and Newsweek offered me a full-time job. [Harold Robinson] Hal [Bruno, Jr.] intervened once again and said look you need to get some grounding as a newspaper report. We don't teach the basics here. You need to learn the basics. I said okay. So, he sent me up with an interview with the Washington Post, his sister company. I went to the Post and sure enough a guy I knew in Atlanta [Georgia], [Eugene] Gene Patterson, who was editor of the Post. I met Gene when he was still working for the Atlanta [Journal] Constitution 'cause every Friday either [HM] Vernon Jordan who then ran the Southern, Southern Board Education project [sic, Voter Education Project of the Southern Regional Council] or [Charles] Chuck Moore who was a civil rights lawyer there in Atlanta would have Friday evening cocktail parties and all of the liberals in town, the few liberals that were in Atlanta they were together. So, you tended to meet everybody and Ralph McGill was the guy in Atlanta and once you met Ralph you would meet other people from the Constitution, and Gene Patterson was one of those guys. So, many years later I go to Washington, the Washington Post scared to death and there's Gene Patterson. I was happy to see him. He comes in, he closes the door, and I said, "You remember me?" He said, "Oh sure, sure I saw your resume, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], are you crazy I heard rumor, yeah, yeah." I don't think he really did, but he saw Morehouse. And he said, "Well, why you wanna come here?" And I told him the story. He says, "I'm gonna tell you something these are not good people." This is what he tells me--(unclear)--he's whispering. I said what do you mean not good people? I said, "You're the executive editor," he was a managing editor at the time. He says, "I won't be here long. You don't wanna come here." I was absolutely (unclear). For the managing editor to tell me these were evil people I didn't wanna come to work here. So, I came out and I was absolutely floored. He said, "I tell you what I'm gonna do I'm gonna call my friend in Chicago a guy name Jim Hoge [James F. Hoge, Jr.]. You know Jim Hoge?" I says no. "Well, he's the editor of the [Chicago] Sun-Times, and I'm gonna tell him to hire you 'cause you wanna work for Jim, you don't wanna work here." And sure enough about two or three months later Patterson was fired in a very ugly dispute he had with the Grahams. So, I came back to Chicago on his reference, got into see Jim Hoge and Hoge hired me and that's how I got into the newspaper business. That was like in early 1971. Story_ID: 168329 Speaker 1: So, what was your degree in at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Economics. Speaker 1: Economics. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had so many--I think I, I think I stayed a total of maybe three quarters at UIC, 'cause I had so many hours at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I had more than enough hours that I needed for graduation. By the time I transferred, I didn't need many hours here to get out, but I had to have at least, I think I had at least two semesters, two quarters before they would give me a degree. So, I stayed there all of three quarters. So, even though I was a student there, it's kind of a strange thing to have that as my alma mater because actually I was there so little I don't have much relationship to the school. I didn't even know if I'd graduated until very recently. I met somebody from there and I asked 'em to check their records 'cause I never went and marched or anything. I never wanted a diploma. Story_ID: 168330 Speaker 1: All right now, now you're, it's about 1972 and you're-- Speaker 2: Nineteen or 1970, 1970 I started working at the [Chicago] Sun-Times [Chicago, Illinois] and I worked there until '72 [1972]. Part of what I was doing at the Sun-Times, most of what I was doing was covering politics 'cause I loved, I loved newspapers. I learned how to compose and dictate seven and eight hundred word news stores right in your head, the old newspaper way. Only in Chicago [Illinois]--Chicago was the last media market where you still had five editions of, of a paper where you had to go out and cover an event, the event. For instance, I covered one of the [Muhammad] Ali fights. They had the, you know they had the screening at a, at a theater on the South Side. They wanted a color story. The fight didn't start 'til eight. When you got out of there, it was 10:30. The deadline was 11:00, so you didn't have time to come back downtown and write. You had to stand at a phone booth and you had to dictate the story, and they had rewrite guys. And, and rewrite guys they were just there trying to make your stuff stitch together and make it make sense. But, the discipline of learning how to do that I learned at the Sun-Times, which was just an incredible art to know. It has helped me in, in immeasurable ways, even outside of journalism. Well, in 1972 I was covering presidential politics and I covered both conventions, the Democratic [National Convention] and the Republican [National Convention] and my reporting got the attention of the Washington Post with Ben Bradlee down in Miami [Florida]. I'll never forget it. Story_ID: 168331 Speaker 1: Shortly after returning to Chicago [Illinois] after the summer convention [Democratic and Republican National Conventions] I got a call and an offer to go to work to the Washington Post, which I did in 1972. Speaker 2: Okay, now what was that like-- Speaker 1: When I stepped into the Washington Post, it was a, it was an institution I had never really understood or seen before because it was so elitist. I remember the first thing I noticed when I went into the newsroom they had an employee bulletin board and there were notes on the board that said the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] class of '72 [1972] was playing a Harvard class of '68 [1968] in softball. Okay, that's the kind of place the Washington Post was. I was one of the few reporters they had ever hired outside of the Ivy League and one of the few employees they ever hired outside of Chicago, I mean from Chicago. Ben Bradlee, larger than life figure. He was in his glory back in 1972. Walks over to me, "Hey kid, welcome, welcome. Glad you made this decision to come here 'cause you know you will never regret it. The Washington Post will be a fine major institution when its selling--and the [Chicago] Sun-Times is selling brassieres." That's how he looked at the Sun-Times and much of how the eastern establishment elite looked at the Sun-Times. And I'll never forget I remember my first story at the Washington Post I was so accustomed from the Sun-Times of hollering out loudly, copy. When you would do that, a copy boy or girl would come by, collect your one page and take it to the editor's desk. That's how you would transfer your copy. Not at the Washington Post. You didn't dare yell out copy. And I did it just out of instinct and everybody in this damn room three of four hundred reporters just turned around and looked. I was so embarrassed. So, I had some acculturation to do, yeah, but also some very, very fine people there, some great journalists. Story_ID: 168332 Speaker 1: However, when I went there [Washington Post] it was right in the midst, Watergate was just heating up. Speaker 2: Yeah, [Robert] Woodward and [Carl] Bernstein, right. Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, Woodward sat right next to me. He came up to me when I first got there because Woodward was on a social ladder lower than mine because he had come from a weekly newspaper, some Montgomery County, Maryland paper that no one had even known. However, his pedigree was superb, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], [U.S.] Navy officer. Dad is a federal, was the federal judge. So, he came from good paper, but in journalism that didn't count, 'cause he had started out at some obscure weekly. When they put my bio on the board, he saw I was from Chicago [Illinois] 'cause he was from Waukegan [Illinois]. So, he walked up to introduce himself, he was older than me because he had been in the Navy for about five or six years before he had gotten out, and introduced himself. I had never heard of his family and we talked. I thought he was kind of an odd guy, a little stuffy, didn't think that much of him. And then I met Bernstein who was four or five stations away from me, because my editor, Harry Rosenfeld, brought me in the room and he says, "I'm need to give you the lay of the land around here. This guy Woodward, I saw him talking to you. He doesn't know his ass from a hole in the ground. He's hired because Ben Bradlee knows his daddy, okay, somebody upstairs has to hire him. We would never hire a kid from Montgomery County." He said, "He won't be here long. And this other guy, you see this guy over here," pointing at Bernstein, he said, "don't talk to him. He won't be here long. He's about to get fired as soon as I can make the case on him. We caught him sleeping on the job, he's lost us a rental car, he just a fuck up," talking about Bernstein, "have nothing to do with him." And sure enough that's, that was my introduction to him. Story_ID: 168333 Speaker 1: So, I'm sitting there at the Washington Post. They're trying to figure out what to do with me. So, I'm, I'm assigned to the general assignment desk. Then they decided they want to send me out to Upper Marlboro, Maryland, which is Prince George's County [Maryland]. Rural, lots of segregation, friction stories going on, forced busing, but in the Post though it was known as a pretty prized spot because Tom Wolfe opened the bureau there and Tom Wolfe had written some very memorable pieces from the Upper Marlboro Bureau. He worked there back in the--he was at the Post in the '60s [1960s], the mid '60s [1960s]. So, it still was known as a place where Tom Wolfe got his start. So, I went out there and it was a real throwback having been in Chicago [Illinois], 'cause Upper Marlboro is a pretty small semi-rural suburban, nothing compared to the big City of Chicago. And I went out there and I enjoyed it, and I had a pretty good time. It was boring. And about--I stayed there until the Watergate thing got going and then they needed more bodies that was consuming tons of people inside the paper. Even though [Robert] Woodward and [Carl] Bernstein got, was only their name restricted to the story, at any given time there probably was twenty or thirty reporters working behind the scenes. I remember when a plane went down here in Chicago that killed Michelle Clark, a television correspondent. It also had [Illinois] Congressman George Collins on it. Also Howard Hunt's wife [Dorothy Hunt] was on there. And when she died in that plane she had $250,000 of bills, unmarked cash money in her possession and the Post got word that that money was part of the money that was coming in from CREEP [Committee for the Re-Election of the President] which was then the Republican criminal operation. So, I was immediately dispatched to Chicago to come out to the Wentworth police district [2nd District, Chicago, Illinois] and to match to get access to that money that the police department had under, in custody. Speaker 2: That's out 111th Street right [sic, 51st Street], Wentworth--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Then, it wasn't the area it was the old district. And, and I was given a list of serial numbers that they supposed to have tracked the money had been taken and laundered from Mexico 'cause we were trying to show that money had come from the Republican National Committee to Mrs. Howard Hunt and part of this money that she had with her when she died was money that had come out of [President] Richard Nixon's possession. So, I had to match the serial numbers. Now, it took me a week or more to finally talk the Chicago cops into being able to do that. Me as a young reporter I was really, I mean I was pretty much, I was insulted and also I felt very aggrieved because despite how much you worked on it you were never gonna get a byline 'cause the paper had made the decision that only reporters were gonna get the bylines were Woodward and Bernstein. So, a lot of reporters were really pissed off and I was among them. Story_ID: 168334 Speaker 1: Why did they do that to make it appear that there's some consistent focus on this case about two guys or something or what? What did they do? Speaker 2: They did it at the [Washington] Post to try to control the creative tension and the natural competition, the competitive zeal that would have led to this story being misreported. See the original-- Speaker 1: By being fragmented or something by a lot of different guys trying to take credit for it. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause the original story came in on a Saturday night. The only people who work at the Washington Post on a Saturday night are the slugs and the ne'er-do-wells. [Robert] Woodward was a slug. That's why he was working on Saturday night. It came in over the police radio as an ordinary break-in at the Watergate [Hotel, Washington, D.C.]. That's the only reason he got it. He didn't know what to do with it. It was a break-in. So, he goes down there, gets a police report, comes back and writes a John Doe, you know, story about a break-in at the Watergate offices of Republican, Democratic National Committee. It was all of maybe four or five paragraphs. [Carl] Bernstein, who was being punished and was made to work Saturday's, walked up to the desk, saw the story, and said well this is awfully strange. Why would somebody be breaking into a damn office? So, he makes a few calls, moves the story a couple of sentences and all of a sudden slaps a joint byline on it. And now it's Woodward and Bernstein. That's why they stopped it. Wood--Bernstein just forces his way into the story 'cause he smelled something big. A lot of reporters there smell something big. The Post knew early on this was gonna be all bust or all glory. They knew early on. They knew they had [President Richard] Nixon, they just didn't know if Nixon had them. They knew they were rolling the dice because everybody in that paper was reporting that story, I mean, from Mrs. [Katharine] Graham, [Joseph] Joe Califano who was her general counsel, Edward Bennett Williams, general counsel, people on the board, everybody was reporting that story. And then the sources that they had really were more of the sources of [Ben] Bradlee and Mrs. Graham's and Edward Bennett Williams and they weren't ordinary reporters. So, that's why whose, this whole mystery about who is Deep Throat. I think Deep Throat was completely a composite fabrication. I don't think that was one person. If there was one person, they didn't, they didn't leak all that information to Woodward and Bernstein. No, no, if you wanna bring down a president like that you don't go to two young undistinguished reporters. Because I remember sitting in that newsroom many an evening and you'd see Mrs. Graham and Califano, [HM] Roger Wilkins. Roger Wilkins was then on editorial board of the paper. He had been a deputy attorney general. Roger would be there. Bob [Robert C.] Maynard would be there. Bob was then a very senior person at the Post, his official job at that time when it was ombudsman. They were the two senior African American journalists at the Post. But, you would see them caucus. You had Meg Greenfield. You would see them over there and they were comparing notes and they'd all been out reporting a story. Woodward and Bernstein would be the people who would get the byline credit, but that, that was too important to be left to their junior reporters. The Post was, the Post, the Post was rolling the dice on its entire empire. Had they come up wrong, Katharine Graham would have been out on her, on her toots because I remember the day that John Mitchell, who was then the attorney general, made a direct threat to Mrs. Graham and told her that if she weren't careful he was gonna get her tit caught in the ringer. Well, when Bradlee came back and convened a meeting and told us that, oh that just brought the damn law. I mean you could feel the testosterone just rising in the newsroom, but it was clearly the Nixon forces against Katharine Graham and the Post. They would do everything they could to not only prevent her from advancing the story, but also to lead to her demise as a business. She was being challenged on all fronts. So, I'm just saying when you have that much at stake you, two young reporters who Mrs. Graham didn't even know personally, I don't think she would have put her whole, put her whole fortune and her whole reputation in those hands alone. Story_ID: 168335 Speaker 1: But the [Washington] Post was an outstanding place. I mean, some of the finest reporters I had ever, I had ever worked with. I mean just ab- absolutely fine guys. As a matter of fact, my boss Kevin Klose is now the president of National Public Radio [NPR]. He and I stay in contact. Dave, Dave Broder I stayed in contact with. Many of the people I met there. I mean they just to me they're the best in the business in what they do. And you meet, and you meet a class of journalists there you'd only meet there and the New York Times because those institutions have the resources and have the reputations that attract the best. [HM] Dorothy Gilliam, [HM William] Bill Raspberry, Bob [Robert C.] Maynard, [HM] Roger Wilkins, Meg Greenfield, the list is just--Holly West (ph.), [HM] Jackie Trescott and the list goes on and on. They're really just very fine people. Even though I was only there a little more than two years. I remained in Washington [D.C] for another eight years, so I still had a lot of interaction with those guys. Story_ID: 168336 Speaker 1: Now, why did you leave the Washington Post? Speaker 2: Because I was frustrated. They had so much damn talent. I was a prima donna. I wanted to make it to the big time. I'm looking and seeing I had, I'm four or five levels buried beneath talent at the Washington Post. You have to almost wait your turn, and I was, I was more interested in that and also I just kind of grew frustrated being on the third detail during the Watergate story, and I didn't see that ending anytime soon. And I really thought I made a career mistake by coming there quite honestly. Speaker 1: So, this is 1974? Speaker 2: This is '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By this time, one of my good friends, one of my Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] early admission colleagues got in, Bob [Robert] DeLeon who also had gone into journalism. Bill Moyers had become his protege. Bill Moyers was then the editor. After he, after Bill Moyers got the LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] White House he became editor of Newsday out of Long Island [New York]. Among the first class of people he hired was my friend, Bob DeLeon. Speaker 1: That was the late Bob DeLeon, right, who was the editor of Jet magazine. Speaker 2: That Bob. Bob, Bob also came to Morehouse at age fifteen, so he and I had been close friends since '65 [1965]. So, Bob had been, Bob had left Newsday and had been hired here in Chicago [Illinois]. He worked for [HM] John [H.] Johnson at Johnson Publishing Company. We were very young. Bob was very much a hot shot. At this point, I'm twenty-four, Bob is probably twenty-two, and Bob had been named associate editor of Ebony and had just been given a job as managing editor of Jet. So, Bob thought he was a pretty special guy. Speaker 1: And he was at twenty-two and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's hard to imagine when we, when you read in the paper that how old he was and I remember I was in college at that time we couldn't believe that somebody that age would be running Jet. Speaker 2: Bob was an exceptional person. Bob never even completed college. I mean Bob was just an exceptional guy and that was even his first job when he came to Ebony. Mr. Johnson, John Johnson really adopted Bob. I mean, he really loved Bob and took a great deal of interest in him, and Bob was such an inspiring guy, great confidence, very smart, poised beyond his years. It was easy to see what Mr. Johnson saw in him the son he wished he had had because his own son had just become ill with sickle cell anemia around the same time. He was kind of close to our age, so it was kind of clear that Mr. Johnson was living vicariously I think the, the boyhood in his son that he saw in Bob, the relationship. So Bob got that job at Jet he calls me, he said, "Look you gotta leave the Post. You gotta come out here and help me." I said, "I'm not leaving, no, no I'm not leaving the Washington Post to come and work for Jet and Ebony are you crazy?" He said, "No, now we're gonna turn it around, we're gonna change it, we're gonna make it serious. Come out here and see Mr. Johnson." So, I came out saw Mr. Johnson and because I so badly wanted to believe that it was true he and Bob, you know Bob and Mr. Johnson gave me the spin and convinced me I should leave the Washington Post. I went back put in my letter of resignation. [Ben] Bradlee called me in his office, and he said, "Are you crazy? Did I read this right, you leaving here to go work for Ebony and Jet?" He says look, he says "You need a vacation." He says, "Take two or three weeks, no take a month, then come back." He said, "I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna pay any attention to this." He takes my letter and he tears it up, which really insults me. I said, "That's one of the reasons I'm leaving because of that kind of arrogance." He says, "You gotta be crazy." He said, "I'll tell you what you go, you go and you gonna call me and you gonna, you gonna wanna come back over here and, and you know what the saying is around here once you leave Camelot you never come back," (laughter) that's, that's the saying at the Washington Post. Once you leave Camelot you never come back. I said fine and I went to work for Ebony and unfortunately Bradlee was right. Story_ID: 168337 Speaker 1: I would see him [Ben Bradlee] occasionally or somebody from the [Washington] Post would call. How's it going over there? What are you working on? And I must admit it was different. I'd never worked for a black organization before. I'd never worked for a black magazine. I wanted that experience. I worked in the Washington [D.C.] Bureau with [HM] Simeon Booker who is still there, whose a, whose a Washington legend and [Esther] Fannie Granton, who was a Washington legend of her own at that point, but I did, I did enjoy working with some wonderful staff people out of the New York [City] Bureau and here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Now, during that time period of Jet magazine did become something a lot better than it's been before in a sense I think when you-- Speaker 1: It had. It became more--if you may recall it, it went to a larger, larger, larger format-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --which allowed more content, relatively more content, but I thought they were about to evolve further into the news magazine as opposed to more of the society and the format that it is now. I was a serious journalist. I didn't come to write about three hundred pound women and I didn't go over there to write about athletes who hit the lottery. You know I wanted to do serious kind of stuff. I was told by Bob [Robert DeLeon] and Mr. Johnson [HM John H. Johnson] that's why I was hired. Well, nothing could be further from the truth. I think Mr. Johnson knew better, but he loved having Bob and if Bob wanted to hire me he would go along. Speaker 2: Well, actually it didn't get better, but it wasn't-- Speaker 1: It did. Speaker 2: --you're right it wasn't-- Speaker 1: It got better, but-- Speaker 2: --it didn't become the Washington Post or anything or Newsweek right? Speaker 1: We probably, frankly he'd would have been crazy to have conformed to do what I wanted. He'd been out of business. He was smart not to listen to Bob and me. Had he given me a magazine I wanted to work for, he wouldn't been in business today. Hell, we were the ones who were just completely not knowing what we were talking about. Oh no he did the right thing. And is testimony to the fact that he's still in business, so no I mean he was right, we were wrong. But, as I'm saying we were just young prima donnas who thought we were hot shots and how dare him hire us to work on a magazine and he not put out the kind of magazine we wanted. Story_ID: 168338 Speaker 1: So, that's where I was. So after about a year there [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] in '75 [1975] I'm thinking this ain't gonna work out; couldn't go back to Camelot [Washington Post]. I applied for a fellowship. The National Endowment for the Humanities journalism fellowship at Stanford [University, Stanford, California]. So, here again I had the damn nerve at twenty-four years old to think I needed a sabbatical and what I probably really needed was a stern talking to. But, anyway I got it and I took a year off, a year and a half off and I went to Stanford. At that point, I had a wife and a, a year and half old daughter and went and resided on Stanford's campus for a year and a half on a sabbatical and had a wonderful time out there in California. Story_ID: 168339 Speaker 1: Bob [Robert DeLeon] had by that point had quit, had got into an argument with Mr. Johnson [HM John H. Johnson], married [HM] Diahann Carroll, the actress, and he too had moved to California. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So, he and I we became really good--we reacquainted our relationship because I had freedom on my hands and he had freedom on his hands and we just had a ball. A little awe at having Diahann Carroll around. Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there's a considerable age difference between the two of them now. Speaker 1: Oh, I'd say so. Diahann must have been--she was a fully twenty years older than us and I, I used to think far older than even that, but she would claim that those, that those days she was in her mid-forties, and Bob at that point was in--Bob was twenty-five; I was twenty-six, and she claimed she was mid-forties. I think she was older than that, but quite an interesting person. Speaker 2: She looked nice. Speaker 1: Well, yep, well preserved. Heavy libido, very active libido. So, she had a need for young men. Bob, however, was just simply using her. I mean, Bob had no interest in--Bob was interested in being the boy toy she thought she had. Bob was fascinated with her, loved the lifestyle she provided. That's what she provided for Bob. The Rolls Royces, the Jaguars, the Ferraris, the houses; that's what he loved, the first class. You know, they were so grand. They would buy--not only would they buy the two first class seats for themselves, they'd buy the two across the aisle so they wouldn't be disturbed; that kind of stuff. Going into restaurants and calling ahead and saying Diahann Carroll is coming in and they would usher you in through the back so no one would disturb you, that kind of stuff. He enjoyed it. So, he had a very fast life. But, once he got into that relationship with her, Mr. Johnson just had to cut him loose and I don't blame him. 'Cause Bob had essentially just, he had made, he had over-reached, and I discovered that when we spent the first evening with him and she went and pulled out one of her jewelry case and I'll never forget it. She set there and we were all on the floor--they were living in Oakland [California] at the time in a penthouse apartment and she pulled out all these jewels, all these fabulous gifts that the very famous men had given her over the years. There was like an emerald, a bracelet from the Aga Khan [Prince Shah Karim Al Husseini Aga Khan IV], a pair of diamond earrings from [Aristotle] Ari Onassis, more jewels from [Sidney] Poitier. I mean, she had Richard Pryor even. So, you know I'm looking at all this stuff and I'm thinking to myself you know men don't given gifts like this to platonic relationships, and then I'm looking at, that's years that that must represent and then I'm looking at Bob, my twenty-five-year-old friend sitting over there. I'm thinking of the little girl and the wife he left back in Chicago [Illinois]. I said what in the hell are we doing here. It just seemed like we were always out of place. And when they had--I remember they had their first party. She had all of her Hollywood friends up there and then Bob just had my wife and me. We were, we were like the age of their children. It was just, just a very bizarre, just a very bizarre kind of life, very bizarre. Story_ID: 168340 Speaker 1: And Bob [Robert DeLeon] never managed to recover from, from that. He had a very tragic death that was really induced by his unhappiness. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah he, he wrecked his car on a highway right into a tree or something, right. Speaker 1: He did, but at the time though Bob was, was very unhappy, had been drinking, and those of us who knew him thoughthe was trying to get out of that relationship [with HM Diahann Carroll] 'cause he actually had been talking on the phone to his ex-wife in Chicago [Illinois]. Diahann [Carroll] happen to come into the house, so he wanted to continue the conversation so he told his wife I'll go down to my office and I'll call you from there. Later in the night having been drinking Bob was never a good driver and he had just been given by Diahann Carroll I think it was a Ferrari for Christmas. So, there he is on Mulholland Drive drinking in a fast car like that. He was going so fast on, on Mulholland that when he went off the cliff he went a distance of almost eighty feet before he begin descending. So, he was moving at quite a rapid speed and his car had sat down in that ravine for at least I think a day or so before they found it. So, he died instantly at twenty-six years old, twenty-six, twenty-seven. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yep and Diahann I haven't spoken to her since. She came back to Chicago to make the surprise visit on Bob's ex-wife to try and get access to some of the insurance funds that Bob had left to his daughter to pay off some of what she alleged to be Bob's debts that he left. And then in two of her books that she released since Bob's death she described Bob in very unflattering ways. In one book, she described him as almost a con artist who had come into her life and had actually conned her. He was not who he said he was. So, I don't think very highly or Ms. Carroll. Bob's daughter is still here. She's an adult. I've just reached out for her. I have people out now trying to--I wanna contact her because I--it's been on my mind because I think I really should talk to her about her dad because she probably has heard some horrible things and has read all kinds of things and as Bob, one of Bob's closes friends I really do owe that to her. Because actually I was the one who took her mother to the hospital so she could be birthed 'cause Bob was out of town. So, I just, I think it would be interesting to see her, to see her now. Monica is her name, and she's a journalist. Speaker 2: Okay, who does she write for? Speaker 1: I'm told for Savoy, for N'DIGO, for Essence. She's a freelancer, but I haven't, I haven't saw--I, I literally haven't seen her since she's come home from the hospital. It's been a long time ago, so hopefully--but Monica was his only kid. Story_ID: 168341 Speaker 1: So, you're out in California-- Speaker 2: In Stanford [University, Stanford, California]-- Speaker 1: Yeah Stanford, yeah. Speaker 2: --Seventy-five [1975] and '76 [1976] on a National Endowment for the Humanities fellowship. Speaker 1: Okay and you know you're friend [Robert] Bob De- [Robert] DeLeon dies in '79 [1979]. Speaker 2: Well, Bob died, Bob dies in I think seventy, no '77 [1977] or '78 [1978] [sic, 1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because at the end of my sabbatical, I mean, I say it very ashamedly 'cause a twenty-five-year-old in sabbatical. It was the end of my sabbatical, my wife stayed in California. I was offered a job back in Washington [D.C.] working in the Washington Bureau of the Los Angeles Times. So, by seven, late '76 [1976] we'd returned to Washington and I was in the L.A. Times. Bob died, I think in '77 [1977] or '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168342 Speaker 1: So you're back in [Washington] D.C., you know, working for-- Speaker 2: At the L.A. [Los Angeles] Times, what a bureau, thirty-five of some of the finest reporters, I mean, I had thoroughly enjoyed that. I was back with my old mentor from Atlanta [Georgia], [John Howard] Jack Nelson, who I had known twenty years earlier in Atlanta. He worked for the Atlanta [Journal] Constitution who is now in Washington as the bureau chief of the Los Angeles Times and he brought me in through what we used to call the southern railroad. Unbeknownst to a lot of people the southerners really control the elite rungs of newspapers in America, and that's been true for many, many, many, many years. It's just beginning to ebba little bit now, but during those days for instance you had Jack Nelson who's the bureau chief of L.A. Times, Bill Kovach who was from Chattanooga [Tennessee], who was from, who then was a news editor for the New York Times. You had [Eugene] Gene Roberts, southerner, who was then running the editor of the--he had just left being national editor of the New York Times who was then the editor of the Philadelphia Inquirer. You had Homer Bigart who was then the top investigative reporter at the New York Times. I mean the list goes on and on. Southerners--David, David Halberstam had come in. He had earned his, earned his stripe working with the Siegenthalers down in Nashville [Tennessee]. And the southerners were really the, they were the ruling lords of the manor and if you were lucky enough to know one of them you could get, that was your ticket, and my ticket was Jack Nelson. Jack had followed me all of my career after I had left Atlanta and just watched me. Was happy that I stayed in journalism. [James] Jim Wooten--by this time, Jim had left the New York Times Atlanta Bureau and was in the New York Times bureau in New York [City]. So, I got very luck, I mean, partially because I was on that first wave of African Americans coming into journalism, that's why, and there were so few of us. And also because of the connections I'd made in Atlanta. And it is, I don't care what anybody says, it's a, like anything else it's a relationship business. I would have never been hired and worked in the bureau if I hadn't known Jack Nelson because I was fully twenty years younger than the average person there and at least fifteen years or more less than experienced. Those were very seasoned guys. You normally don't get to a bureau like the L.A. Times or New York Times until almost the peak of your career. So, most of those guys by the time you get there you're either late thirties or early forties 'cause you done the foreign assignment usually. You have carved out your specialty, and that's probably your tenth or eleventh year in the business and for me it was like my third of four year at the business and coming just having left the staff of Jet and Ebony didn't give me a very strong endorsement coming into the L.A. Times. Jack really is the one who really helped fully get me back into mainstream, into the newspaper business, 'cause I really preferred newspapers. Story_ID: 168343 Speaker 1: And the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times] in the late '70s [1970s] was the place to be. It was a reporter's paradise. You could write as long as you wanted. You could take as much time as you wanted. You travelled first class. You spent whatever was necessary, and it was a wonderful paper. Ed Guthman [Edwin O. Guthman] was the national editor. Ed had been, worked in Washington [D.C.] under the Kennedys, under [Robert] Bobby Kennedy. He was Bobby Kennedy's press secretary. So, we had a wonderful bureau, great bureau run by one of the finest reporters I think in, in the country, [John Howard] Jack Nelson. Jack was from Biloxi, Mississippi, a red neck. I don't think the guy even had a high school diploma and went on to become a self-taught man and one of the finest investigative reporters in the country. He earned his Pulitzer [Prize] reporting on the Berrigan brothers back in the '60s [1960s]. A hell of a reporter and hell of a man that grew up hauling--he was a truck hauler in Biloxi, Mississippi. That really was my, that was my godfather and my mentor in journalism. So you see you never know in life who's gonna be the folks who groom you. Story_ID: 168344 Speaker 1: Okay, now there, there, is there a highlight to your term in Washington [D.C.] working for the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times]? Speaker 2: A highlight, well. Covered the White House. Covered [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter in '76 [1976]. White House press pass, a lot of foreign trips. Enjoyed going to, making some of those trips to Africa with Andy Young [HM Andrew Young]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah now that's, that's an interesting thing to touch on that. An, Andy Young who was the U. N. [United Nations] Ambassador under Jimmy Carter and his-- Speaker 2: And the Carters and the-- Speaker 1: --his rise and fall you know I guess in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I got on bad papers with the Carters, although many of those folks I had known many years ago. Atlanta [Georgia] became really a critical spot to be and those relationships I developed there in the late '60s [1960s] really did me, it followed me throughout. Story_ID: 168345 Speaker 1: Did you know Jody-- Speaker 2: Powell? Speaker 1: Yeah Jody Powell [Joseph Lester "Jody" Powell, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know him until one Saturday afternoon I had occasion to write this investigative story about the campaign, and he called and was cursing at me in my home telephone, 'cause I had done an investigative piece on the [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter campaign about the use of walking around money. Walking around money has and still is being used during presidential campaigns to pay off and to bribe, especially black preachers and black radio DJ's and under-the-table money to prostetize (ph.) black voters. And it's formally called walking around money. I had tracked, men and a reporter, a friend of mine Paul Steiger, and Paul is now the managing editor of the Wall Street Journal. He and I had spent about eight weeks tracking this down and had finally figured out the money and where it had come from, where it had gone. We'd gotten interviews with ministers in New Jersey, radio station owners in Maryland. We had the goods. So, I went down to Atlanta [Georgia] headquarters to really soup 'em and one of the things I kind of prided myself as a reporter was my ability to get, get, to get subjects to tell me things they probably shouldn't 'cause I looked so young and also due to the fact that I was black quite honestly. I think that worked to my advantage, and I would get people many times admitting things and saying things that they probably wished they had not. So, I had gone down to Atlanta and got the treasurer of the Carter campaign to admit that yes they had been walking around money. So, when the story ran across the wires that Saturday and making the evening news I got this call at home from Jody Powell screaming at me. Story_ID: 168346 Speaker 1: Then I started covering the [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter campaign kinda closely, working those awful days down in Plains, Georgia, down at the Best Western Motel and I got to know him even more 'cause in Plains we only had one hotel to stay in and that was the Best Western, so all the national press corps was there. They only had one place to eat in town, which was in a converted trailer. It was called Faye's [Bar] Villa as I remember it. And they only had three things on the menu, steak, steak and steak. That they would a grill on a converted barrel out in back and it was B, it was BYOB kind of joint. That's where I remember once I was sitting in the trailer with, with Ms. [Bessie] Lillian [Gordy Carter], Carter's mother. She was talking out of her head. She was old, very delightful, and I looked over in the corner and there was George Bush [George H.W. Bush], the forty-first Bush. He had just come down to brief the president elect. He was then the head of the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency]. So, I, I noticed someone was talking to him, so I asked him could I join in, and I went over and had a real good conversation with George Bush and he had some very interesting things to say about Jimmy Carter. And I got to, a pretty good relationship with him. Speaker 2: What did George Bush say about Jimmy Carter? I mean is there, was there-- Speaker 1: He was laughing and sort of trying to--he realized I was a working reporter so he was very guarded, but essentially he found it so charming that he would go in this trailer talking to the next leader of the free world and whenever he'd gone in to brief him he was kind of crude. You know there was--he couldn't believe that this man was gonna be president of the United States essentially and was he really up to the task because George was a really, you know, he was a real blue blood. You know private school, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], you know the whole bit. In his mind, a guy from Plains, Georgia, running America, completely out of his elements. He was--essentially that was the bottom line. And he was just looking down his nose, I mean, making so many wise cracks about--he has a great sense of humor you just don't see it much and he's very sarcastic. And he was looking around and we were just talking about and laughing about some of his surroundings because Plains was a very, it was quite an odd place you had the president of the United States coming from and the conditions that we were living there is in what we used to call Ed Bradley's world. Story_ID: 168347 Speaker 1: Because Ed Bradley who's now the big star of '60 Minutes' was just beginning to get his legs as a CBS correspondent. I had known Ed from a while ago 'cause Ed used to be a stringer for the TV stations over in Paris [France] and over in Vietnam. When he came back to [Washington] D.C., he had a hard time getting started, so he, he dated several women who were friends of mine who were in the business and so out of mercy they assigned him the [James Early "Jimmy"] Carter campaign early on thinking no chance would Jimmy Carter have of ever becoming a serious candidate, so let's give him to Ed Bradley. And as luck would have it, Jimmy Carter became a star and took Ed right along with him, and that's where Ed Bradley came from. But, Ed used to rule Plains [Georgia] 'cause he was in full-time residence there 'cause he was fully assigned to the campaign. So, we used to call it Ed Bradley's world because the press bus wouldn't leave without Ed. Ed had the best room. Ed had a reserved table in the, in the, in the [Faye's Bar] Villa. I mean Ed was--the Carters would get off a plane and immediately go to Ed. All the staff catered and pampered Ed. It was Ed's world. That's what we used to call it. Story_ID: 168348 Speaker 1: But that was enjoyable. The, the other interesting memory I have is really developing relationships on Capitol Hill with some of those old legends of politics like Russell Long, Lawton Chiles. I really enjoyed getting to know Russell Long and [Robert] Byrd from West Virginia; very helpful to me as a reporter. Once Russell Long found out that I really liked those moon pies, those Lance moon pies from the South, he had some sitting on his credenza. I hadn't seen a Lance moon pie since my days in Alabama. And I'm sitting up there interviewing him and all of a sudden I said that can't be. I said senator--no I said Mr. Chairman, 'cause he was chairman of the finance committee, probably the most second or third most powerful person in the [U.S.] Senate. I said, "Senator is that, I said that wouldn't be a Lance moon pie would it?" He said, "What you know about that?" I said, "I grew up on Lance moon pies." He said, "Where?" I said, "Eastern Shore, Alabama." He said, "Oh don't tell me Eastern Shore, tell me where." I said, "Daphne/Fairhope [Alabama]." He said, "Fairhope and Daphne." He said, "You kidding me." I said, "No." He said, "I know where that is." "Oh," and we became fast friends. "Here, have a moon pie. You want some strawberry?" And sure enough he had some strawberry pop he had bought up from Louisiana. He and I became very close friends and what a source to have. He taught me a lot about politics and taught me just a lot about Washington [D.C.]. I learned so much from him. I would come in the [Los Angeles Times Washington] Bureau sometimes with stories that would be absolutely amazing because I was like, I was a junior guy on the, in the congressional team and a junior guy in the bureau, but I'm coming in there with major stories and under, and under, under the rules of engagement they can't ask me my sources, but they can ask around the edges. Jack [John Howard Jack Nelson], I had told about my relationship with Russell Long, and Jack said, "Well that's not, that's not amazing, that's not amazing. You gotta really protect that, don't tell anybody else that." 'Cause we had two full-time senior guys who would have been quite jealous had they known I was in there cultivating a relationship. But, Russell Long was very, very, very nice to me and very helpful to me and so was Senator [Lawton] Chiles from Florida. Story_ID: 168349 Speaker 1: Got along much better with the Southerners than I did the, the northern liberals. The Ted Kennedys of the world I never really found to be that helpful or that friendly quite honestly. It was the old southerners who I found to be very to me as a journalist and too many of the black journalists said the same thing. Speaker 2: Why do you suppose that's true? Speaker 1: One because I really do think it's something to this, this notion that white southerners really are more comfortable with black people. Russell Long probably had more personal contact with black people as peers and as on a social basis than Ted Kennedy to be quite honest about it. I think also there's a certain amount of affiliate--there's a certain amount I think of self-identification that comes with southerners. I don't care what color you are. If a white southerner meets a black southerner there's a, there's an affinity that's built in there that transcends race. That certainly was true in Washington [D.C]. That definitely was a big help to me because those contacts there--and it was true even with dealing with the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter White House as well. For one thing, it helps you understand the values. I understood like most black people, you understand that white southerners are different than white northerners. Almost as if they didn't grow on the same planet. Different values, different impulses, different political motivations, totally, totally different people. And at the time I think they were just kind of surprised 'cause I was one of the earlier black members of a major newspaper bureau. Maybe there was one other black person who'd been hired before me, but only one. Maybe there was one or two at the New York Times. We were still oddities, so I think that the fact that I was there and a southern oddity he had, he had a very definite interest in wanting to help make me successful. Because many times he'd go out of his way to be certain that I would--you know he would give me some incredible stories and so would [Senator Lawton] Chiles. They'd all play that game, but generally a guy like Russell Long would deal with people who were much more senior than me. When you're chairman of the finance committee and you're Russell Long you can make friends with any journalist you want, and he was a master at it. He just chose to do me a favor. I wasn't doing him no favor. He told me his, he didn't want anybody in his state reading the L.A. [Los Angeles] Times, so don't worry about sending him no copy of the article (laughter). He said that's the last thing I need to be reading some liberal paper like the L.A. Times. I said, "Liberal, that's not liberal." He said, "It's liberal by my standards." He said, "I don't want nobody see me reading the L.A. Times. I'll just take your word for it." That's what he used to always say. He said, he said, "Did you get that last article right?" He said, he said, "I see they're still talking to me they must not know where it came from." I said, "Senator I never disclose my sources." He said, "Good." So that was, that was very interesting. I, I enjoyed it. I enjoyed it because some of the lessons I've learned in politics and the real strategy on how this thing works really would come from many of those times sitting up on there on Capitol Hill and also watching some of the Carter people 'cause a lot of those folks I knew like [HM] Vernon Jordan. Story_ID: 168350 Speaker 1: And [HM] Vernon [Jordan] became--and [HM] Andy [Andrew] Young. I knew Andy from down there in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: What is your perspective on what happened to Andy Young? Speaker 1: Andy was a lightning rod. Andy probably didn't belong in politics, or didn't belong in government. Andy is about as pure and as I think as, as honest a person as God ever placed on earth. [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter owed him the election. I've never--and I say that because Andy brought him support among black southerners and brought him credibility among the white donors, people who gave Carter a lot of money Carter would never had had otherwise. But, I don't think Andy quite ever belonged in the administration. And I don't Andy ever sought an administration job. He was just kind of pushed into it because they needed to have a very high ranking African American, and Andy was a natural guy. And Andy frankly didn't have a job at the time. SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] had kind of, had kind of reached a point of being Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Andy really didn't have an occupation beyond being a minister, and he hadn't had a church ever. He came out of the seminary and started working with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], so he didn't have a job to go back to really, and he had a family to support. So, I could understand and also Jimmy Carter could be very persuasive. So, he talked Andy into going the UN [United Nations], because Andy wasn't ready to run no executive department. He wasn't interested in that. And they tried to put Andy some place I think they thought he wasn't going to be controversial because Andy drew a lot of fire. The right wing just absolutely detested him. So, Andy got into that job that no one thought he was going to ever make anything of it, and as Andy would do took it and made it a huge pulpit and did more in the UN than I think that any UN Ambassador we've had since Adlai Stevenson. He certainly rearranged America's strategic relationships in Africa to this day. Andy Young I think without, it's not, it's not even a contest is the most influential American in the eyes of African leaders to this day. When Andy was UN Ambassador I went on a couple of his trips with him and it's absolutely amazing the reaction that people had, and also the reaction that Andy had with them. We would actually get on a plane and Andy would stop in almost every country, I don't think there was ever a country we flew over we didn't stop at. Once we were out in Tanzania and got caught up in the damn border war between Kenya and Tanzania, and we got kind of stranded out in Zanzibar and Zanzibar is off the coast of Tanzania. We'd gone and spent an afternoon with Julius Nyerere in Dar, there in Dar Es Salaam [Tanzania] and those are the kind of experiences you'd have with Andy Young I don't think you would have any other American. Andy would go and sit literally on the back patio with Julius Nyerere and because Nyerere was such a gracious man and Andy had such a small press corps with him, he would invite us to come and join him. What a rare treat. Three hours with Julius Nyerere and Andy Young. And then we went with Nyerere over to Zanzibar, got stuck over there. He and Andy of course came back in the [U.S.] Air Force helicopter. We were stuck to come back in a Tanzanian air transport with the back door open. Quite an interesting story too, but that's, but I mean Andy is a--I remember going into Angola coast to the Angola border when Andy was meeting with the Angolan government and trying to persuade Carter not to continue support for [Jonas] Savimbi who was then been previously supported by the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency]. And I watched how Andy dealt with the Angolans. It was absolutely amazing. I watched the rapport he had with them, and these were people who had no reason to ever speak to an American government official again, 'cause we had as a country squarely backed their opposition-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --arming them, funding them, promoting them-- Speaker 2: Jonas Savimbi, right. I remember, yeah. Speaker 1: A complete, yeah, I mean, we had, we had definitely chosen the wrong side in that dispute. Story_ID: 168351 Speaker 1: Maybe you can shed some light on this I saw a film as a student. [HM] Leon [DeCosta] Dash over at the Washington Post travelling with [Jonas] Savimbi's forces and reporting back that there were liberators of the country and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, Leon is a friend of mine. That's a very controversial trip. There was a lady in Washington [D.C.], a black lady, who we're not quite sure who was paying her or why they had paid her, but she represented Savimbi's interest. She called a number of black journalists and was trying to entice them to taking this trip. We've since, since learned, although we were suspicious at the time that this was a CIA [Central Intelligence Agency]-sponsored operation and a CIA-sponsored tour. I remember having a conversation with Leon before he made the decision to go. The Post was quite concerned about it because it was a pretty dangerous trip. They were asking you to take a lot into your own hands. Also, we were quite suspicious even then of the actual bona fides of Jonas Savimbi and the administration at the time was strongly urging Leon not to go. But, for some reason, this person, this woman, this black woman who could be very persuasive talked Leon into it. Leon went over there and came back and gave some incredible reporting. But, even he I think may have some questions about how the, how his host intended to use the trip. Being CIA sponsored that's nothing. Most of them, that's very typical. That's nothing unusual, but I think Leon maintained his integrity in doing it. It was just interesting that the person who had arranged the trip would have those types of relationships. In Washington, that's very, it's not that rare, but you find out there were quite a few black people, at least I did in my time there, who were, you know black people worked at the CIA. For some reason, I just never thought that, you know, they'd had diversity too. They were very interesting people the people I met, the black people at the CIA. They actually have a caucus. Story_ID: 168352 Speaker 1: And I and I tell you this just very quickly it's a very interesting story one of their members called me and this gentleman is very famous among the Washington [D.C.] circles. His specialty was lip-reading Russian. So, they literally would fly him all over the world to attend diplomatic parties so he could stand on one side of the room and read the lips of the Russian delegation and decipher what the hell they were saying and what the pecking order was, but that was his specialty, although he travelled under the cover of working for the U.S. Outreach Educational Division. He ran exhibits around the world; that was his cover, but he really was a Russian lip reader. He called me one day at the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times] and told me this story about how he needed me, my help because there was a black Russian, an African American Russian who had defected right after [Paul] Robeson had gone over there and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] had been using him as a mole inside of Russia for all these many years. He had married a Russian woman. He had had children. He even had grandchildren. Late in the late '70s [1970s] as the [Berlin] Wall began to come down and Russian immigrants were beginning to come over they owed this guy, the black people in the CIA he felt, the U.S. government owed this guy, they let him come over here so they could treat him, he had cancer and so he could die back in the U.S., and the U.S. government said no. So, they were trying to get me to write this story about this guy and how the U.S. government was denying this guy access. Well, I had a hard time getting that story cleared because I was having to rely on sources that the CIA and the State Department [U.S. Department of State] were both denying. They completely denied knowledge of this guy. My guys were telling me oh that bullshit. Anyway, I wasn't able to help him, but do you know they told me 'cause my office use to be right a block away from the White House at 16, the 1600, the 1700 block of Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.]. They said go to your window and look at the window. And I'm standing with somebody I want you to see. And sure enough I went to the window and looked way down the block and there was my guy, the CIA guy, with an old guy. He said this is Mr., and he told me the man's name. They had sneaked this guy into the country and, and had taken him into the White House, okay, with no, no knowledge, nothing and was gonna embarrass the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter administration into allowing him into the country. Now, I ask how the hell do you sneak somebody out of Russia and get him in right to the damn White House itself. It was very interesting. It's an interesting world there. Story_ID: 168353 Speaker 1: And, and Leon's [HM Leon Dash] trip just reminds me of it because for many, many years we always used to always wonder about that because there were things that happened on Leon's trip more interesting than [Jonas] Savimbi really. Yeah, and he wrote a very fascinating book, 'Get Off My Mountain' [sic] which is, and actually I thought it was a very, it was very well done book that talked about that, the US and Angola relationships. But, Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] was very critical of us even being able to even have relationships with Angola because Andy was such a, he's, he's a remarkable guy, and the Angolans even though they hated America they did not hate Andy Young. He was the only one able to go in there and keep talking. Now, of course we need them for oil, and we need them for national gas. Speaker 2: Yeah, in those days weren't they a source for Gulf Oil? Speaker 1: Yeah, but never--they were when we, when they closed the country down, then they went to Royal Dutch-- Speaker 2: Shell [Royal Dutch Shell], yeah. Speaker 1: Yep and they had no U.S. interest for years because of our connection with Savimbi. We also were on the wrong side in South Africa. Andy did a lot to make that, did a lot to realign us there too. We owe a great deal to him. But, what really got him in trouble, of course, with the Israeli lobby is when he began having backdoor conversations with the PLO [Palestine Liberation Organization]. Once Andy began working in southern Africa, the PLO and Israel at that point had a lot of interest in South Africa. It was almost like one of their secondary theaters of engagement. The Israelis were using it for all kinds of nefarious activities and so was the PLO. Once they began to track the influence of Andy Young, they saw that Andy could be a very useful conduit. So, they began meeting secretly with Andy, the PLO did, and Andy being who he is he wouldn't bar anybody from talking. Story_ID: 168354 Speaker 1: But the politics around Angola and those journalist trips are more interesting than [Jonas] Savimbi. Speaker 2: We're rolling again. Yeah, how so? I mean what are those, what were the-- Speaker 1: Because it, it, it pointed up the strategy that obviously the U.S. government had at the time that getting African Americans as the messengers was the way into which to blow sympathy for Savimbi, when in fact we should probably as a country probably should have been with the Angolan people because Savimbi as it turned out was really an insurgent who was milking us and the Russians and everybody else he could get 'cause he made millions off of us and slaughtered a lot of innocent Angolan people. Speaker 2: But it's kind of hard to, I mean, when you look, when I look back at it now in those days it was just hard for us to know what was going on unless, I mean I had some doubts. I did not know about it, so I didn't go, but it was--I didn't really know what was going on. Speaker 1: You know reporting was very suspect on those days, and it's not really that good now, but at least we have many more news outlets. In those days, half of what you read was always, I always thought was manufactured either by this government or some other government trying to influence you, and Angola was an important fight, but were, how many places could you get independent news reports, not many. And, and we were engaged in propaganda as a country. Russia was. Europe you could halfway get some decent reports out of The Economist or London [England] [The] Times or something, but other than that you had to pretty much be dependent on what you'd hear through U.S. filters. Story_ID: 168355 Speaker 1: And I just thought that was a very interesting use of black journalists. I hadn't seen them do that before or since. Although Israel copied that shortly afterwards though. It began encouraging black journalists to come over and report on the, get the Israeli side of the, of the Middle East conflict. But the, but the, but the Israeli lobby was always accused of having set Andy [HM Andrew Young] up because they were getting insecure about where they thought his allegiances were. And they knew of the meetings that Andy was having, not that Andy was keeping them secret, but they knew and they managed to spin that in such a way that when it became public it looked as if Andy was violating U.S. policy vis-a-vis the PLO [Palestine Liberation Organization], so [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter had no choice. Actually, I think it was to Andy's benefit. Speaker 2: Now that, now when Andy Young was dismissed by the administration finally I know it was a tough decision for the Carter administration to make, but when they did it then there was this, there's a big trip organized by [HM] Jesse Jackson to go on an investigate, you know, the Middle East and a lot of journalists was a whole, and a whole entourage went over. Were, were you--did you go over the cover that or did you? Speaker 1: I just, I wouldn't have gone on a trip with Jesse. No, I just--also Carter, Carter knew what was going on, and Andy had been warned. In the Israeli lobby, which is very powerful in Washington [D.C.], he had, they had sent up warning flares. I mean this didn't come out of the blue. Andy just was not going to modify his behavior. He was not gonna not talk to people he wanted to talk to. I also think Andy was at the point where he was ready to leave the administration anyway. Andy was not a diplomat, not in the U.S. sense of the word, and I think he got very--I think he chaffed under some of the restrictions that he was having to work under in the '70s [1970s] representing American's interest in the UN [United Nations]. Andy wanted to go around and unite peoples around the world. He did not want to carry interests for the American industrial complex-- Speaker 2: Yeah he was--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --which is what the UN, the UN job is about. It's about representing American economic interest. Speaker 2: It's not about freedom and justice. Speaker 1: No, no, rhetorically it is. But it's about maintaining access to markets and it's about protecting borders. I mean, it, it's about promoting and protecting American economic interests. That's what that job is about. And Andy is probably the inappropriate person to do that. Story_ID: 168356 Speaker 1: Did you think that Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter] was naive basically as a president? Speaker 2: I thought Carter was too much of a control freak. I also think Carter did not have the worldview, and it's impossible to get the worldview coming up the way he came up. It's an insider's game running America. Carter came from the outside. The insiders tried to acculturate. Carter thought they were trying to co-opt him. They tried to peacefully work out a compromise. Carter still said no, so he was never allowed to--he was never afforded, I don't think the, the full privileges and the full power of that office and he never felt comfortable in it. His people never felt comfortable. They never felt like they belonged. They never felt like Washington [D.C.] was their home. So, that almost every weekend he'd be on the plane heading to Plains [Georgia]. You could tell it in their appointment and the more he got under stress in Washington, the more he reached out and found solace and consolation among black people. He had black people all around him. It's just amazing how he just kind of--because we are just a very loyal Democratic Party constituency, and that was about the only part of the Democratic Party that he really held on to was black voters, so the more he got estranged from the mainstream the more he, I think, bolstered his ties to black voters in black communities across the country-- Story_ID: 168357 Speaker 1: Now, was, was Earl Butz the secretary of agriculture under Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter] or [Gerald] Ford? I'm not sure. Speaker 2: That was Ford. Speaker 1: Ford, okay, all right. I remember the-- Speaker 2: That infamous quote. Speaker 1: Yeah, his three things that Negroes like and stuff, yeah. Speaker 2: Actually I didn't quibble with the content of that. He just shouldn't have said it. Earl Butz is the last guy who should have said it. Yeah, he, he was a Ford guy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ford or [George H.W.] Bush. It may have been Bush [sic, Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford]. Speaker 1: Yeah I remember the remark. I, I don't think it was Bush. I think it was in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: It would have been Ford. Speaker 1: Yeah, Ford, yeah. Speaker 2: Ford was a nice guy, great guy. Story_ID: 168358 Speaker 1: And so was Richard Nixon too on certain things. Domestic policy Nixon was much better and had a much different record than he's given credit for. I remember going into the White House when Nixon was president back in '72 [1972], '73 [1973] and talking about things and hearing him talk about black capitalism--I never heard of that term used before--and saw them unveil a whole program for black economic empowerment. That's what they called it back then, Nixon did, incredible. Our own civil rights organizations weren't even at that level of consciousness. And he had a young team of black guys with him, [Robert] Bob Brown and [Stanley] Stan Scott. Speaker 2: Bob Brown who was in SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee], that Bob Brown? Speaker 1: No, this is Bob Brown from High Point, North Carolina who's now a consultant. He went on to become a consultant to a couple of Nigerian governments, a couple for those military regimes over there. He now is down in--he's a corporate consultant down in, he lives in High Point, North Carolina. But, Bob was a special assistant to the president, so was Stan Scott, so was John Wilks. He had about four or five senior African Americans on his staff, Nixon did back in the early '70s [1970s], and along with John Ehrlichman of Watergate fame. But Ehrlichman before he became known for Watergate he, he was head of the [United States] Domestic Policy Council for Nixon. Ehrlichman was a very, became a close friend with [HM] Vernon Jordan. Ehrlichman really liked Vernon, and Vernon really liked Ehrlichman. As a matter of fact, they used to play tennis all the time out on the White House tennis court. From that relationship Ehrlichman and his black staff assistants developed, I think, some very forward thinking policy aspirations for black people and economic independence. Frankly, it's the only time in recent memory where the government has actually even come close to even uttering anything that ambitious. He got totally trampled by all the Watergate investigation, but Nixon had another side to him. And I remember he was talking to some of the old journalist's hands, some of the old black folks who had been in journalism for years like Ethel Payne, a very well-respected journalist who used to work for the Sengstacke organization. Ethel had been a journalist for fifty-eight years, very well plugged in, and she has pictures, and she was telling me about, you know, evenings that she'd have Nixon and his wife [Pat Nixon] over to her house for dinner and has picture of Nixon and her small kitchen cooking with an apron on, just laughing and having a good time. See, that's the side of Nixon we had never seen before and you know that's, that's a reality about Nixon and that never was put on the record, but there's some people in Washington [D.C.] that are gonna give a much different version of him, and I thought, and I thought on the domestic side it was never fully, he wasn't treated very fairly. And after Watergate, I mean, it just, it just completely erased everything. But, like, like human beings he wasn't all bad. Story_ID: 168359 Speaker 1: Yeah, there, there was a wave of small business loans for black entrepreneurs during that time-- Speaker 2: Well, actually he [Richard Nixon]-- Speaker 1: --that I don't think we've seen since. Speaker 2: Well, he set up the whole notion of having [Office of] Minority Business Enterprise [MBE], this whole notion which laid the ground work for MBE, WBE [Women's Business Enterprise], and the, and the fundamental policy principle that those businesses should be given opportunities to do business without being in direct competition with larger firms. There should be carve outs. That, Nixon introduced it back in '68 [1968] and '72 [1972]. Prior to then, there was no, there was no policy or recognition of that. [HM] Parren Mitchell [III] who was a congressman from Baltimore [Maryland] had a lot to do with it. He was up on the hill pushing that, but basically that was ushered inby Nixon. Now, [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter took it and moved it along and once Maynard Jackson became mayor in Atlanta [Georgia] he took it and really begun, begun to flesh it out where cities could begin using it. But, Nixon was the very first one who started talking about that. This whole--just in, just in the terminology minority business enterprise, that was a Nixon invention. We didn't have that before. Even the Office of Minority Business Enterprise within the Small Business Administration that was a Nixon creation. No, he had another side to him. As I said, he was just a very complex guy. But it's something to think about those gentlemen because they were--I enjoyed meeting them. I still see them today and they've had a tremendous impact on things in the country and they came right out of John Ehrlichman's staff. Story_ID: 168360 Speaker 1: Now, when did you come back to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: I came back to Chicago in 19, late '79 [1979], early '80 [1980]. I got a call one day and I was sitting in the L.A. [Los Angeles] Times bureau from [HM] George Johnson. George Johnson was the founder and CEO of Johnson Products Company, legendary inventor of Ultra Sheen, Afro Sheen. He and I had met a couple of years earlier because in addition to working for the L.A. Times I was also a Washington [D.C] columnist for Black Enterprise magazine and in the context of that I'd come out to interview him because I had happen across a FTC [Federal Trade Commission] investigation that, involving his company Johnson Products and this kind of smelled to me. It kind of reeked of some hanky panky, and I was just curious about it. So, I came out here to interview him and in the course of talking with him I did a piece, a column on him for Black Enterprise back in 1978, '79 [1979] something like that. So, he and I we hit it off and we said why don't we stay in touch 'cause I told him I said I think he had really been screwed over here. This is highly, I said there's something here that doesn't really hang right. I haven't been able to put my hands on it. There's some stuff going on. And he felt the same thing. He had lawyers working on it. He had done all the legal stuff, but he knew he was getting the bad end of the deal. So, one day two, almost two years later he calls and said look can you come to Chicago and talk to me on Saturday. I have something very urgent to talk to you about. I said well, and he said I'll pay for it. He said just, just go to the airport I'll have a ticket ready and I'll, and I'll meet you at the airport. I went, came out here. I spent Saturday with him in his office and at the end of the day after a long four-hour conversation he says, "I need you to come and help me. I wanna take on the federal government, and I need to fight off the FTC because they're trying to ruin, they're trying to put me out of business. I need somebody who has your skills and your contacts who can help me fight--Revlon is trying to use the government to run me out of business." I said, "Well look I don't know anything about manufacturing. I don't know anything about marketing." I said, you know, "I'm a reporter and that's all I've ever done." He said, "Don't worry." He said, "I'll, the marketing and stuff," he said that's, "I have a whole company full of people who know that. I just need you to help me figure out a strategy to fight off these competitors and fight off the FTC." I said well look that sounds awfully exciting when he kept spinning, 'cause he's a wonderful salesman. He said, "You need to get back home anyway. You got these kids," 'cause he knew my mother-in-law and he knew my--he was in school with my mother-in-law. He knew my, my wife's family. He said, "You need to bring those kids back home anyway," 'cause I had two young kids at the time. He said, "Whatever they're paying you I'll pay you more." He said, "I'll tell you what you come here, after a year you don't like it, I'll pay and send you right back." He says nothing, you know, nothing gained, nothing lost. I said, okay that's fair. So, we packed up and moved to Chicago and that was in I think late '79 [1979] or early '80 [1980]. Story_ID: 168361 Speaker 1: And I started out being a special assistant to him [HM George Johnson], and started out reviewing, just investigating all of the FTC [Federal Trade Commission] stuff but in the process though fell madly in love with his company [Johnson Products Company] and the art of marketing, consumer product marketing, and I loved being in that company 'cause he had such a talented staff of people. And I thought it absolutely amazing that you could make a product that had a manufacturing cost of $1.90 cents and sell it for ten dollars. I thought that was absolutely amazing. Everybody's products was the same, the only difference was the perception of that product in the minds of the person behind it, a very powerful thought. Speaker 2: I think Afro Sheen, Ultra Sheen-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and other kind of sheens are really the same sheen basically. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's no patent on any of that. I mean grease is grease, but the value of what he did and the genius of what he did is that he created in the consumer's mind the perception that this was truly unique. That's what you become successful for, and he's one of the, he's one of the country's legendary marketer. He's a marketing genius. 'Cause not only did he have to do more than an average product manufacturing developer, he had to create an entirely new category. Ethnic hair care didn't exist until he came along. You couldn't buy black hair care products in retail stores until he went in and told [Charles] Corky Walgreen, "Look let's try it. Let me put these in the store. I'll pay you twice as much retail commission as other products, just let me put it there." He invented the carrier, which is today like a four billion dollar retail industry he invented. That's incredible. A man with a high school degree and five hundred dollars; it's incredible. And that business once I learned it, that business, that industry which Madam C. J. Walker and H. B. Fuller really cultivated, George Johnson had gardened and much later came along and further refined it, but that business generated more wealth for African Americans than any other industry in America because it generated the wealth on all vertical levels, from the manufacturer to the wholesaler, to the retail, to the beauty salon; that's powerful. Fifteen thousand black hairdressers got a good living doing Ultra Sheen relaxers. Fifteen thousand, I mean, that's and when you think about the ripple effect to that. That's quite--and then you realize that industry had been owned and controlled by black manufacturers for over one hundred years since the days of Madam C. J. Walker. So, I, I felt very fortunate of having the privilege of being able to work in an industry like that and learn some of that history and to get to know some of the men who helped do that. I thought it was just an incredible story, and still do. I'm still very close to [HM] George Johnson. I'm still very close to [HM] Comer Cottrell who was the founder and CEO of Pro-Line, of the Gardner's here in Chicago [Illinois]. Those are real heroes. They all have sold their companies. They all have become very wealthy men and now are in their twilight years, but boy you talk about some real bold tall achieving guys. Those are the guys I think who just are tremendous heroes. They'll never be properly honored or recognized for what they done. And their success spawned so much other success in the black America. They can't begin to take credit for all the stuff they've done and wouldn't even want to 'cause they're not those kind of guys. But, to think about what that meant. Now, we've lost control of that, of that industry. It has gone the way of all the other industries in which we have used to generate capital in our community, but they held on as long as they could. Story_ID: 168362 Speaker 1: But, the, the initial incursion which weakened the black hold on that industry came through the Federal Trade Commission [FTC] and the United States government in 1976. Speaker 2: What did they actually do? Speaker 1: They took an anonymous complaint in their Seattle, Washington, office that the product, the Ultra Sheen relaxer had an ingredient which was, which was lye, sodium hydroxide which could if used improperly harm, bodily harm consumers. They wanted the company [Johnson Products Company], they forced the company to put on its label a very large warning that said this product can be harmful. The company took the position, well my product is the same product that our competitors are using, why don't you require all of us to put, affix this warning label on all of our products at the same time so I'm not competitively disadvantaged. The government said no. There was a twenty-one month lapse between the time his product had the warning and Revlon was made to have the warning, same product. In those twenty-one months, Revlon had eroded Ultra Sheen's market share from the nineties, 'cause remember he [HM George Johnson] invented the relaxer. He invented this category. When this started, he had like a 91 percent market share nationally. By the time in those twenty-one months he had dropped down maybe thirty market points, which is worth a lot of money. He never got his balance after that. That was Revlon's entry into the market. They literally were going around from black hair salon to salon see Johnson Products, something is wrong with this product, look at this warning. Our products don't have that. For almost two years, the federal government allowed them to do that. I always tried to get [HM] Mr. [George] Johnson to consider suing the United States government. He really should have. He had quite a case, but they never--the odds of suing would have been very low, but at least you'd bring national attention in it because that was one of the cases that always stands out because no one, no, none of the regulatory people I've ever talked to have a very adequate explanation for why that was allowed to happen. Speaker 2: That sounds like a good '60 Minutes' story--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: It's a wonderful story. And because he didn't whine about it and because black people really didn't understand at the time the implications of it, he suffered alone. He got his, he, he got, he got very, he got, he go, he got economically assaulted with no one coming to his aid 'cause I don't think people really understood the imp, implications of it. That was, that was the beginning of the end of the, of the, of the black ethnic hair care industry-- Story_ID: 168363 Speaker 1: So, were you able to do anything to forestall that, that disaster? Speaker 2: I was able to help put together a strategy to fight them off because his [HM George Johnson] competitors led by Revlon was using that as a first, that was just the first foray into trying to either force him to sell to them or to drive him out of business. They didn't stop. That was just the beginning. So, we fought them all over in every market all over America. We had to also figure out how to shoot a few shots back. One of the things we were able to do is that we opened up successfully a manufacturing plant in Africa. It became very clear that the [Johnson Products] Company was gonna have to go offshore to other markets where there were people who'd buy the products because this market was not going to be fair, an equitable place to compete, so I helped him open a plant in Nigeria, Johnson Products Nigeria. So, we expanded international sales greatly. We also helped him consolidate the other black hair care manufacturers because it was very clear that this, that this was a threat not just to JPC, but it was a threat to the entire industry. So, we helped him, I helped him form a trade association company. It was called the American Health and Beauty Aid Institute [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--I think it's called here. The logo, there's a logo on it--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: The Proud Lady. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I actually helped develop that. I actually arranged and helped pull together the very first meeting and association. And I was real active in, real active in it for many years and still know some of the people who are still in it, but that was one, that was one of the better things we thought about doing because we were able to at least get some awareness. And we also dug in politically and we began going to Capitol Hill and informing politicians who began going to the editorial boards and lobbying back at Revlon and some of the other countries. We actually began to challenge them. When Revlon tried to acquire a company once, we filed a protest with the U.S. Justice Department [U.S. Department of Justice], during the [Ronald] Reagan administration. They had never had a black company ever challenged, the merger acquisition action before. And we did it on the grounds of its potential antitrust implications for our community. We sent the letter and it was, it was, it was during the [Richard] Nixon administration. No, during the Reagan administration. Ed [Edwin] Meese was attorney general, and that was a first signal to Revlon that we, there's some crazy folks out there working at Johnson Products, what in the hell are they trying to do. 'Cause we made [Ronald] Ron Perelman who was still the president and CEO of Revlon to have to publicly respond to those charges, and we trailed him all over the country with those allegations until he eventually gave up on the acquisition, but out of that they also decided to kind of--because we figured out who and where his access points were and we just let him know that this wasn't, this business was worth his effort. 'Cause the guy who really was on [HM] George Johnson who really wanted to crush Johnson Products was Charles Revson himself. Revson, the founder of Revlon, had long died. Perelman had just gotten recent ownership of the company and he didn't have any axe to grind with George Johnson, didn't know who George Johnson was. Some of the people left in the company did though. So, once we were able to get that part of we were able to move on with other things. But, it's a very interesting part of history. As a matter of fact, Mr. Johnson and I are getting ready to document and distribute some of that, some of that information, 'cause I think it's so important. He, he has to really do that, I think, before, before he goes. Story_ID: 168364 Speaker 1: Did you work for the [Jane] Byrne administration at a certain point? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Jane Byrne, okay, all right. Speaker 2: No. I got involved with the Harold Washington campaign while I was still working at Johnson Products [Company, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's an inaccuracy that has been reported, I think, in the, in the archives at the Washington Center. Speaker 1: Right, right that's where I read it, yeah. Speaker 2: I don't where they got that. Jane Byrne wouldn't have hired me. Jesus, and I wouldn't have worked for her (simultaneous). Speaker 1: I thought it was odd, that was kind of odd that you'd-- Speaker 2: Very odd. I was, I was working very comfortably at Johnson Products. [HM] George Johnson was one of the original funders of the Harold Washington campaign, and Bill Berry [Edwin C. "Bill" Berry], former president of the Chicago Urban League and was then president of the George Johnson Foundation. Bill Berry and George Johnson were very much of the ground zero of Harold Washington's campaign and because I was there with him I was involved from the very beginning. Speaker 1: Well, the Harold Washington, the call for a black mayor was one that seem to be, I mean, black journalist [HM] Lu Palmer [Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] basically started talking about that three or four years before it actually happened and by--when it finally, when it, when the black business community, you know, rallied around it and as you, as you were, especially the hair care guys like you, you talk, [HM Edward] Gardner with the-- Speaker 2: Well see-- Speaker 1: --get out the vote campaign. Speaker 2: --in '77 [1977] when Harold ran for mayor I don't think Harold got more than 13, 14 percent of the black vote, that [Richard] Dick Newhouse had run, barely got out of the teens. But, we knew demographically just looking at the population that there was a potential, that you had to put together a coalition. And what really set the climate for it frankly was the, was Jane Byrne. Jane Byrne through her deeds and misdeeds actually pissed people off enough to really make conditions right to have a black candidate. I remember picketing [Chicago] City Hall when she threw all the black members off the board of education, even though the black enrollment in CPS [Chicago Public Schools] at that time was over 60 percent. I remember ChicagoFest. She did everything possible to insult this electorate, so she really got people riled up. She also was stupid enough to have also at the same time pissed off the downtown business leadership. She angered them. She had been too overzealous in fundraising. She had been a little bit too dictatorial even for him. So, there was a rare moment in time where the downtown business interest and the black community leadership was feeling the same pain from the same enemy. And as it turned out, there was one organization where those two groups met and that was Chicago United. Chicago United business organization of minority of black firms and downtown business CEOs had been formed back in the '60s [1960s] during the times of the civil rights during the riots of '68 [1968]. So, out of that group came this, this, exasperation. Story_ID: 168365 Speaker 1: Okay now we were talking about Warren Bacon and Chicago United's plan to elevate the profile of Warren Bacon. Now this is about 1981 or so? Speaker 2: About '80 [1980] or '81 [1981]. Warren Bacon was a former executive at Inland Steele [Co.]. Very affable man, very, very well liked. The principals inside of Chicago United had just spontaneously came to the conclusion that if there was going to be a black mayor it had to be Warren Bacon. He was ideal, plus their consultants said he had told them that. Warren said, oh no you guys are crazy. Nobody knows me, I can't get voters on the street excited, you're absolutely crazy. No, they said we'll make you known. So, a large effort was placed behind Warren Bacon and resources were put there to do an elaborate yearlong study of Chicago Public School System [CPS], how to improve efficiency, how to make, how to bring it into modern organization management, huge amount of money, huge number of people to elevate Warren's visibility. As Warren's visibility became more, became higher, it also became quite clear that Warren had been right. Warren's a business executive. He had no touch for retail politics, but these guys had even less of a feel, so as much as Warren would protest the more they kept over, overwhelming him until it became quite clear that was coming out of the streets and what was coming, coming in from the media would not seem appropriate that there was a yearning for Warren Bacon. So, for a while there was a--I, I recall very early when [Edwin C.] Bill Berry convened a meeting in Independence Bank [Chicago, Illinois] with six guys and said, "Look guys we gotta give this thing some credibility. I'm going down to First Chicago [Bank, later, Bank One Corporation] to open up an account for the election of a black mayor. We don't even have a candidate. I don't know who the hell the candidates going to be, but I need $250,000 dollars before I leave here today." Six guys wrote out checks for [$]250,000. So, the first account for committee for election of a black mayor didn't even have a candidate. That was what the checking account was called, committee to elect a black mayor. Story_ID: 168366 Speaker 1: At the same time, the Chicago Defender was running a very bogus poll. I say bogus because it was being manipulated by factions in the community and as we later found out, by Harold [Washington] himself. There were a number of names they were running. Who would you vote for as the first black mayor of Chicago [Illinois], and they were running the totals in the newspaper at the end of some time period. Well, guess who won the poll. It was Harold [Washington], and God, I mean what a surprise because I knew Harold. I had known Harold Washington since the days of my, at the [Chicago] Sun-Times, and he was known to be a very bright guy, extremely bright, but a little flaky. Harold did not have the best reputation. He had gotten into trouble with the political fathers, and he put a jail term on him for failing to file his taxes. He had been disbarred from taking a client's money and not having performed the legal work for which he had paid, so he had been disbarred for a period. There were all kinds of rumors coming from Springfield [Illinois] about his drunkenness and his sex habits, and plus he was a guy who nobody could really put a handle, socially enigma. So, of all the people who had surfaced as a winner of this poll Harold was probably the last person the black leadership class would have thought of. Now, they all knew Harold. They all supported Harold which was the amazing thing. I used to, I used to see Harold when I was there at Johnson Products Company [Chicago, Illinois]. Twice a year Harold would come by, wait in the reception area, and I would take a check out to him from [HM] George Johnson and once I came out and asked George, "Why do you give him money? Why are you, why are you contributing money to his campaign?" He said oh, he said, "He'll never go anywhere, but I just like the guy, got integrity, he's bright and we just have to support people like that." And that's how, that's, it's the same thing for the Jacoby's [HM Jacoby Dickens], the same thing for the [HM Albert] Al Johnson's. People always liked Harold, they just never felt he would ever rise to the pinnacle where he was. Well, he, he later rose as mayor. So, when his name began surfacing from this poll and from the streets, there was a lot of incredulity 'cause they said how can we elect a guy who had been disbarred, been convicted and did brief jail time for not having filed his taxes and had some questionable allegations about his conduct. How can we sell a guy like that? This ain't gonna work. So, right from the very beginning Harold walked into a real difficult situation because we really had at that point two elements of the electorate, two elements of the community who were at odds. Harold had done a great job of co-opting the street, the grassroot, the news, the Conrans [ph.]; he'd done a wonderful job. No question Harold was their candidate and for obvious reasons. Harold had done Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] holiday here in Chicago and in Springfield. He had gone to Washington [D.C.] done the Voting Rights Act. I mean he, the man had had a very distinguished legislative career, no question about it, and was a very, very smart man. Story_ID: 168367 Speaker 1: On the other side though, the guys with the money who was gonna be needed to make this financially possible were not for Harold [Washington], but they didn't have anybody else. So, I remember I was at the meeting the day that Harold came into Chicago United [Chicago, Illinois] to present himself. A very frosty meeting. Harold was very nervous, very nervous. We could see he was sweating so profusely. I mean, you could just tell. I felt so sorry for him, 'cause he came there to convince here why he would be a viable candidate and why he deserved their support, and it was a chilly room. And he got up there and he started talking and he made his case, and I don't think he turned anybody's, I don't think he converted anybody. Then at the very end of the meeting it became clear that the white CEOs were completely turned off, not partially, completely, and up until this time the agreement was that there was gonna be a consensus candidate that the white community, that, that, a candidate that the black voters could support and the white business guys could fund. Because the supposition was that not sufficient money could come from black people in order the raise the millions of dollar necessary to defeat [Jane] Byrne. 'Cause up until that time most money that had ever been raised for a black candidate was money for an alderman's race, we talking about forty thousand, fifty thousand dollars, one hundred thousand dollars at most. We knew to elect a mayor even in '82 [1982] you needed ten million dollars, at least, between the primary and the general. So, we felt we needed them. So, selling Harold to them was very, was a hard sell. Story_ID: 168368 Speaker 1: So finally it got to the point where it became very clear that Harold [Washington] had emerged. Harold was the guy the people wanted, so Bill [Edwin C. "Bill"] Berry very, known to be very frank and very, very bold talking said look you may not like him, I may not like him, but that's who we got. That's who we gotta go with 'cause the people like him. We'll have to take him and work with him, make him our guy. So, Bill spoke and everybody sat back and kind of halfway nodded. So, the first mailings went out announcing that the very first fund raiser being held by the committee to elect a black mayor was being convened, and they were being asked to bring in their first check for five thousand dollars. A letter went out to about thirty-five large companies, all of whom were members of Chicago United [Chicago, Illinois], all of who see, owes Bill knew intimately and had known for years. We were gonna start off with the first--that was gonna hopefully yield another couple of hundred grand really quickly, but more importantly give us the names we'd use at the, at an announcement press conference announcing Harold's election. We were gonna be the rainbow campaign with Sears, Motorola, Jewels, along with [HM] Lu [Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], you know, that would have been quite a picture if you think about it. We'll that's what we were aiming for. So, I helped Bill Berry draft the mailgram, we sent them out, and after about a week we only got one response. So, Bill goes back to my office, chews me out, certain that I had done something wrong and didn't mail out to the right people and messed up the addresses. So, I said I'd do a second mailing. Mailed again, no responses. Clearly, they had gotten together among themselves and decided they were gonna sit this one out. They couldn't stomach Harold. At that point, we, the black leadership, money people, the finance guys panicked. They panicked because we didn't think that we had the wherewithal to raise the millions of dollars necessary to raise in such a short amount of time, to make it viable for Harold or anybody else to run. So, as it turned out we were wrong. So, that's why 90 percent of the money that was raised in the primary came from black people. Quite, quite, accidentally 'cause that's not how it was planned. And it also explains a lot of why council wars proceeded. Story_ID: 168369 Speaker 1: There actually was a, was a racial divide and, and a racial gulf around Harold's [Harold Washington] election before it even got started, but most people don't know that story. They don't know that the racial divide actually began in '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: Well, Chicago [Illinois] the racial divide began a long time ago. Speaker 1: Well, a long time, yeah, but I mean around this mayoral election and it started with the leadership group when the white counterparts of the black Chicago United [Chicago, Illinois] CEOs took a walk and decided to back out that set the tone for a very ugly, a very ugly period. That then just proceeded into the city council, but the war had already started. It just, it just got no public attention. And actually it made, it made for a much better I think campaign, and it definitely made for a much better growth experience for our community because I think we would have had some problems had it gone according to plan. Because many of the interests that Harold had to later oppose or promote would have been in direct contradiction, I think, to the business interests that a lot of his perceived supporters would have probably wanted him to take. As it turned out, one of the reasons Harold was able to be such a great mayor is that unlike most politicians he was completely relieved of all obligations to raise money. Guys like [HM] George Johnson and [HM] Jacoby Dickens and [HM Albert] Al Johnson, Al [Albert Boutte, Sr.]they told him straight up. They says look we don't want you to do anything but be a great candidate. "We don't want you to raise a dollar, that's our job. We will raise all the money that's necessary. All we want in return is for you to win and once you run for you to do good government and do not embarrass us. You do the best you can do. We will raise the money. And here, here's an American Express Card anything you need you put on there. The bills come to us. We don't want you to be bought or obligated to anybody but to your community." And he, and he ran like that for fifty-five months. What a great relief to a politician, especially a politician like Harold not to have to raise thirteen million dollars. Had he had to raise money like every other candidate, he probably wouldn't have won. It was a people's movement, no question, but we still needed seven or eight million dollars. We still needed payroll. We still needed money to pay rent. We still needed money for get out the vote. I mean there are certain things in a campaign that you do not have a substitute for but greenbacks. Those greenbacks came through a finance committee that was almost all African American. Story_ID: 168370 Speaker 1: When we had the announcement press conference on the committee to elect a black mayor even before Harold [Washington] had even been formally identified--I mean before he stepped up at the Hilton Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] and announced his candidacy. That maiden press conference was downtown, and they had it at the Hyatt Hotel and Hugh Hefner had been invited because Hef was clearly in that group. He had been--Hef had done more to support independent black politics in Chicago [Illinois] than anybody, any single individual. That goes back to the early '60s [1960s] and everybody knew that. Hef had moved to California by then, of course, but his daughter came to the press conference. She was the only white person at that press conference. Speaker 2: Christie Hefner, right? Speaker 1: Christie. As a matter of fact, the very first employees in the campaign came from Playboy. They were on leave. The very first mailings the campaign did came from Playboy. Playboy provided the, provided the office of administrative support for at least the first thirty to forty-five days until we could get organized and get all that stuff and running and, and were very, very, very critical to the operation because the people she sent had, hadn't had campaign experience. And also they gave unstintingly, I mean, you know there were two full-time people she sent, plus we used office and phone or anything else that was necessary and that's why Hefner's really had never gotten I think proper, proper recognition for what they've done. To him that's a very small thing. He paid the big dues to this town back in the '60s [1960s] when no one would stand up to support independent black politicians like, like, like [HM William] Bill Cousins, like, well I can go down the list. Bill New--[Richard] Dick Newhouse. He would give money. He'd be the largest contributors to all of those independent politicians. He would have fundraisers at his house and raise money. Nobody else was doing fundraisers for, for people like [HM] Anna Langford. Anna Langford was considered, you know, she was considered a pariah. Nobody would come out and give her four or five, or ten thousand dollars except Hef would. And Hef didn't ever ask anything of them. He would give to them and didn't ask for anything. So, I mean, that, and also he gave them a lot of legitimacy because unfortunately the black community was not supporting independent politics early. In votes slowly, but financially no. That came almost exclusively from people like the [First] United Methodist Church, the first, the, the Temple, the Chicago Temple [First United Methodist Church at the Chicago Temple, Chicago, Illinois]. But, primarily through Hugh Hefner. Hefner played a very critical role and he did in the campaign and he did when Harold went out there to California-- Story_ID: 168371 Speaker 1: --California became a major fundraising. We probably raised, I bet you probably 10 percent or more. Of all the money that was raised for Harold's [Harold Washington] campaign probably came from Hollywood, maybe more. Harold was great. He was a great--he had a great charisma. He was able to win over people very easily, and Chicago's [Illinois] campaign attracted such attention it was pretty easy to raise a lot of money and especially with Harold didn't have to be responsible for follow-up calls or nothing at all. All he had to do was just stay, wave, make a speech, he's gone. It's somebody's else job to call and beg for money. So, that's why those guys on the finance committee, the [HM] George Johnson's of the world and [HM Edward] Ed Gardner's of the world really have not been properly noted because people ask what do we have to do to get another black mayor in this town, well you have to understand how you finance it first. That story has never been put on the record. You need the excitement, the popular excitement in the street, but you also need about fifteen and twenty million dollars. That's the other side. Because under, underneath all of that, all, all, all the noise and all the jarring and all the clamor, which was important, you couldn't have won it without it. And underneath all of that, you had a very well-financed sophisticated polling operation that was run by Pat [Patrick] Caddell. You had a very sophisticated advertising operation. I mean we bought as competitively or more than our candidates were able to buy. We were doing polling every day. We were doing focus groups every day. It was a very sophisticated operation, a very, very expensive. We wouldn't air a commercial without doing polling. We had polls among the white property owners, white renters, black property owners, black renters, different ages. And most of those focus groups were held over to Kirkland & Ellis [Chicago, Illinois], the law firm. We were using moot court for that purpose. So, there's was a lot--and we had great help from Foote, Cone, & Belding [Chicago, Illinois]. All the media buys and all the, I mean, and we, we had, we had a lot help from a lot of institutions that had never really been credited, but underneath all of that was a lot of very sophisticated help that no campaign in Chicago had really had since, for instance, "Come Alive October Five" and all of the signage and all of the imaging that was done. The reason we have Harold is because of the marketing department and Soft Sheen Products. I remember when we presented the strategic recommendation that he be known as Harold because there was a lot of feeling that that was, you know, you should be Congressman Washington, or Washington. Everybody said oh we should go with Washington. It was Ed's group that said oh no that's the ultimate accolade for a politician, Harold, and that's when it stuck, the colors even. "Come Alive October Five." So, that was the, there, there was a lot of--it took, took a lot of people and took a lot of different resources, but in the end at the end of the day running for mayor in this city is a very costly; you need the money. And those guys we don't have entrepreneurs like that anymore. The guys who are around who have succeeded them, the younger guys are just as successful or perhaps more successful than they are in business, but they don't share their love and devotion to black community to do the kind of unselfish giving those guys have done for forty years. Those guys would come together routinely and pool their money to help do something like elect Harold. None of them ever asked for a contract. None of them were city vendors. None of them were expecting to come and get their brother-in-law hired, never once. Harold went to them after the election and said, look if you guys wanna send somebody down on my staff, he said you know--(unclear)-"Oh no Harold we don't need that, we don't need anything. We just want you to do a good job." He said well don't you wanna have somebody down here 'cause the business community downtown wants me to put somebody in. They said, well yeah we'll get back to you. They had to ask for volunteers. Nobody wanted to come down and work in [Chicago] City Hall. They finally got a volunteer and he said I, I can only be down here one or two days a week and I just wanna a dollar. I'll just work a dollar a year and that's what was done. Story_ID: 168372 Speaker 1: Now at what point did you realize that Harold [Washington] could actually win this, I mean, did you think he could-- Speaker 2: First debate, that debate in the primary. I knew he would win the primary, but the, what the organization at that point was so untested. Once he won the primary, I knew he could win the general. As long as we had--remember at that point we had a wounded Democratic Party and Harold and come out of that primary televised debate with the legitimacy of being a real candidate. Speaker 1: He certainly beat the other candidates, even though the media seemed to make it seem like it was more even than it was. It was pretty clear that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, more important black people thought he won. That was a big thing. If, if his base hadn't felt he won, he wouldn't have had a shot. And also it became obvious after the primary that the big money had begun being turned a loose. Every day more and more money was coming in. Story_ID: 168373 Speaker 1: And also a lot of the support and encouragement we had was coming from friends outside of our community. You know one of the great untold stories of Harold's [Harold Washington] campaign, but it really is much broader than Harold I think is the tremendous relationship that exists between the Jewish community and the black community in Chicago [Illinois] and it's very, it's very quiet and it's not, there's no organization names to it, but to my knowledge they are, there's a tremendous affinity. And during the election for Harold and during Harold's term in office a lot of support and a lot of money came from Jewish friends in, in support there would be absolutely just amazing. I'm remembering now one story. I can tell this story 'cause she's no longer with us and that's Eppie Lederer, Dear Abby [sic, Ann Landers]. She was very close to Harold. She used to say she was Harold's mole. Eppie used to go to those very fancy Lake Shore Drive cocktail parties and crowds and she would call and very surreptitiously report to us what was being said and what was being done behind people's back, and she turned in sometimes very remarkable information she'd pick up at her dinner and cocktail circuit. No one would ever think that Eppie Lederer would be out there spying for Harold. Story_ID: 168374 Speaker 1: Classic case, I remember once I got a call from a guy named Jerry Wexler who was one of the major developers in this town [Chicago, Illinois] called Jupiter Industries. Jerry says, "You never would guess what's happened, they're trying to get together and buck the mayor [Harold Washington]." I said, "What do you mean Jer?" "All the major developers got together over, over at, over at this guy's office and they said they're not gonna go on with any MBE [Minority Business Enterprises] stuff. They're gonna bond together and they said anybody who breaks and works with the [Harold] Washington administration they gonna drum out the business, just thought you needed to know what." I said, "Who was this?" I'm trying to get those names now. He said, "The mayor should, the mayor should make an example out of one of these guys. These ain't the South, how dare they do that," and he was right. The developers in this town had gotten together early '83 [1983] and said damn MBE, damn affirmative action we're not gonna do nothing. And it actually had an organized meeting and it actually called in a guy who was the first developer who had, who had been awarded a project with the City of Chicago [Illinois] and since this is for historical purposes let me be explicit it's [Richard] Richie Stein who now runs a company called Mesirow Stein [Real Estate Inc.]. At the time back in '82 [1982] he was, he was only doing strip malls in the suburbs. We asked him could he, was he interested in competing to develop the first block in the North Loop, which is now 203 North LaSalle [Chicago, Illinois]. That was the first building built during Harold's [Harold Washington] tenure. Well, in order to do, that was the first building that also had attached to it affirmative action or WBE [Women's Business Enterprises] requirements. Twenty percent of all the contracts had to go to minority and female--(unclear)--. That was a very bold move and believe you me it did not go down without resistance, an organized resistance by the businesses that were involved in that. We still are struggling with some of that even today, but in those days it was a very organized movement. And that was really fought and, and, and the people who helped fight that frankly were people in the Jewish community who was, who were friends. And that is a very, even today that goes on and it's very kind of ad hoc, but it's very interesting to see who that work, very interesting. And Harold was the beneficiary of that. 'Cause I think you have to put the Hefners in context and when you do that you really have to explain about that relationship. Story_ID: 168375 Speaker 1: They also came together to support [HM] Carol [Moseley] Braun when she ran for [U.S.] Senate. If you look at her finance committee, you will see what I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Same people were. Speaker 1: Yep, and they're consistent on there. And, and in the business world day to day it's amazing how it gets manifested. It's just very interesting, and it's only known by, I mean, the, the, the gentile community in Chicago [Illinois] is completely unaware of it. What was always so interesting when you talk to some, some Jewish friends they feel that we are, the black people, are just so forgiving and so, so understanding. They thought Harold [Washington] was just too, too inclusive and too kind to political enemies. And they were saying at the time you, some people you can't treat decently. They would always say that. They always used to think that Harold should be a little bit more strict on his enemies, that you know don't let them get you at a disadvantage. And culture, we just come from a different place. But, I just found it very interesting when we look at major social and civic organizations in Chicago and you will see conspicuous absences of Jewish names, but you will see a lot of African American names. And you will ask well why are members of your community not serving in this organization or serving on that organization these are very large civic prestigious organizations, almost like an organized boycott and in many ways there is an organized boycott. Yep, but that's, that's, that's, that's, that's another social side of Chicago which I think is very interesting. I hope that somebody will write about it one, one day, but it, it, but it's a, it's, it's a great source of keep Chicago on an even keel though I think. It's a great relationship, and it has more impact day to day in business that gets done. There are a lot of black businesses who benefit unknowingly from, from that, from those interests. Story_ID: 168376 Speaker 1: Okay, well what was it like being press secretary for Harold Washington? Speaker 2: Crazy, 'cause it was like fighting a race war by day and running a government by night. Council wars really permeated the first two years of his tenure. Council wars was actually just an out and out media war and a political war that was fought under a scorched turf policy. [Edward] Vrdolyak was just as, as, as smart of a strategist as Harold and was playing for keeps. We were playing for keeps, so every day we would come in there to fight and do harm. So, for two years every day twenty-four-seven we had knock down, take out war. In the evening at the end of the day after the news cycle, we then would get around to running a government; that's what it was like twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. I remember once Harold was so intense he actually called me on a Christmas Eve and he said, we were talking about something we were getting ready to do they were trying to do us and we're trying to do them, one or the other, and he was saying look call everybody together let's meet at my house tomorrow morning at ten. I said, "Mr. Mayor tomorrow is Christmas." He, I didn't hear a sound, he got embarrassed he said, "Oh, oh, oh, oh I knew that, I knew that." No, he didn't know that. It was intense, and we played--it, it was--we played, we had to play for keeps 'cause so much was at stake. But, we now later learned though and very interesting that that was not quite as it seemed either, which is always a good lesson I think for history 'cause one of, one of the interesting historical footnotes is that Harold and Vrdolyak had secret meetings throughout the entire time. And frankly, they, they, they would have had to because for the first year and a half Harold needed Vrdolyak's consent in order to get anything done in the [Chicago] City Council, I mean anything. Story_ID: 168377 Speaker 1: Why would they [Harold Washington and Edward Vrdolyak] meet? Did they have similar interests? Speaker 2: Well, it has since been published that those meetings took place and in retrospect they would have to because there were important issues which affected the economic and social welfare of the city that had to get done. Bonds to keep [Chicago] O'Hare [International] Airport [Chicago, Illinois] expanding, the city budget so we be able to put out fires and collect garbage. I mean, there were a lot of important matters that had to get decided even as we waged council wars. So, of course, the two gonna have to meet, but I just never thought that at the time. It is probably a testimony to their cleverness, and also to their maturity. And while the rest of us were fighting to the death, they had enough sense to know when to pull back and when to consult each other and say look we can't run this city [Chicago, Illinois] over the cliff in the name of my being the mayor or you being the leader of the city council. Some things have to be bigger than even us, and that's the city's welfare and I was just amazed that that took place, but not totally surprised 'cause I used to wonder sometimes how did we manage to end impasses at the eleventh and a half hour. These, these big fights would always go right down to the wire. One Christmas Eve 'cause under this law we have to have a balanced budget in Chicago [Illinois] by the stroke of midnight December 31st. We had gone through seven budgets and it now was 10:45 p.m. December 31st city council was still in session, and we still didn't have enough votes to get a budget passed. And then somehow on the eighth printing of that budget at 11:05 we got enough votes to pass the budget. So, we had many, many episodes like that. I actually had gone out to O'Hare on a, on a, on actual, on a, on a shutdown, on a shutdown drill. We were gonna have to close O'Hare Airport. Imagine what that would have done to the city's image and to the damn aviation system in the country. Here again we were trying to get a bond deal approved for the airport. It had been held up by the [Edward] Vrdolyak 29. At the eleventh and a half hour they managed to blink and we got the bond deal through. So, clearly, I mean, there were moments like that that had occurred throughout Harold's [Harold Washington] first two years. Story_ID: 168378 Speaker 1: Now, in your opinion how much of Council Wars was due to race? Speaker 2: Race was about, race was the, was the tool that was used. [Edward] Vrdolyak clearly used it, and Harold [Washington] clearly used it. It really was about old fashion political power. Vrdolyak used to tell us privately what really used to piss him off about the whole thing he says, "Look same game, different players." That's how he really felt. Why are you calling names. He used to hate it when Harold would say those, you know, those, those rapacious dogs snipping at the heels of your mayor. Oh, he used to hate that because their kids would have to go to school and put up with their dads being called rapacious wolves. Speaker 1: Right, slobbering over the city [Chicago, Illinois] (laughter). Speaker 2: He hated that. Yeah, they used to say hey cut that out, that's excess. This ain't about race, this is about same game, different players. That was Vrdolyak's watch words, and in some cases he was right. It was about political power. Vrdolyak had a way, an approach to doing business that Harold strongly disagreed with, and Harold was not about to compromise on it. Not only was it politically suicide, but he also was morally and ethically opposed to it, and Vrdolyak felt just as strong. So, this was a fight between two very smart, two very charismatic, and two very clever political leaders who actually I think had a lot of respect for each other. I never heard, I never heard the mayor say anything negative about Vrdolyak privately. Alderman [Edward] Burke yes, Vrdolyak no. Story_ID: 168379 Speaker 1: Now, [Edward] Burke's a player that we haven't discussed, but what, what was Harold's [Harold Washington] opinion of Burke-- Speaker 2: That Burke was a racist. Speaker 1: --I mean or, or critique of Burke? Speaker 2: That Burke was purely a racist. [Edward] Vrdolyak, he said no. Vrdolyak is just a political--he's a Machiavelli who will use race or any other means to achieve his end. Burke, racist. That's why Harold would be so shocked to come back today and see the conversion of Ed Burke. Speaker 1: Ed Burke is raising a black child now in his home, I believe. Speaker 2: And raising a black child, but also has admitted the errors of his judgment and his ways back then, feels very ashamed for it, and is paying, and is paying a huge cost for it. Because in, in fairness, Ed Burke is one of the smartest political leaders in Chicago [Illinois]. He frankly, had it not been for council wars, he either would have been mayor or he would have been considered to be mayor, but he clearly would have gone to a higher office. As it is now, he knows he's washed up. He can't run for anything ever again other than his same aldermanic seat he's had for thirty years. And he once was a guy who they thought would even eclipse Richard--Richard Daley. And by, and frankly by virtue of his smarts and his acumen he should be, but council wars has totally, he's been totally tarred by that. And I think the fact that he went out and adopted an African, a troubled African American child, says volumes about him and also the length to which he has gone to acknowledge his wrong doing and to affirm, I mean, searching out African American role models and mentors for his son, taking his son to places that are, that have African American influence. He's making a very conscious--I mean the fact that he has changed is very, very obvious. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the, one of the few white councilmen at the reparations hearings. He sat through the whole thing. Speaker 2: I think the, I mean, I can tell you anecdotes about him that has been absolutely just amazing. He's, he's not the same man, and I think what I've learned from Ed Burke is that we all can grow and we all can change, and we all must be accepting of each other. That's what I have learned about Ed Burke because no one probably more passionately disliked him than me. But, I have since come to see him in a totally different light. I now, I frankly I now think he's one of the most courageous and one of the most evolved men I know in public life. I actually not only respect him I actually applaud him because he not only has admitted, made an admission of having been wrong and having been morally wrong in what he did, he has gone out of his way to pay penance for that; that there are consequences for your actions however misguided those actions may be and he's proven, he's demonstrated I think where his heart and where his mind is and where his soul is. So, I think it's very appropriate that he would now have an African American son. I think he did that intentionally 'cause I think he wanted to send signals. I think he wanted to really be able to clearly let everybody know. And I find it interesting how he's raising his son. I think, I mean, you have to applaud him. Story_ID: 168380 Speaker 1: Okay, now you were press secretary for two years right from '83 [1983] to '85 [1985]? Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983] until '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: And why didn't you continue on through? Harold Washington was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was tired. I had been working there since the general election campaign, working literally seven days a week, very intense, and I just could not physically do anymore. I also had promised Harold I was gonna--originally I wasn't gonna work in the government at all. And I went by to wish him congratulations after he had won. I said Mr. Mayor this has really been great, congratulations I'll come back for the inauguration, I'm heading off to Mexico for a week or so and let me know if I can do anything when I get back. Well, my third day in Mexico I get a call from a [Chicago] Sun-Times reporter informing me that I'd been named press secretary, okay. Speaker 1: So, this was a surprise? Speaker 2: Totally surprised because I had told him and I told him all along during the campaign I says look I got the greatest job in the world at Johnson Products [Company], when this is over I'm going back to my job. I said I love selling shampoo and lipstick and travelling down and all over the world and working, I said I love it. I said you go and run government, I'm gonna go back to Johnson Products. --(Unclear)--. I wasn't interested, 'cause I had told him I said look if I was gonna stay in politics I would come all the way back to Chicago [Illinois] to be press secretary. I could have done that in a bigger, bigger podium. I says and plus I'm not cut off for that. But, the reason I think he had to do it that way 'cause frankly I don't think they found anybody else to be honest with you. And I also think that I, because I was a representative of his finance guys with whom he had a very tenuous relationship I was a very good broker. I was a very good person to have around because I was the only person around him who had ties to those, those guys who had financed his election to whom he did not want to sever. He didn't want to sever the relationship. I wouldn't either. The guys who just raised me all the money I needed to run for mayor I'd wanna keep them kind of happy too. They didn't have anybody to send him. They didn't wanna any jobs, so he named me, and I wasn't, I was honored by it, but I told him when I came back I says look I'll be in this job for a year and then I want to really get out. And a year came and went and then the second year came and it became kind of clear to me if I was gonna get out I'd have to go. Story_ID: 168381 Speaker 1: Well to be honest about it my, my job actually entailed far more than press secretary. The way we worked was that we probably the press office or the staff in the press office probably had more policy impact than any, than the mayor's [Harold Washington] immediate staff because we had around us policy people who had driven the policy in the campaign. We all just moved up into the press office. The people the mayor hired as his chief of staff, [William] Bill Ware, and other people down on the fifth floor frankly were not involved in the campaign, were not policy people and who had a tremendous learning curve. So, we were at a competitive advantage for at least the first year and we, we set the pace. I mean we knew and we were doing the polling and we were running the, the imagery, so we were the people who, who led it. After a time, you build up enemies and there's always fractions inside of, of a bureaucratic camp, always fractions. And at the time we didn't know that Bill Ware's illness was upon us. I didn't know until I actually went to Bill to tell him I was leaving, and Bill told me, well he said, he told me a very strange thing. He said you may not be the first one to leave, and I said what do you mean? I said you're not going anywhere. He said I don't know. He said you may be surprised, some of us may leave feet first. And so that was a very odd remark, but Bill who died not long afterwards from AIDS clearly knew he was ill at the time. And now that I think back on it that many of the things that were going on it became friction between the staffs and became just an extra burden to have to deal with. There were things that Bill was doing to, either because of that or trying to deal with his own, with his illness and also being gay 'cause that was not known and he knew the kind of damage that would do Harold [Washington]. Speaker 2: And he had a reputation for bottlenecking stuff in that office. That's what the press said. Speaker 1: That's what the press said and that's what the base said, but you know, that, that was so erroneous. One of the things that Harold did so well is that Harold managed to create an image and I help do it that's part of my job, in which he was never the victim. He was never the, you know, he was never the, the guy at fault. The truth of the matter is that he had, Bill had things bottled up only because he couldn't get Harold to sit down, review, and make decisions, and Bill refused and so did I where there are certain decisions you simply would not make because we weren't elected to make 'em. Harold had a view of the world initially that said you all run the government, I'll run politics. He quickly found out that life was not that simple; they all one of the same. But during the time that Bill got the reputation for being the bottleneck is when Harold was saying I don't wanna be bothered with meeting with commissioners and all that stuff, you all do that. So, Bill would be walking around with some, many, many action memos waiting for the mayor to give the time and the focus where he could make decisions 'cause Harold did not enjoy the bureaucratic obligations of the job; that's no secret. Getting Harold to sit down and go through forty-three budgets the executive department sent to him is not something he savored. Meeting with forty-three commissioners on an as come basis to help him resolve problems and manage the task was not a task he favored. Harold was a politician, he was not a, he was not a manager. Management was something way beyond him, and why we would expect a man to be manager who had never managed anything before is just a little bit kind of befuddled him (laughter) 'cause he, you he said I didn't promise to be that. I promised to be a warrior, and he was a great warrior, but he was not a great manager and Bill's reputation suffered on that. He, he had become a great manager. He started to grow into being a great manager because he realized good government was good politics, but he didn't come in knowing that. He had to learn that, and that's a very difficult job when you understand that good government is good politics. Being the mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois] is a very, very, very tough job. Story_ID: 168382 Speaker 1: Now did, did Mayor [Harold] Washington try to talk you out of leaving? Speaker 2: No, no. He knew, he knew I'd had enough, and he also knew--like most politicians, Harold uses people--politicians use people the way other folks use disposable gloves. They use them until you can't use 'em anymore and then you go and get somebody else. Politicians can't fall in love with staff people because they're there to serve you and when they stop being of service you don't try to talk 'em out of it, you just want them to stay long enough so they don't do you any harm or you make certain they don't go angry, but no. And Harold also said I wouldn't play with him when I came time to leave, because he knew, because he would look at me, he, he could tell. And I was physically tired and also I just had some disagreements. You know he and I had gotten to the point where I had done as much for him as I could do. Because I told him initially right at the start of the general campaign I said I'm gonna package you and sell you like a Big Mac. I said you may take offense at that, I said, but all that means is that the innate character and attributes and features you have and all your accomplishments they will be packaged and polished and projected. Some of the negative features of, of your personality and your attributes we'll try to down play, 'cause at the end of the day we're trying to get 51 percent of the people not only to like you, but to feel they trust you. If they don't think they can trust you, they ain't gonna vote for you. I said, so we gotta play with some imagery here. Selling a physical package like Harold Washington with his background to an electorate is not easy because what white voters were telling us give us anybody, give us [HM] Andy [Andrew] Young, give us Maynard Jackson. That's who they wanted. They had a hard time swallowing Harold. Story_ID: 168383 Speaker 1: A lot of black people had a hard time swallowing Harold [Washington] at first; a lot of women especially. There always was a huge, no not huge, but a significant gap in his male likability versus female. Black females had a hard time digesting Harold. They voted for him, but there was always a nine to twelve point difference in likability. When you ask, when you ask black women do you like Harold Washington as an elected official, as your mayor, and there would be 9 to 12 percent fewer black women who'd say yes than men. Speaker 2: Why do you suppose that is? Speaker 1: I think one, and we polled that, we did, I mean, we, as a press secretary that's not something I had to leave at chance. I wanted to know why. A couple of things came back. One is that they did not like the relationship he had with his female friend, Mary Ella Smith. They thought that he was portraying that much too loosely. That they were, he was somehow not giving her enough props. Early on she was a girlfriend, then all of a sudden she became his fiancee, but then they saw no ring and he was always laughing about it when asked, and women misinterpreted that. They read that as insulting. The other issue is that Harold was many times, and he had to be, but many times was seen in the media as being very combative, frowned, stern talk, fighter, man's man. Yeah, that's who Harold was, which is why he scored so highly in every poll among men. Women don't necessarily think that is a sign of a mature man. They like you to be a lot more balanced. They wanna see more smile. They wanna see less testosterone. So, we had to do some things to present that in a much more favorable image. They didn't see enough women around Harold, and understanding 'cause I went back and this visual, I turned the sound off of the video tape and just looked at the visuals of a week worth of TV and what I saw was Harold in the center with these huge black guys around him, all males, big guys, Harold is big, them looking like this. Well, yeah not a real warm and fuzzy picture is it? So, we were able to do some changes. We were able to put some females in very prominent spots on the security detail, brought in some Latinos, made it a rainbow, you know, those kinds of things because images are worth more than words. And Harold was so smart and so communication savvy he understood and made it easy for me to do my job, very easy 'cause he had so much being thrown at him he didn't have time for preparation. He largely entrusted me and my staff to handle the, the messaging. Messaging for him was very, very complicated. So, he didn't have the liberty many times of speaking extemporaneously. Story_ID: 168384 Speaker 1: Most of what Harold [Washington] said had to be scripted, but his art of delivery was so good he made you, he made the audience think it was not scripted. But, the fact of the matter is, if you're the mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois], especially him, he was under such a tight scrutiny. He was speaking to so many key audiences simultaneously, being misconstrued by any one of those audiences could have been fatal, so you can't run the risk of being misinterpreted, too much is at stake when you're the mayor, when you're the black mayor. So, everything is scripted. Only, only a very few appearances did he really just speak off the cuff. I told him once I said unfortunately Mr. Mayor you don't have the liberty of speaking extemporaneously 'cause he was complaining about always being scripted. See he think, he thought that was such a, you know such, unnecessary that he's not at his best. I said no I agree you're not at your best when you have to read paper, I agree. I said, however, we don't have a choice. No, I said there are too many different audiences you need to, who are listening to every word you say and to be misunderstood or misconstrued is a risk we can't run. So, he learned to live with it and learned to really be able to understand why. And he was a delight to work with. It was almost like I told him one time it was almost like working with Ronald Reagan. He was deeply insulted. He said what do you mean Ronald Reagan, 'cause he hated Reagan. I said well Mr. Mayor I said because you know, I said you, you're in many ways it's like I'm the coach and you're the thespian. I said you know, 'cause it got to the point where he got to be so good--he and I began working together so well he would leave his office and walk across the hall to a meeting and I could talk to him in key words. I said meeting of business types, looking for budget integrity, talking about layoffs, talking about opening up foreign markets, talking about, and I would just give him the key words, and by the time we got there he opened the door boom perfect. Story_ID: 168385 Speaker 1: He [Harold Washington] was probably the smoothest politician that the black community's produced nationwide. I don't, I can't think of anybody else as smooth. Speaker 2: Harold [Washington] was one of the smoothest in the country. I mean really, I mean Harold was just, he was just a brilliant man. He was perfect for that job. That's why I said the match between man and job was nearly perfect. Harold had just enough oddities and enough eccentricities and enough genius. He was perfect for that. And the reason I said eccentricities is because a person who was given to normal lifestyles, who had a family, had to go home after a certain while and rest and tend to children and have a wife, Harold would have collapsed. Any, anybody who was like that could not have understood what Harold had to withstand. Harold gave his life to that job. He would go home at the end of a fifteen-hour day, sit there by the phone and field calls all night. He never changed his phone number. His number was always in the directory. He used to say he had one group of people who reported to him by day and another group who reported to him by night. He worked that phone 11:30, 12:00 o'clock, 1:00 o'clock in the morning, five to six days a week. That was incredibly hard. And also just the kind of panic and the tension that there would be in the job, the death threats he would get would just be, I mean the volumes got to be huge. And you don't think about that because it's not coming to you. If you've got the police there telling you Mr. Mayor you have to be careful today because we've gotten three active threats and these are really the real thing, I mean, what a message, and you're supposed to go about your day in a normal way and Harold had those pressures on him. I think one of the reasons frankly is he gained so much weight in his latter years is that frankly he had been prohibited from having freedom and movement outside of the office. They were afraid somebody was gonna take a shot at him. So, he gained an awful lot of weight. He wasn't able to really walk. He wasn't able to really get out without having a lot of police around him. I look at this mayor now he travels around the city with two guys in the front seat of the car, that's all. Harold had two guys in the front seat of a limo and a car behind him and a car in front of him, so he had four, eight, ten people in his, in his entourage just Chicago [Illinois] policemen. So anywhere he would show up it was a huge production. Speaker 1: But, he drove an Oldsmobile (laughter). Speaker 2: At first until he got a Cadillac limo. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah he quickly expanded to a limo because he had so many other people he had to take along with him on them trips. You used to hear some of the news reporters tell stories about following Harold. You know they said you, you follow that big limo and all of a sudden boom every time you spot a golden arch the limo would turn in and there'd be, you know, ten vehicles behind him all turning into McDonald's. You'd see that big arm reach out to the window, 'cause that was Harold, that was Harold. You know Harold, you know he was just full, he was full of life. He loved the job. He loved the job and it worked him and it worked him right to the very end. But, I mean had he not had a warrior's heart a normal person couldn't have stood it. Story_ID: 168386 Speaker 1: Now did you think he [Harold Washington] was gonna win a second term? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. It was just a matter of time. Frankly there were events that happened behind the scenes that could have, could have crushed the [Edward] Vrdolyak 29 and twenty-one impasse a lot sooner, but Harold [Washington] agreed to it. Harold didn't wanna agree to it at any price. Had he wanted to, he could have shifted three of those people between now and, and he could have done that in month six or seven. Speaker 1: Well, he had information about-- Speaker 2: There were people who were members of the twenty-nine who had privately come to him and told him that they anxious to cross over and join him, but he wouldn't permit that. And I think there was perceptual issues with that and also I think there were some ethical issues he had a problem with. But, we all knew that after he had a chance to secure a couple of seats there in the Hispanic community, a couple of Hispanic districts, which he was able to secure that, that he would have it forever and it's true-- Speaker 1: Okay, so were these-- Speaker 2: --Harold would have been mayor until, until he had decided not to run anymore. Speaker 1: So, these Hispanic can- candidates decided to come over, I mean, 'cause I know a couple of them were-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) not Hispanic. Speaker 1: Not, not Hispanic, okay. Speaker 2: No, no these were, these were white. Speaker 1: These guys that, were these alderman reelected in '87 [1987] or did they lose to some, someone? Speaker 2: No, these were reelected. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't disclose who they are 'cause some of them are still serving now, in one case one is not. But, it's not surprising to think about how Chicago [Illinois], how Chicago's ethnic tribes work and who, which tribes get along best with which tribes 'cause we are a collection of tribes in this city. Story_ID: 168387 Speaker 1: When you left the administration [Harold Washington mayoral administration] you went, you, how soon was it before you founded Summit Consulting [Inc.]? Speaker 2: I actually formed a predecessor firm called North Star Communications 'cause I promised the mayor [Harold Washington] that when I left I would nothing to embarrass him or me. I would not accept a job in which I'd be coming in trading on my relationships with him. I knew that I was being closely watched by the media because they all were gunning for me to go into something that would end up getting me on the front page of a paper. And, I told him I said I'm not gonna come in here. Story_ID: 168388 Speaker 1: Well speaking of that, just, just what, I mean, what was the media, I mean what was your, what's your political analysis of the media in Chicago [Illinois] in those days? What were they? Were they try--were they out to get Harold Washington? Were they, I mean were they-- Speaker 2: They got caught up in the same thing that the people did. There was a zealousness and a thirst for scandal and corruption in the Washington city hall that has not been seen before or since. Speaker 1: With that in mild-- Speaker 2: It was a complete aberration. Speaker 1: --yeah with that in mind-- Speaker 2: That you can only say was due to race. Speaker 1: --how in the world did those six aldermen get caught up in that Michael Raymond scandal, I mean, they had to know that anybody associated with Harold Washington would be under a microscope. Speaker 2: That's not so much Harold as there is Chicago City Council. They were not the first aldermen to go and they were not the last aldermen to go. There's been like what forty-three aldermen who's gone to prison. Speaker 1: Yes, I believe, I believe your right. Speaker 2: Harold was under intense scrutiny, but not so much from the federal authorities though. Most folks got caught because they really unfortunately, I think, were just, they got overzealous. Some of us really did think it really was our turn, and some of us really thought that government meant it was your time to go in and your time to put your hand in the corruption tin. Some of us really did think that. And they didn't understand this was not about our turn to become crooks, and some people really did think that and those people who thought that got into some trouble. Speaker 1: The most amazing-- Speaker 2: And Harold's future was about cleaning up government and trying to put a lid on the corruption and about doing things ethically and lawfully, not giving people permission and go in and change places with the other guys. And there was always a tension there and in the movement. Always a tension between those who wanted to simply same game different players who were saying Harold is not putting in his players fast enough, and those who were saying like me this ain't the same game. There is a new game; that's good government. Story_ID: 168389 Speaker 1: Were there any personalities in the Chicago [Illinois] media that you admired during your tenure as a press secretary for their integrity? Speaker 2: Yeah, Dick Kay at Channel 5, Carol Marin who was in at Channel 5, pretty short list though. I can tell you the ones I, I lost respect for: Walter Jacobson who was then a commentator and anchor at Channel 2, Art Petacque who is no longer with us, but he was a late, late crime reporter for the Chicago Sun-Times, did some really unethical stuff. But, by and large though what I found is that the reporters got caught up in the same emotionalism that everybody else was. So, things became very magnified, the gossip, the rumors. Everything became very magnified. I talk to those same reporters today who covered [Richard] Daley. It's not a week goes by one of them doesn't mention boy isn't this a hell of a double standard, had this been we'd still been--I mean they all, they all make that statement because even they are aware. They don't try to defend it. That they got caught up, it was an ugly period in Chicago, a very ugly period in Chicago journalism. No question there was a double standard. But not only was there a double standard in journalism, there was a double standard in everything else in Chicago. It wasn't just the media, but the media also got caught up in this and there were some ugly internal stuff going on inside of these news organizations. The same kind of tension and racial animosity that this campaign set up elsewhere it set off inside of these newsrooms. They weren't immune to that. So, I think there's, I think there's a recognition that that was not a very good moment and I don't think they're proud of it at the very least-- Story_ID: 168390 Speaker 1: How did, do you have any sense of how black reporters felt in the major media here in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well back in those days we really didn't have that many to be very honest about it. We had [HM] Monroe Anderson at the [Chicago] Tribune. We had [HM] Clarence Page who was a columnist at the [Chicago] Sun-Times. I'm trying to think did we have--I don't--[HM] Vernon Jarrett who was still doing a column at the Sun-Times and [HM] Avis LaVelle who was working for radio, WGN, and I can almost count on one hand. I'd go down in the press room three and four times a day and see the only black reporter down there was Chinta Strausberg of the [Chicago] Defender and Avis LaVelle from WGN. There was nobody else. So, with the press corps that covered Harold [Washington] only had two black members. That never changed through his entire four and a half years. Chicago journalism for all that it is cracked up to be has never really been that inclusive racially. Story_ID: 168391 Speaker 1: Now also let, let me state the other reality politics is not the root to build a viable political car- a viable journalism career, papers and especially broadcasting. They've been cutting back on political coverage for years. More and more people are turned off by it. The worse way to get ahead in journalism in the world today to talk about I wanna cover city hall. And look at the amount of coverage that it's given. They don't put their stars on that anymore; that's changed. If you wanna, if you wanna get ahead in journalism you had to be a business reporter, not a court reporter, health care reporter, education reporter. Those are far more glamorous beats. So, what you've got left in Chicago [Illinois] of city hall press corps is really re- reporters who've been there for a long time and don't know how to do anything else, who are fighting to get their stories in, from editors who have grown increasingly bored with government and politics. Speaker 2: Now you look at Chicago today and for instance a situation like--there is a go- ghost payroll scandal I think involving the Laurino's and [Edward] Burke and the story was reported as small first and it finally grew and all of a sudden just disappeared, you know and there wasn't a story anymore. Speaker 1: For one thing you have to understand that the economics of journalism has changed. You no longer have those big staffs that are able to do those investigation stories that's number one. Number two, the editors really think that there's less public interest in those stories. You know they're always out surveying readers to see what people want. People aren't interested in that no more. Speaker 2: So, if the people seem disinterested in or not, if the story is not popular they're, they're liable to back of it then? Speaker 1: At the end of the day, these are businesses. You know they are trying to sell newspapers. Speaker 2: The, the Duff story with-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the [Chicago] Tribune did a lot on that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean the Tribune are the ones who broke that, I mean-- Speaker 2: John Kass hammered on it every day pretty much when he had a col- a column, but-- Speaker 1: We only had one paper who had the resources to do any investigation in this town and that's the Tribune. All they don't do frankly don't get done. The [Chicago] Sun-Times can't afford to do it anymore. They can barely put out a paper, so we don't have that, and the [Chicago] Defender I mean come on, Loraza (ph.), no. So, all the Tribune doesn't do--in the old days back in the '80s [1980s] when Harold [Washington] was mayor we had investigating units at all the TV stations. We had a much more financially viable Sun-Times. The Southtown Economist [later, Daily Southtown] was really covering city hall and had a good paper at that point, I mean, and you had the City News Bureau [of Chicago] that is now out of business. I mean, you, you had a lot more viable media organizations-- Story_ID: 168392 Speaker 1: Now, I've heard and I've read--it was covered in a column by John Kass in the city [Chicago, Illinois] that today in city hall, the city hall press corps assigns young interns to every reporter from every media that comes in there, to trail 'em and write down what they're writing and to find out who they're talking to and they report back. Speaker 2: I think, I think I've heard rumors of that and they wouldn't be the first people to have done that. I would have done the same thing and maybe did when I was press secretary. That's nothing new, but I, I tell you he was trying to make the point that [Richard M.] Daley runs a very tight lid. Yeah, they do run a very tight ship. But, I also think though that the times have changed and I think that the Daley administration has gotten a complete pass in many respects because of the changing media trends. Folks ain't that interested anymore and two there aren't that many people that are reported to them even if they were. And I think those two things together definitely help. Now, are they good at knowing how to spin a story and to keep interests down? Yeah. However, when reporters want to go after something and dig, I don't care how good you are on the government's side you can't stop 'em. When Channel 2 and Pam really wanna dig in a story-- Speaker 1: Pam Zekman, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. When they really give her the money and the time to investigate, she's gonna do a good story, but if you talk to Pam Zekman her budgets ain't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I heard, I heard someone say once that a lot of politicians and people in Chicago [Illinois] fear, fear an investigation. I said what kind of an investigation? They said any kind of investigation (laughter). Speaker 2: Well now remember, you know, during those days Walter Jacobson had daily commentary and almost all of it was on city hall. Think about the loss of that. I mean that along was a major--and then we also had a commentary, a daily commentary on Channel 5; that's gone. We used to have [HM] Vernon Jarrett every day of the week, at least four days of the week in the [Chicago] Sun-Times; that's gone. I mean we really have lost--we don't have the same kind of media space we used to have that's focused on politics. And, and I think, I think that will change too. Things ebb and flow with time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it's a period in which people just kind of got fed up. Council Wars really sickened Chicago. I think people had a real overdose, and I don't think they've fully come out of it yet. Story_ID: 168393 Speaker 1: Tell us about your, now we were beginning to, to discuss your consulting firm and you started a prototype of it. You started, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah I started a prototype an earlier firm called North Star Communications, public affairs, corporate communications consultancy primarily serving business organizations, companies, corporations, in area of financial relations, reputation management, crisis management and on the public affairs side representing both non-profit and corporate clients in managing public policy issues and achieving legislative outcomes. And we do that for a range of clients, all the way from the General Motors down to non-profit organizations and for government. Among the recent engagements we had just to give you a range of things that we do, we, our first assignment when I set up Summit [Consulting, Inc.] about fifteen years ago and merged my previous firm North Star with another company and brought in a group of colleagues from another firm and we formed North Star about fifteen years ago. Our first client was the horseracing and breeding industry. They retained us to block the land-based casino gambling in Chicago [Illinois], and we did that. We also the represented the horse breeding industry in California, Kentucky. Did a lot of stuff in a couple of states in which we fought off the expansion of land-based casinos. We also were retained by the Coalition of Organ and Tissue Donation [Donate Life America]. The country has a big crisis going on in the amount of organs that are donated every year, and we were retained to develop a new strategy to try to increase the amount of donors among the American public every year. We were retained by the department of planning about five years ago before the city [Chicago, Illinois] had control of Chicago Housing Authority [CHA] once again and the [Richard M.] Daley administration wanted to redevelop--(unclear)--CHA projects, communities intermixed in--(unclear)--and we were retained and over a course of a year and a half we developed a financing strategy and a vision and a tactical plan for transforming what is now the transformation plan CHA is using. That, that brought us a lot of satisfaction. It is good when we can get our teeth into something that has that kind of tangible benefit for the city. Otherwise we're representing companies who are fighting off regulatory challenges. We're representing companies whose share price have dropped because of crises. We're helping companies get into new businesses and new markets. It's the kind of thing that we do. Most of what we do we're not at liberty to talk about because clients most of the time put us under confidentiality agreements, but we do sort of high end public affairs and PR [public relations] work. Speaker 1: This is, seems to be an outgrowth of what you started doing for Johnson Products [Company] way back. Speaker 2: Everything I've done is, is a great preparation for this. It involves the experiences that I've had in government plus corporate plus news. I mean much of what we do is, is media relations management for clients. Almost everything we do involves that, either you don't want to be in the paper or you're trying to be there in a way that completes your goals. And knowing the news business is a great help, knowing how reporters think and function. There's no question it's a good help. So, yeah it all, I mean everything I've done contributes to the success I'm having today. Speaker 1: Yeah and that success is in the millions of dollars from what I've read, I don't know. Speaker 2: Well, we gross--we're very blessed. We gross close to two million dollars a year, and we're a pretty small firm. I mean, I haven't gotten rich by any means, but it's generated enough of a living that I've been able to college educate my two kids and give them a good life and to me that's the measure of a good career. I enjoy it greatly. But, if I wanted to get wealthy there were far more, there were other things I would do if I was interested in just generating wealth. At some point though very soon I probably will get interested purely in wealth. I'm at that age where I need to be concentrating on wealth, and when I do I'll leave this business and go into something else. Story_ID: 168394 Speaker 1: Tell me sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: My hope is that we can complete the, the evolving awareness that economic empowerment is really, is really the key I think to a better life. My concern is that we do not allow the class divisions which have become very apparent to get any worse than they already have. That's becoming a very, very noticeable driver I think of a lot of things in our community. Maybe it's hoping against hope because at the end of the day people are people and I'm beginning to see now what the realities of the situations are that people have more uncommon by economics perhaps than they do by culture and it has profound influences. I'm wondering what's gonna be the support for Chicago Public School system [CPS] by majority African American property owners when in five years the Chicago [Illinois] Public Schools' enrollment is majority Mexican. Are we gonna wanna pay taxes to support a school system where most of the kids are Mexican knowing what I know and we know about the tolerance and the, and the, and, and the cultural hostility that exists between the two communities? Well, that's where we're going in Chicago [Illinois]. We're about five years away in which the majority of the school kids will be Mexican, and the majority of the property tax owners, property people who own property in Chicago paying residential will be black. It's a big issue. So, I wondering about how we in Chicago can exist, 50 percent of the city is African American, 25 percent is Mexican, but is growing more than that. We'll, we'll start seeing black go down to probably 40 percent, 35 percent. The whites gonna hold steady, blacks decline. The only growing community is the Mexican community, and I don't think there's any interaction between the Mexican and African American communities, none. They feel they're in competition with us. That's a poor--(unclear)--that's a poor understanding of what's going on. They feel that they are, that the Mexican community has to compete for what they get and that's not the, that's not the right perception. Many in our community feel the way some aldermen felt back in 1985 when we went over the Humboldt Park [Chicago, Illinois] and one black alderman sat up and told an entire auditorium of Mexican adults as far as I'm concern y'all need to take a number and get in line. Highly insulting. I thought they were gonna have to--they had to bring him out of there under police protection. Now that's, that's the unvarnished feeling among many people in our community. We're in the city that is increasing of black and Mexican, and I don't think black people are any aware of this whatsoever 'cause we're so, we're so geographically segregated we never come across it. There's no social interaction. Our schools don't have it. And unfortunately we are allowing even the kids to grow up today in isolated school settings. We should be forcing integration, but our political leadership doesn't have the, the gall to do that. Right now we must have forty empty school buildings in the City of Chicago largely on State Street because poor black families are leaving Chicago. Poor kids have left the City of Chicago by almost one hundred thousand kids out of Chicago Public School system, in droves. Who is, who is filling up schools, it's Latinos, but they don't want to use the school where we have empty school buildings. They want us to stay in their communities, so we are building new schools at a time in which we're shuttering others. What a, what a hell of a way to run a railroad. At some point, we will not financially be able to afford to appease both communities. At some point, we gonna have to realize that Hispanics will have to come, have to cross the Dan Ryan [Expressway] to come east to go to school, and at some point we're gonna have to understand that even though most of the taxes may be generated off of black and white property owners, the school system is majority Mexican. And I look and see how we have the bureaucracy of the Chicago Public Schools and our expectations has always been and that, that's one of the few havens where you find black professional employment in very large numbers. But, the fact of the matter is that if you don't speak Spanish you're not gonna be very useful in about a couple of years and most of the African American educators I know who work at CPS don't know Spanish and ain't taking it. So, we're gonna have a school system that looks very much like Los Angeles [California] or San Antonio [Texas], and I don't know if perceptually we're ready for that in Chicago 'cause we've been given no preparation for it. So, that's, that's some of the things that worry me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168395 Speaker 1: Sir, you're still fairly young, but what would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I don't think in those terms either. I, I think it would be my children. And now I have two grandchildren, Jalen [ph.] and Jalani [ph.] I, I, I think only in family terms. I don't think I've done anything of a magnitude where I can suggest that this is a legacy, not in the least. Story_ID: 168396 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 2: I think so. I think there would be, but I mean, I'm not complaining 'cause I've had some great breaks in life and I've really enjoyed, I had a great ride. I've been very privileged, but I think there's some--I think I would have gone back to school and gotten a graduate degree in business, and I probably would have gone into some, some financial service direction because I find a great interest in that, in deal making, investment banking, Wall Street, quite an infinity for that. So, I think if I were to do it all over again I would even though I love communications I'd probably upon leaving city hall in '85 [1985] would have probably gone back to graduate school and gotten a M.B.A. I still may go get a M.B.A. I'm still fascinated by that. I'm trying to talk my son into getting one now so I can live vicariously. I can use his books and, and see what he's doing. And I think that's, that's the only difference I would have made. Probably would have, probably would have stayed married longer if I had to do it over again. Divorces are so horrible on, on the impact on children, on the families, very, very horrible. I don't think, I don't think a family ever overcomes it. I think you just live to outpace sometimes some of the, some of the wounds, but they're always there. I don't think you ever just completely overcome it, and I think, I think if I had to do it over again I think I would have been a little bit more mature on how you approach that. Either, either don't approach it or approach it with a great deal more maturity. Understanding women is something I have just come to understand late in my, relatively late in life, and I should have been at this point before I even married what I think because when I was married I really did not understand the psychology of women. Now I do a lot better, and I think if I were married now I would be a much better husband than I was then. Story_ID: 168397 Speaker 1: Sir, one last question and that is similar to legacy, but a little different how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a great guy who was very loyal, very giving, and had high standards and a great father and a good friend. To me, those are the things I value...