 Story_ID: 360244 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm Shawn Wilson, the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea the videographer. I'll have you introduce yourself and spell your name (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Shawn and Neculai. Speaker 1: Shawn and Neculai. Speaker 2: 'The Man from U.N.C.L.E.' Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 2: You remember that show 'The Man from U.N.C.L.E.'? Remember that show? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Some bad dudes, man. Speaker 1: So, we're just gonna have you state your name and spell it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial] and it's M-A-R-C, last name M-O-R-I-A-L. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March 21st, the first day of spring in the year 2006. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: We're here at the headquarters of the National Urban League, 120 Wall Street, New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on January 3, 1958. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: At Flint-Goodridge Hospital in New Orleans, Louisiana. Story_ID: 360245 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you five simple questions that appear on the website and then I wanna talk about your father [Ernest Morial] and growing up in New Orleans [Louisiana]. So your favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: Gumbo. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Every day of the year. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: That's a tough one, the Galapagos Islands. Speaker 1: Galapagos. And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Keep the faith and spread it gently. Speaker 1: Nice. So you were on 'Tavis Smiley' not long ago I heard (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The State of the Black Union, yeah. Speaker 1: I heard that. I heard that. But, each, I mean, I'm getting ahead of myself. I'll go back, but the State of the Black Union is something I wanna also talk about, but we'll do that in other sessions. Story_ID: 360246 Speaker 1: But let's start with your childhood, and we will talk about your mother's side of the family first and then your father's [Ernest Morial] side. So, if you could state your mother's name. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Sybil Haydel, H-A-Y-D-E-L, and Morial [Sybil Haydel Morial], married my father in 1955 in Boston, Massachusetts where my mother was a graduate student and working. At that time, my father was in the [U.S.] Army, stationed in Baltimore [Maryland] and after my mother finished, they lived in Baltimore for a year or two and then moved back to New Orleans [Louisiana] around 1957. Speaker 1: Now your mother, just speaking about your mother, did you, do you know your mother's parents (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah I can tell you all about my mother's family. My mother was the daughter of Dr. C.C. Haydel, a physician, and Eudora Haydel [Eudora Arnaud Haydel] who was a teacher, but later mainly a homemaker. My mother's father was from St. John the Baptist Parish [Louisiana]. His, his family, his family, they were sharecroppers and they, they grew sugarcane in the late 1800s. My grandfather, who was born in St. John the Baptist Parish was the first of nine and was, went to school at Straight University [sic.], which is a predecessor to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Straight College [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] I think it was called, the predecessor to Dillard University. And attended Howard University school of medicine [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and finished in 1922, very much a pioneer. He moved back to New Orleans, became a civic activist and founded an insurance company, the Standard Life Insurance Company [New Orleans, Louisiana] and was one of the most busy and popular black doctors in New Orleans in the '30s [1930s] to '40s [1940s], to '50s [1950s], to '60s [1960s] and probably into the 1970s. My grandmother on my mother's side, Eudora Haydel, was from some place in Mississippi and was a woman of great style and loved to cook. Every once in a while loved to cuss (laughter), but was a very stylish woman and a wonderful, wonderful grandmother. My mother was in some ways I guess a child prodigy. She finished high school at the age of fifteen. She graduated from college when she was twenty, nineteen or twenty. Got a master's degree from, finished college from BU, Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], and also got a master's degree from Boston University in the 1950s. Story_ID: 360247 Speaker 1: My father [Ernest Morial], his family, he was the youngest of six children. His father [Walter Morial] was a cigar roller, cigar maker. His mother [Leonie Moore Morial] was a seamstress, and they were part of New Orleans' [New Orleans, Louisiana] Creole community in the sense that they on my father's side could trace their family back to Haiti, some of the original Haitian refugees who came in New Orleans in the 19-, early 1800s and my grandparents spoke Creole. Neither of them, I don't think either of them went past third or fourth grade, but they could both read. They could both write. They were very devout, devout Catholics, very neat, orderly people. Never drove a car. In fact my grandfather on my father's side didn't even like riding in a car. Well, people from that generation and my, my grandfather was also, on my father's side was also handicapped. He was an amputee. So, he had, he had one leg and then he had a, had a, had a prosthesis and he was very--what I remember about my grandfather, my grandfather made me memorize, on my, on my father's side, made me memorize the name of every president. I think I was five or six years old, and he gave me a book of the presidents. He made me, I'd have to, I'd stand up on the porch at his house and recite the names of all the presidents. In those days, it was from Washington [President George Washington] to Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], and to this day (laughter) I remember the names, could probably recite the names of all the presidents just about in order and, and so on my father's side he was a cigar maker, his wife was a seamstress, and later on my grandfather when the cigar factory sort of closed down became an employee of Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.]. I think he worked in the stockroom. And my father came, my father's family was a very modest working class, very proud people, very devout people. Story_ID: 360248 Speaker 1: My mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] was from much more of a middle class background, because her father [C.C. Haydel] was a successful physician and they met at a, as my mother tells me, a great American books club, and she said when they met my father [Ernest Morial] and, and her got into, it was right after Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] or right around the time of Brown v. Board, and they got into a great big discussion about whether the Tulane University [New Orleans, Louisiana] and some of the universities in New Orleans [Louisiana] were gonna admit African American students back in the 1950s. And they moved back to New Orleans in 1950, I guess '56 [1956] or '57 [1957]. My sister [Julie Morial] was born in February of '57 [1957] and I was born January of '58 [1958]. It was about, I think it's ten months and, ten months and twenty days separating my older sister and I. We were both born in Flint-Goodridge Hospital [New Orleans, Louisiana], which was the black hospital in New Orleans connected to Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana]. My grandfather was a physician, was the chief of staff at that hospital-- Story_ID: 360249 Speaker 1: My earliest years I lived in a wonderful neighborhood called Pontchartrain Park [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Pontchartrain Park was a neighborhood built. It was a, in the 1950s when integration and housing, segregation, and all of these issues were bubbling up. One of the responses by the city fathers of New Orleans was to build a neighborhood or subdivision for African Americans to quote, prevent them from desiring to buy in white neighborhoods, so they built Pontchartrain Park. It was opened in the 1950s and was, it remains one of the largest blocks of black homeowners anywhere in the United States even to this day. And I, it was a wonderful neighborhood to grow up in because many of the early families were both World War II [WWII] and Korean War veterans, African American, who bought their houses on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], and all of the programs that existed, so you had people in the neighborhood who were truck drivers and letter carriers and teachers and university professors and doctors and lawyers and musicians and bus drivers and you, you, you know, you name I think on the block that we lived on there were probably the most predominant profession was probably school teachers. The lady next door was a school teacher. The lady a door over was a school teacher. The lady and the gentleman across the fence they were school teachers. So, you had a great environment, and all black neighborhood with tons of children, I mean just tons of children and young families who bought in that neighborhood in the 1960s, 1950s and 1960s. Story_ID: 360250 Speaker 1: One thing I wanna ask about your father [Ernest Morial], you said that your father was Creole and, and I read that Creole meant a mixture of races. Can you explain what that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What Creole means, what Creole really means and I mean my father was African American of Creole, probably Creole descent. What it really means is people who could trace their family roots to the United, to, to--they lived in New Orleans [Louisiana] and in Louisiana before New Orleans and Louisiana became a U.S. possession, a U.S., before Louisiana became a state and so fo- for the white families most of them traced their family history back to France. For many of the black families, they traced their family history back to Haiti. So, my father's family history goes back to Haiti, but the, the African Americans or black who are Haitian, the Haitians who came to the United States in the 1800s came mainly as servants of wealthy whites. They came after there was a civil war [Haitian Revolution] in Haiti as refugees. Many of them came and they had second class status. Many of them were not slaves in the United States, while they may have been slaves in Haiti and part of the slave system in Haiti. They were Catholic because the French colonized people to be Catholic. They were in a lot of cases trades people, iron workers, brick layers, masonite, masonnary [masonry] people, and the community developed in the 1800s in New Orleans. New Orleans is unique because even in the early 1800s it was a predominantly African American community, predominantly black community and always had a throughout its history has had a significant black community, significant black population which has influenced everything, the food, the architecture, the culture, the music. I mean New Orleans is distinctively an African and Caribbean, European, Native American mixture, probably more so, in, instinct, intrinsically than any other American city. Speaker 1: Prior, I mean I'm going just a bit back in history you remember the first, I mean the first, the train conductor. Speaker 2: Homer Plessy. Speaker 1: Plessy, so he himself was he Creole? Speaker 2: I don't know what he considered himself. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean he may have been, I, I, I'm not certain with Homer Plessy. Speaker 1: But I know you wrote an introduction to a book ['Separate and Unequal: Homer Plessy and the Supreme Court Decision that Legalized Racism,' Harvey Fireside] that talked about that case. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The reason I bring that up because they, it was said that he only had one drop of black blood in him, so he was very light skinned and I saw pictures of your father. Your father was very light skinned (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Father was very fair, very light skinned your right. Story_ID: 360251 Speaker 1: Now was your father [Ernest Morial], I mean you say that they were Haitians, but were the Haitians that came as Creoles were they, were they, had, were they of European descent? Were they like light skinned? Speaker 2: No, I mean they were probably of mixed descent of African and, and probably French descent. I remember my, my uncle would talk about--I never saw any photos of them, but my uncle would talk about my aunt, great aunt, which would have been my father's aunt, and I remember he used to always say she was tall and statuesque like an African princess and so I mean you know it's like New Orleans [Louisiana] there's so many mixtures of people and, and Louisiana was unique in that it did classify by law anyone that had any African American blood as being black. I mean, that's, that was, you know, that's, that's how Louisiana was. Speaker 1: But is it like, was it divided into, was Creole something separate from black? Speaker 2: They--let me say this, let me say this. There was in New Orleans for a long time a cast system, a cast system of color, a cast system of, of somewhat of class, but mainly of skin color that existed in New Orleans, you know deep divisions between lighter skinned African Americans and darker skinned African, African Americans. It was compounded a little bit by religion because the original and it was all skin color, but some of it was religion. Since Louisiana was colonized by the French and then you had this Haitian refugee influence it was predominantly Catholic community. When it became a United States colony and then later Louisiana became a state and New Orleans became a city in the United States. When New Orleans became a city in the United States, it was already a hundred years old. French language, French newspapers, French culture, French law, and then all of a sudden it was part of the United States. So, then you had a new influx of people who came in, who were not French, not Catholic. They were Protestant. They were from other parts of the United States. They were new refugees and they really settled on the opposite side of town, so you had a French sort of quadrant and then you had a quote American quadrant, a French sector and an American sector. And, and, and, and that division became also, the black community in New Orleans was somewhat divided along those lines too. Catholics who pretended to be more light-skinned, but not completely, not exclusively, new people who had come in because all of a sudden it was no longer a French city, but a U.S. city. So, you've always had in New Orleans those divisions and probably what, what probably is interesting about my father is he was probably the first person who was able to unite the factions electorally when he got elected in 1977 and became mayor. He was able to unite a lot of warring disparate interests in the African American community around the concept and notion and the idea of political emancipation through the election of an African American mayor for the first time. Story_ID: 360252 Speaker 1: So, I know you were just, really first grade when he [Morial's father, Ernest Morial] became a lawyer. Is it, was he the first black lawyer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was the first black to finish from the Louisiana State University Law School [Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. There were a handful of black lawyers in Louisiana before he became a lawyer, the late great A.P. Tureaud, to name, most of them had attended Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. I think a few had gone to a school in Missouri, Lincoln--there was a Lincoln Law School [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], I believe, at one time, but many of them had attended Howard. My father attended LSU [Louisiana State University]. He became the first black student to attend LSU--the second black student to attend LSU, and the first black to graduate from LSU Law School in 1954. So, so that was an accomplishment in and of itself and he began practicing law in 1957 with A.P. Tureaud who was the dean of civil rights lawyers, so my father became a civil rights lawyer. So, he was co-counsel on every major civil rights case, desegregation of schools, desegregation of all public facilities. His name is on the pleadings. He was involved in all those case. It really defined the course of his life, what he did in the late 1950s as an understudy to A.P. Tureaud. So, he got involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and in 1962 became president of the NAACP New Orleans [Louisiana] branch and remained there for three years and then became an assistant U.S. attorney and through the intervention of people like Hale Boggs and others and I, I remember him saying he was really reluctant to take the job as an assistant U.S. attorney because it meant being a government employee. It meant sacrificing and giving up most of his law practice. But, he did it because A.P. Tureaud and a fellow by the name of Arthur Chapital who were his mentors. Arthur Chapital had been the president of the New Orleans branch of the NAACP and later became the chairman of the NAACP state conference. Arthur Chapital, A.P. Tureaud and then my father's older brother, Walter Morial [Walter Morial, Jr.], were really his mentors in life and they convinced him that because of the opportunity to open a door and make history he should take this job as an assistant U.S. attorney because there had never been a black in a position like that ever in the history of Louisiana. So, he did that and then he in 1967 he ran for the state house of representatives and was elected. There had never been an African American elected to the legislature [Louisiana State Legislature] in the 20th century when he got elected in 1967 and he ran against an entrenched incumbent white legislature by the name of Stephen Daley, interesting, and won the race in the first primary without the need for a runoff. And you know I remember this, my father's first campaign I remember vividly I was only nine years old, I would go Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana], we get on the back of his sound truck with a band and ride around the neighborhoods and campaign on Saturday and go to churches and rallies and I think my father brought to campaigning something that was a hallmark of every campaign he ever ran and it certainly became a hallmark of mine and that is it was the organizing methods of the Civil Rights Movement, two political campaigns, very grassroots oriented, very community oriented, a lot of volunteers, a lot of phone banking, a lot of knocking on doors, a lot of working in the churches, which in those days was not, not all that common in New Orleans politics. So, people got an opportunity to see a candidate who had never seen candidates before, and so it was, that race was, was historic and, and so he went to the legislature and got seated in 1968. Story_ID: 360253 Speaker 1: So, you spoke about your father's [Ernest Morial] brother, that your father's brother was one of your father's mentors. Can you, what's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Walter Morial [Walter Morial, Jr.], my father's oldest brother, was one of his mentors and my fath- there were six children in my father's family. Speaker 1: Can you name them? Speaker 2: Walter, Alise or Alice [Alice Morial], Richard [Richard Morial], Marie [Mary Morial], Francis [Francis Morial], and Ernest, and in my father's family only my father's oldest brother and he finished high school and college and then graduate school, so the others didn't finish high school. But, that was a custom of the day. People didn't necessarily go, so, so, and my father's middle brothers and sisters, there were four of them, three of them moved in the, in their teenage years to California. Two moved to Los Angeles [California], one moved to Oakland [California] during the war [World War II, WWII] or after the war getting away from the South, getting away from segregation, going to look for economic opportunity. Francis, who was my father's brother just four years old than he really became very, very close to my brother [Jacques Morial] and I. He was a bit of a bon vivant. He was a seaman. He travelled the world. He was fun-loving. He was playful. He knew a lot of people from a whole lot of walks of life just like a seaman, you know, and, and he also left home in his teenage years to join the [U.S.] Merchant Marine. So my father's, my father, I think my father said when he oh I don't know 10, 8, 10 years old, 8 or 9 years old, 10 years old, 11, years old, 12 years old, all of his siblings were gone except his older brother and he. So, his older brother had a big influence. His older brother was very serious, taciturn, attended Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] in the '30s [1930s], got a master's [degree] in business administration from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in the '40s [1940s] and this is a great commentary on segregation and discrimination in the South. Here's a man, a black man who gets a master's in business administration from the University of Chicago in the '40s [1940s], which you know is just amazing, comes back to New Orleans [Louisiana] and basically becomes a teacher and an assistant principal, then a principal in the public schools. I mean, a master's in business administration from the University of Chicago should be running a company, he should have been a corporate executive, but he came home. He had a big influence on my father 'cause he pushed my father to go to school. So, my father went to Xavier. Really, really pushed my father, really, really stayed on my father and probably was the biggest influence on my father's life, he'll say you know until he became an adult and met and married my mother [Sybil Haydel Morial]. Story_ID: 360254 Speaker 1: So, what else did you take away from your father's [Ernest Morial] early campaigns as a child (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just, it, it was-- Speaker 1: What did you see, tell me what you saw? Speaker 2: It was, it was very exciting because for me it was an adventure. It was an opportunity to get exposed, to get outside of the neighborhood [Pontchartrain Park, New Orleans, Louisiana]. I--'cause there were five children in the family from the time I was, and we were all bunched so by the time I was four, the time I was eight years old there were four children, so it was not uncommon on Saturdays, I have a brother [Jacques Morial] three years younger than I, we would go with my father all day. And my father would typically, you know, he was a lawyer so we'd go to his law, law office in the morning and we'd hang out there. Then, he would go to different rallies and he go to these churches and he'd go to these NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meetings, and so we would you know go all over town [New Orleans, Louisiana] with my father when we were little boys, you know, and so we saw things and did things our friends didn't have a chance to see and go out of the neighborhood 'cause my mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] was like, "You take those boys today and I'm gonna take care of these two girls," 'cause I had two, you know, two sisters and later a third, "You take them and I'll take these girls," and so we'd go with my dad. So, you know, my dad we'd go to his office and of course my dad would be working and we'd kind of be on our own. So, it was a building called the Knights of Peter Claver building [Peter Claver Building, New Orleans, Louisiaa], so we'd run around the building and the NAACP office was there, the Urban League [Urban League of Greater New Orleans] office was there. Black insurance companies were there. Black, it was a black, sort of like a black professional building. And so we got to know when we were little all these different, you know, grownups and grown people and you know we were like pesky little boys, you know, in, in the building causing trouble, going into other people's offices and just being curious as little boys would be. So, it was, I think my father being exposed to what he, being a part of what he was involved in gave me and my brother to some extent a great level of exposure. You know, we, I tell people you know I, I grew up, I was baptized and grew up Catholic, but I feel like I'm Baptist because I've been going to Baptist churches all my life as long as, you know, as long as I, I can remember 'cause my father would go to these churches and go to these meetings, go to the rallies, and we be going to all these activities 'cause he was very active and involved. My mother was too. My mother was a civic activist. She was involved in the teacher's union [United Teachers of New Orleans]. She was, started a voter registration organization. They were both very much civic and community activists before my father ever ran for public office. Story_ID: 343826 Speaker 1: Okay continuing on roll two (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean New Orleans [Louisiana] had a, you know, a powerful ministerial community. I think a lot of people don't realize that SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] was actually founded in New Orleans. Southern Christian Leadership Conference was founded in the basement of the New Zion Baptist Church in New Orleans, which was at the time pastored by the Reverend Abraham Lincoln Davis, better known as A.L. Davis, referred to, his friends called him Jack, and he was a prominent minister who was in charge of an organization called the Interdenominational Ministerial Alliance [IMA]. He also had a political organization that he was active with called the OPPVL, the Orleans Parish Progressive Voters League, which was a black political organization in the, I guess the '40s [1940s], the '50s [1950s], and the '60s [1960s]. And Reverend Davis had a deep voice and he was influential, powerful, and part of the civil rights coalition of the times. And I remember my father [Ernest Morial] was very fond of him. I remember visiting his church as a boy and as a teenager many, many times. And then there were other ministers such as the Reverend Avery C. Alexander who was an activist minister. He was best known, he served in the state house for twenty-five years, the state House of Representatives [Louisiana House of Representatives], but he was best known for staging a one-man protest in the cafeteria at City Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana], which was segregated in 1963 and he got pulled out by his feet up the steps. There are pictures of the police holding him by both of his feet while his head bounced along the ground in 1963. Wonderful spirited warrior. He actually was still in the legislature by the time I served in the legislature. And Avery Caesar Alexander, another great prominent minister of the times who was active in civil rights, you know in activism of the day. There were other leaders. The other large influential organization in the African American community in those days was the longshoreman's union, and New Orleans had a black and a white longshoreman's union. A black union and a white union, and the black union was called Local 1419, ILA, International Longshoremen's Association Local 1419, and it was headed by a short and stocky man by the name of Clarence [Clarence Henry], nicknamed Chink. Everybody in New Orleans has a nickname. Chink Henry and Chink Henry I remember him also when I was a little boy was a very prominent and very powerful, because in those days before you had cranes and containerization there were thousands and thousands of people that worked at the docks that unloaded the boats. So, he was a political influence. He had the civil influence. He, too, had his own political organization. It was called the CCIVL, Crescent City Independent Voters League. So he and A.L. Davis and Arthur Chapital and A.P. Tureaud and they all made up the leadership, the community, black leadership community mainly in the 1950s and '60s [1960s] and these men were much older than my father, twenty, in some cases twenty, thirty years older than my father. Story_ID: 343827 Speaker 1: My father [Ernest Morial] was a little bit of an understudy to all of these, all of these men and I know they kind of took him under his wing, under their wing, and I mean my father became president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter he was thirty-three years old and was very, very active before he ever entered politics. And I think he entered politics because in those days politics was the natural outgrowth of civil rights. After the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was passed and the right to vote was secured, the idea was to run for public office, but I think my father in his earliest of years if he had an ambition it was probably to be a federal judge because so much, you know, so many of the great victories had been secured due to these courageous federal judges, Skelly Wright [J. Skelly Wright], John Minor Wisdom, just to name two in, in Louisiana who showed the courage to strike down segregation, showed the courage to enforce the Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision and so that probably had a lot to do with why my father after three years in the state legislature [Louisiana State Legislature] departed to become a judge. He left the legislature in 1970, became a judge of the juvenile court, which was a trial court and then two years later ran for and my father had a thing back in those days 'cause when he ran for the house he challenged this entrenched incumbent [Stephen Daley]. When he ran for the state court of appeals [State of Louisiana Court of Appeal for the Fourth Circuit], he challenged the senior judge, chief judge of the court of appeals, state court of appeal, fourth circuit court of appeal. The man when my father challenged him dropped out and retired, but as the times were, some of the political establishment at the time instead of allowing my father to be elected to the court of appeal without opposition went and found somebody and put him in on him and my father had to defeat that, that judge to become an appellate court judge. So, I think in those days my father probably had his eye on the federal judiciary thinking about becoming a federal judge. But, I think what happened is my father became a judge, he was forty, he said he was bored. He said the judiciary, particularly the appellate court, he found boring. It was not, it didn't energize him like politics, so that's what led him to begin thinking long and hard probably around 1975 about becoming a candidate for mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana]. Story_ID: 343828 Speaker 1: You also said that your mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] was institutional in, as far as voting rights. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I think she, she had her own organization. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what was it that she was a part of (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That organization was called LLOGG, the Louisiana League of Good Government, and the reason why LLOGG was founded because in those days the League of Women Voters didn't allow African Americans to join, so my, my mother and her friends wanting to be involved in civil activism and this is after Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], but before the Civil Rights Act of 1964, created a black version of the League of Women Voters called the Louisiana League of Good Government. My mother was the founder and first president of that organization in 1963. At that time, she was a school teacher. She was a second grade teacher at Henderson Dunn Elementary [Henderson H. Dunn Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was the elementary school that served the Desire public housing development [Desire Projects, New Orleans, Louisiana], and she taught there for I don't know ten years or so. So, she was very involved in, in that kind of work. She was also an activist in the, in the teacher's union and in those days New Orleans [Louisiana] had a black and a white teacher's union and my mother was involved in the efforts to merge and integrate those two unions, which came I don't know someplace in the late 1960s. I don't know when the quote, the new organization was called the United Teachers of New Orleans. Story_ID: 343829 Speaker 1: So, where did they send you to elementary school? Speaker 2: I first went to elementary school--it's important I probably talk about my, my preschool 'cause I went to preschool at Hume Center [Hume Child Development Center, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Hume Center was the preschool or early childhood of the Central Congregational United Church of Christ. So, it was a church-based, a black United Church of Christ. It's a church that [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young grew up in, and Andrew Young was from New Orleans [Louisiana]. And I Went to Hume Center from--I went to school, I started going to school at two and then we went in 1962 my sister [Julie Morial] started in 1963. We began at the neighborhood Catholic school, which had just been integrated in 1962, St. Gabriel the Archangel School [New Orleans, Louisiana]. I went to school there in kindergarten there were only three black kids in the class. I'll never forget we went to the class, you used to sit at these desks where three kids sat at a table and we were in the back of the class (laughter), three of us, and the neighborhoods were segregated, so we had a distance to walk. We had--the school was located in the white neighborhood, so we had to walk to the white neighborhood and I remember before we started school, we used to walk home from school in those days, my mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] took me to, I didn't know these other black boys, took me to their house and said, "Okay now you, you all have to walk to and from school together every day. You know you all have to walk to and from school together every day." So, we walked to and from school together every day and I remember went to kindergarten half day and I remember a couple of times we got chased by older boys. They had, they, maybe they were being playful, but they know what they were doing. They were trying to scare us, and they succeeded scaring us, but you know in those days you couldn't go home and tell your momma that we got, we got chased home because then you, you might, she might tell you, "Well I gotta get somebody to pick you up." We didn't want that because walking home, walking to and from school was an adventure, it was fun. You know, you could lollygag along the way, you could make little stops where you found a little area where we used to cut a short cut through some people's yards and go through this like drainage ditch and we found little attractive nuisances to play. Story_ID: 343830 Speaker 1: So, I went to St. Gabriel [St. Gabriel the Archangel School, New Orleans, Louisiana] from kindergarten to fourth grade, and then my parents [Sybil Haydel Morial and Ernest Morial] put me in, and this is in a school that really had a big, a big impact on me, they put me in Christian Brothers School [New Orleans, Louisiana], which was a school for that had a gifted and talented program, an advanced academic curriculum. I went there in 1968 and me and one other boy were the first black students to attend that school and the entire time we were there we were the, we were the only black students at the school. But, it was a wonderful very supportive school. It was run by a Catholic order called the Christian Brothers, and the Christian Brothers, most of these brothers who, it's a religious order, but they're not priests, they really, most of them were from places like Texas and New Mexico and most of them were men from working class families that had made this commitment to teach, so they were a handful of Hispanic teachers. There were several who had spent time as missionaries. I remember one had been a missionary in the Philippines, my six grade teacher, who was Hispanic, had been a missionary in the Philippines, so they were very fabric. I remember fir-, the first week I was in school I, at this school at Christian Brothers, I got in a fight because some boy called me a nigger and I only knew one reaction, so we went and rumbled down on the ground fighting and the, the teacher on the playground sent us to the principal's office. And so we went to the principal's office and the principal was a stern brother named Brother Edward, you know, he wore a black suit and a black tie and a white shirt and Brother Edward Scanlan and he said, "What are you doing here," both of us, and so I said, "Well we got in a fight because this boy called me a nigger." So, he looks at the boy and he said, "Did you do that?" And the boy kind of put his head down and he said, "Let me tell you something we don't talk like that around here. I will call your father." Then he looked at me and said, "We don't settle our disputes by fighting around here," and then he said, "I don't wanna ever see you again, get out of here" (laughter). Whoa, you know fast, quick, and immediate, stern, you know warning, and this was an all-boys school. And it was interesting because it was a school, a lot of the boys were from, I'd say 90 percent of the boys were from Uptown, New Orleans [Louisiana] and many of them, not all of them, were from more prominent families. One of my first exposures, Christian Brothers, the, the white kids who were there and the black kids were there mostly working class, middle class. At Christian Brothers, you had kids, who you know, their, their, they had carpools, you know they'd catch carpools to take 'em to school and carpools to take 'em home from school and you know I rode the bus. So, I started riding the public bus to school when I was in fifth grade, public transportation in fifth grade, so a lot of what I had an opportunity to do is when, when I was very young from going around with my father, riding the bus to school when I was in fifth grade, is I got a chance to see. I was very exposed. I was very independent. I was very assured as a young boy. You know by the time I was in eighth grade I could probably get anywhere in the whole town on public transportation. You know I knew my way around and I wasn't afraid to be alone or be by myself or you know go places, and my parents, you know, they, you know it would be unheard of today for parents to let their kids ride public transportation by themselves to go to fifth grade, I mean it would, maybe if you're going in the neighborhood, maybe in larger cities like New York [New York] a little bit of it, but be unheard to, to do anything other than let your children go to a neighborhood school and go, I mean I went a long distances. I had to catch three buses to get there. It was like a forty-five minute to an hour ride to and from school every day. Speaker 2: Now did your other siblings attend private schools (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, all of us went to Christian, I mean to St. Gabriel School and then I switched to Christian Brothers School. My parents were very committed to a Catholic education for religious reasons, and I think also for disciplinary reasons, and my, you know my mother was a public school teacher. They very much, they stressed education. I mean it was drilled into our head at a very young age that we were going to go away to college, not only that we were going to go to college, but we were gonna go away. My mother had gone to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and thought that was a good experience. It was drilled in our head that we were gonna go away to schools in the East. You know, it was just, it was almost a predisposition to do it 'cause my, my mother felt, and you know my father too, to a great extent, my mother felt you know you guys need to get out of here, go, go away to school. If you wanna come back, beautiful, come back, but you need the exposure, you need the education experience that you get from spending some time away and spending some time on your own. Story_ID: 343831 Speaker 1: Can you list the siblings in the order of which you guys arrived (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Julie, Julie Morial, Julie C. Morial, my older sister by a year, attended Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut], got a M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and has a master's [degree] in public health from the University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California]. Then there's me and then my brother Jacques [Jacques Morial] attended the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and has a master's in public policy from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. My second sister, fourth child, Cheri Morial attended Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and has a master's degree in urban studies from the University of New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana] and is a banker. My youngest sister, Monique Morial, attended Tulane University [Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and has a law degree from Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], no went to Emory and has a law degree from Tulane. So, we all ended up with graduate degrees, but it was, it was sort of the most fundamental thing that our parents [Sybil Haydel Morial and Ernest Morial] emphasized and stressed was education. Family, church, and school, probably is what was really stressed as we were growing up. Story_ID: 343832 Speaker 1: So as you were growing up, growing up as children, can you talk, describe the neighborhood that you lived in? Speaker 2: Yeah, Pontchartrain Park [New Orleans, Louisiana] was a neighborhood of black homeowners and as I mentioned a lot of teachers and for me, my neigh-, my life in the neighborhood revolved around the playground. We lived directly across the street from the playground, and the playground when we first moved to the neighborhood when I was three or four years old, just there was no playground just grassy area. Then later they put baseball diamonds there, then they put a, what was called a clubhouse there. I remember as a little boy when the mayor came to cut the ribbon at the clubhouse, Mayor Victor Schiro [Victor H. Schiro] and then they put a basketball court. I started playing competitive--the city had a wonderful recreation department, New Orleans Recreation [New Orleans Recreation Development Commission]--I started playing in the playground leagues when I was eight years old. So, I played baseball. I played football. I played basketball. My whole life revolved around--before the playground was built, we used to play football. But we played touch football in the street right around the corner on Campus Boulevard, and there was no playground so we'd play in the street and the great thing about those games is that big boys played with little boys, so you'd have, you'd play, it's like pickup football, you'd basically, there'd be a game going on and somebody would pick the winner and they'd play to whoever got three touchdowns and won the game and then you'd get your little team together and then you'd get back out there, so it was like pickup football that you played. And we'd all play and we go back there and we'd pretend. You know we would pretend that we were Green Bay Packers, and we'd pretend we were the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts], and we'd pretend we were the Cleveland Browns and somebody was [HistoryMaker] Gale Sayers and then Leroy Kelly and Jim Brown and you know Johnny Unitas and Lenny Moore and you know you back there pretending living a complete fantasy world playing touch football with kind of the whole, this is before they had organized sports at the playground around the corner. When you get organized sports at the playground around the corner, a little bit of the action moved to the playground, then it was like, oh I'm gonna go be on the team, then we'd play tackle, then we wear a uniform. And I played, the first year I played was 1968, which was the first you had integrated competition in the New Orleans recreation department. Before 1968, the black playgrounds played against black playgrounds and the white playgrounds played against the white playgrounds. In 1968, they integrated and that was the first year we played. Speaker 1: And that's interesting because King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed the same year-- Speaker 2: King was killed (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that before or after his assassination? Speaker 2: It was probably after his assassination. I think it was the fall of '68 [1968] I think I remember. I think I was ten years old and I remember we'd go to the games what was then called North Stadium [ph.], which was right by the water plant, you know, and we had our little green and white uniforms and our little helmets, and it was really a big deal. You know, you were kind of like representing the neighborhood. It was competitive and you know we had a good team. We won most of the games. Story_ID: 343833 Speaker 1: In '68 [1968] when the team [New Orleans Recreation Development Commission's sport leagues] was integrated and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed was your father [Ernest Morial], could you see a lot of act on that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My--I don't think I could ever make the association to be quite honest between what I was living and what my father was doing. I don't think I ever really recognized that. It's important the teams weren't integrated, the competition was integrated. You still had all black teams and then you had all white teams and my, the first integrated team I played on was--I also played basketball and New Orleans [Louisiana] had a very robust Bitty Basketball League, and I played on the team. It's interesting because the team, we didn't have a Bitty Basketball team at our playground, so we had to play--the coach there got us on a team in what was called the old 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] and we had a team, and our team won the city championship in 1970, 1971, and the first integrated team I played on was I got selected for the citywide all-star team and I'll never forget it. It was the first majority--New Orleans had always had an all-star team, a Bitty all-star team and the first integrated team was probably 1969. I played on the team in '71 [1971] it was the first majority black team with seven black players and three white players. They only picked ten players and we played in, in the national tournament. We actually won the national championship and so you know it was, it was an interesting highlight. I think at my house I have a picture of the team when we accepted the trophy in 1971. So, a lot of my life revolved around sports, playground, you know all these things going on in the neighborhood [Pontchartrain Park, New Orleans, Louisiana] and it was really, you know so much of the action in the neighborhood revolved around the playground and I lived across the street from the playground. So, I'd come home, when I was at that age, I'd catch the bus, I'd get home, I'd hurry to get home, I'd run in my house I'd change my clothes and I'd run out and go to the playground and go to the little practice, little football practice, then it was a little basketball practice and we'd play and I'd get home 6:30, something like that most days, 6:30, you know, and it was very disciplined. Then I'd go and then my mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] would, have to eat, and I'd go just do my homework. I mean the whole thing was like, you know, it was very, very regimented and very, very focused on going to school, doing homework and because I wanted to play sports I knew I had to do my studies. Story_ID: 343834 Speaker 1: And because New Orleans [Louisiana] is so big on music, were there any music, were any of, of your siblings, were they studying music (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] put me in piano lessons when I was a little boy and I hated it because piano lessons took place at the same time as football practice. I was not interested in playing the piano. My sisters played the piano. I also joined a little band at school and played the clarinet, but I wasn't I wasn't into, you know, it didn't impress because it was told, the time competed with sports, and I was completely consumed by playing sports, I mean as a little boy, I mean that's what I wanted to do. My fantasy was to be a professional football player, professional basketball player, so music--I regret to this day that I didn't learn how to play the piano or the clarinet. I really regret 'cause I love music. Being from New Orleans, you know, you love music as a spectator, participant, audience, but I never really, you know, learned any music, not because my parents didn't make an effort to get me into it, but just because it was, it was, it was my avocation. Story_ID: 343835 Speaker 1: Sports was so big for you as a kid that when you had the opportunity like two, you did two big things as mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana] with sports. Can you just talk about that connection? Were you impacted by things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. We relocated, yeah, I mean I'm a sports enthusiast and a sports fan to this day, I mean I, I'm an ESPN junky, you know I like to go to boxing, I like to go to sporting events, I like to talk about sports, I like to watch sports, I like to follow sports. It's a little bit of something that's--I had, you know, and I grew up when I was a little boy we a--there was a team in New Orleans called the New Orleans Buccaneers, American Basketball Association [ABA] team. We used to go to the games. My father [Ernest Morial] would take my brother [Jacques Morial], brother and I to the games and the star of the ABA at the time was Connie Hawkins. I don't know if you remember Connie Hawkins. Connie Hawkins was a, a, an early generation Julius Erving. He had big hands, he had a swooping style; he was the star of the ABA. He played for a team called the Pittsburgh Pipers [Pittsburgh Condors] or some, some team like that. So, we'd go--so I remember that and then New Orleans got the New Orleans Jazz [Utah Jazz] and one of the things I wanted to do when I got to be mayor was bring professional basketball back to the city, so, everybody said it couldn't be done, and we fought, worked and worked, and worked, and worked and finally right in the final three months of my term in office we relocated the Hornets [Charlotte Hornets; New Orleans Pelicans] to New Orleans, which was really a big coup for the city, and it was a punctuation point for my time as mayor because I said the fact that the NBA [National Basketball Association], the NBA does not embrace cities that are going down. It embraces cities on the rise, and we did that and then we also got a chance to host two Super Bowls. I got an opportunity to work very closely with Paul Tagliabue, gained a lot of respect for him. We, we did two Super Bowls in '97 [1997] game [Super Bowl XXXI], the 2002 game [Super Bowl XXXVI] and those were great opportunities and, and, but it was a lot of, a lot of passion to go after this stuff because sports is entertainment, it's money for a community. It's more than just the entertainment value, it's also the branding. Cities with sports teams are better known then cities without sports teams. Speaker 1: And a lot of that came from your childhood. Growing up. Your passion for sports (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It came from childhood and it came from, you know, and it came from you know also my father took us, used to take us to Saints' [New Orleans Saints] games and took us to, to Buccaneers' games and when we were much smaller we'd go to high school football games with him. He lived sports too. We bought our first, I remember we bought our first color TV. Our father bought, bought our first color TV in my house, he bought it in order to watch the first Super Bowl 1967 [Super Bowl I] and I remember went out like two days before the game to buy the TV and my father said, "Don't tell your mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] that we bought a color TV." So, when the TV comes she was like very cross, like we can't afford that, we don't need that. It was like, you know I'm like, yeah, we gonna watch the first Super Bowl with our little Magnavox (laughter) color television. Story_ID: 343836 Speaker 1: Continuing on our interview, today is April 4, 19-- Speaker 2: Two thousand six [2006] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand--2006, Mr. Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial]. Speaker 2: Thirty, thirty-eighth anniversary of the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Story_ID: 343837 Speaker 1: And we will start there, 1968 you were ten years old, what do you remember about this day (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh ten years ago, it's hard to remember the exact day, but I remember 1968, what I remember in the spring of '68 [1968] was my father [Ernest Morial] had been inaugurated, had been elected to the Louisiana House of Representatives in late 1967 and he was inaugurated in early May 1968. And I remember it was a big, big deal and I remember it was a Monday because we all drove up, my entire family together from New Orleans [Louisiana] to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and stayed in a hotel. The hotel was called the White House Inn [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and we went over to the legislature [Louisiana State Legislature] to, for my father's inauguration and the Associated Press published in a New Orleans paper, the Baton Rouge paper, and papers across the country this great photo of my father, me, I was ten, and my brother [Jacques Morial] was seven sitting in his seat on the floor of the legislature, the first day of the legislature and he was showing us how the voting machine worked. There was a voting machine where you press a button at the desk. Each legislator had a red button and a green button and then when you pressed the button when the called a vote the vote lit up on a big board in front next to your name whether you were voting green or red on a bill. So, I remember, remember that, my first introduction to being in the pap- in the newspaper at ten years old. It's a great photo. We have it around here somewhere. Story_ID: 343838 Speaker 1: Did it register for you at, at that time that your father [Ernest Morial] was the first black to be elected to the state representatives [Louisiana House of Representatives] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it really didn't register in, in that kind of a way. I mean it, we knew it was a big deal. We knew it was important and, but not in that sense at that age I think, I think it took a couple of more years for it to really, really register. I think it registered for me when one of the things I did when I was, when he got elected to the legislature [Louisiana State Legislature], I would go and spend a week or two with him in the legislature, go up and stay with him and he had, he had an apartment up there and then when he went to work I was ten years old I basically would roam the halls of the Capitol [Louisiana State Capitol, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. And there was--his first or second year there, maybe it was his second year, he introduced a blood, a blood bill to de-label blood. Louisiana had a law at the time which required blood to be labeled black and white, so when you basically they took blood from you it was stored as either black blood and white blood and only black blood could be given in a blood transfusion to a black person and only white blood to white person, and that was the law up until 1970, '71 [1971], I don't know somewhere in there. My father had a bill to de-label the blood, and I remember when the bill came up his colleges in the legislature employed a practice called jumping the rail. In other words, when, when as soon as the bill would come up for a vote they'd leave the chamber, thus denying the legislature a quorum, thus requiring that the bill be returned back to the agenda and not voted. Finally, the bill came up for a vote and there was this legislator from Bogalusa, Louisiana, named Archie Davis, who got on the floor of the house and gave a fiery speech that ended with, "As long as I live I will not have nigger blood flowing in my veins," and that was his speech. Well, that was on, I mean, that speech ended upon 'The Today Show,' ['Today'] ended up in the newspapers of America, put my father in the, in the national spotlight for a short period of time, and I remember that a brother came down to the, a gentleman came down to the legislature who had designed this game called the Black History Mystery Game [sic. Afro-American History Mystery Game], which was like board game for children to teach them figures in black history, but I remember that was probably a, a searing reminder that my father was not only the first African American legislator, but that you know it was very, very much still the old South. I mean I was a young boy and the legislature was, in Louisiana was a very festive kind of place, lively place, lively debate, lot of back slapping, it's a political environment, and I remember when I went there as a, as a boy I mean there were no other black people in the Capitol with the exception of the custodians who I remember used to wear grey uniforms, and these men, and it kind of like took me in. I was a little boy and I went to the legislature and they looked, they used to keep an eye on me, you know, they, they looked, looked, kind of looked out for me when I was a little boy running around the legislature. And the only other Afri- the only other African Americans, the only other black people working in the Capitol were the people, they, they, they used to have a gentleman and a lady who were dressed in what you would call butler and maids attire who would serve coffee and water to the members of the legislature. And so it was very much a--my father went there, I mean, he was, he was a pioneer. I enjoyed the legislature when I was a little boy. It was a fascinating learning experience. Story_ID: 343839 Speaker 1: In my father's [Ernest Morial] third year, I would go every summer, his first year, second year, and his third year. I got a job as a page in the Louisiana Senate [Louisiana State Senate]. I was the first black to ever work in the legislature [Louisiana State Legislature] as a page, working for Senator William Guste [William J. Guste], who was a senator from New Orleans [Louisiana] who eventually became the state attorney general, who eventually when I was a grown man and ran for mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana] and he was attorney general supported me for mayor and he was a very much older man by that time. But, and then finally after my father left the legislature about three or four years later when I was sixteen or so I got a job working as a, as a page in the house [Louisiana House of Representatives] one summer and by that time there were seven or eight black members. I worked for two black members, Louis Charbonneau of New Orleans and Johnny Jackson of New Orleans; both these men are still living. They're no longer legislators, but my experience in the legis-, I mean I got exposed to the legislature as a little boy, it was fascinating, it was interesting. Why would a little boy be interested in that? I don't know it was interesting. It was different, it was curious. I could go back and tell my friends about stories 'cause you know I remember that the, a lot of the legislators in Louisiana, they were, they were characters, you know, they were people like--I'll never forget a legislator by the name of Shady Wall and that was his name, Shady Wall. Shady Wall was, used to wear white linen suits and colorful, you know orange shirts and blue shirts and big handkerchiefs coming out and he used to hand out these little stick-on roses to everybody and he was lively and gregarious and there was--I remember a legislator by the name of A.O. Rappelet, and he used to wear a big old hat like a big cowboy hat and a big linen suit and he wore these kind of like dark glasses. He looked like a, like a planter, I mean there were, you know, a lot of very interesting, you know, characters. Of course, in those days I think there was one woman in the legislature and one African American and that's it. Speaker 2: Can you think about any other important bills that your, your father worked on like the one with the, with the blood bill? Speaker 1: I remember he, I remember him working on the eighteen year old vote bill, which was a big issue back in '69 [1969], '70 [1970] at that period of time because the state, the U.S. Constitution had been, had been changed. It was a constitutional amendment that had to be ratified by the states. And I remember him speaking before the legislature in support of that. It was a very big issue 'cause it used to be a twenty-one year old vote and then it got changed to eighteen. Story_ID: 343840 Speaker 1: So what year did you, I mean, at this--you were around sixteen, your father's [Ernest Morial] in the legislature [Louisiana State Legislature]-- Speaker 2: I was about ten, I was ten, eleven, twelve, when he was in the legislature. Speaker 1: And at that time what's, were you going to the Jesuit School [Jesuit High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: I was going, at that time I was attending--when he first got to the legislature I was still at St. Gabriel [St. Gabriel the Archangel School, New Orleans, Louisiana], then I switched over to Christian Brothers School [New Orleans, Louisiana] and we, we were talking about 1968 and that's the year we started, I started playing football, baseball, and basketball for the New Orleans recreational department [New Orleans Recreation Development Commission] playground team, which was right across the street from the house that I grew up in (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I remember you said that was the first team that was, that was allowed to play white teams. Speaker 2: The first year they allowed black teams to play white teams 1968 and-- Speaker 1: You remember that, but why do you remember it? Do you remember it because as a child-- Speaker 2: I remember it because I remember the coaches told us that. The coaches told us, and it was very obvious, you know, when you're little and you show up and you know you like all the black kids and then you look over there and that team is all white, you know, and I remember that as I played in the north playground there were only one or two integrated teams back in those days. The team from the upper 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is a playground that was called Bunny Friend Playground, and I remember it because when I was at the march this Saturday I saw a guy who played on the Bunny Friend's team and he and I ended up playing on the, on the city-wide all-star team together at age thirteen. I don't think I've seen him once in thirty years, but I ran into him at the March. And so it was obvious to me and I think that you know the, the, the--I remember the coaches, you know this is important and you know you guys are representing and you have to play well and you know make our community proud, and the coaches really when I think back they really wanted to prove something, that the black playgrounds could compete with the white playgrounds in the city recreation department. Story_ID: 343841 Speaker 1: So when you, 1976, I'm just jumping forward (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Finished high school. Speaker 1: You finished high school, what was the name of that-- Speaker 2: Jesuit High School. Jesuit High School is an all-boys Catholic high school in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: But even I, I guess we, we should go back a couple of years before you graduated in '74 [1974] your father [Ernest Morial] was elected judge. Speaker 2: He was actually, he became a judge in 1970. He became a juvenile judge. He was appointed to a vacant seat. In those days, whenever there was a vacancy, a judge died or judge left or retired the governor would appoint the vacancy, so Governor McKeithen, John J. McKeithen, another great Louisiana political personality appointed my father to a juvenile court judgeship in 1970. He had only been in the legislature [Louisiana State Legislature] three years and then in 1972 my father ran for a seat on the state appellate court [State of Louisiana Court of Appeal for the Fourth Circuit], won that seat, but the term didn't begin until January 1, 1974. So, if you look at his resume, his resume will reflect that he became an appellate court judge in 1974, which is true, but he had won an election in 1972. Speaker 1: Now as a child did you work on any of these, of these campaigns (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All those campaigns. Speaker 1: What did you do? Speaker 2: I remember the state legislature--pass out flyers, go to rallies, get in the way, but whatever they tell you. I remember these campaigns, going to campaign headquarters and you know it was loaded with people and in those days people ran distinctly grassroots campaigns and so there'd be meetings and there'd be rallies and you know and we'd go and go to these events and I would go and I was probably more interested at the time and kind of going to the campaign headquarters and just being at the campaign headquarters. So, if they told you to lick stamps or you know do signs, I mean all of my father's campaigns I was involved in as a boy. Story_ID: 343842 Speaker 1: So, when yo- and when it comes 1970--when, when was your father [Ernest Morial] elected [as mayor of New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977]. In 19- my father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were at what time-- Speaker 2: I was a freshman in college. I was at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and my father's campaign--he began his campaign the summer between my freshman and sophomore year. So, I came home from New Orleans [Louisiana], from, from, from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in like May, mid-May and I got a job, a summer job working for Boh Brothers Construction Company as a laborer. So, it was hard work. I worked at the Lone Star Concrete plant and we were building a, a water pit. The Lone Star Concrete company had gotten tagged by I guess the Environmental Protection Agency [EPA] for dumping water that had sand in it into the river. So, Bo Brothers Construction Company had been hired, we were to build a pit, which was probably about as deep as this room, but about two or three hundred yards long next to the plant. So, my summer job was basically hauling, digging, hauling dirt and then later after the pit was done concrete. Being a concrete labor I made seven fifty an hour, had to be to work at seven o'clock and we got off at three or three fifteen every day and so I'd get off and my father was just starting his campaign and so I'd get off and then I'd go to his campaign headquarters at the Knights of Peter Claver building [Peter Claver Building, New Orleans, Louisiana] on Orleans Avenue [sic. Orleans Street] and got involved in the campaign. My responsibility in that campaign became, I ran the entire sign operation. One of the big things in campaigning in New Orleans is people put signs on their lawns, put signs on their houses, advertising the candidate of their choice, so I basically was put in charge of that operation. But, in those days we actually made our own signs, so we had an operation where we made the signs and then we made 'em and then we went out in the neighborhoods and put 'em up. So, I got involved in my father's campaign. It was a historic. I knew, I was nineteen years old, I knew it was historic and you know at that time in '77 [1977] Maynard Jackson had been elected and Tom Bradley had been elected and Coleman Young had been elected and Dick Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher] had been elected, so the importance of the race was clear. Speaker 1: So, can you just tell me what cities those, those different, I know Maynard Jackson was in Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maynard Jackson, Atlanta; Coleman Young, Detroit [Michigan]; Kenny Gibson [Kenneth A. Gibson] was the mayor of Newark [New Jersey]; Tom Bradley was the mayor of Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: And they were all first-time black mayors-- Speaker 2: First-time African American mayor-- Story_ID: 343843 Speaker 1: So you realized that your father [Ernest Morial]--do you, can you tell me anything about the lead up to your father running for mayor (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah my father was a judge [on State of Louisiana Court of Appeal for the Fourth Circuit] and at the time Louisiana had a law which prevented judges from running for political offices other than judgeships. My father filed a civil rights case challenging that state law and actually got it struck down in the trial court, and as a result he was able to take a leave of absence from his job, unpaid leave of absence from his job as a judge to run for mayor and it, it was important because it meant he didn't have to take the risk of resigning his judgeship at that time to run for mayor. And when he ran, he was a long shot. An African American had never waged a campaign for mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana] in the city's history. The city was only 40, the vote, the voting, the voter ratio at that time was 41 percent African American, 42 percent African American and 58 percent white, so my father ran a lot of the political establishment, both black and white in the city basically saw him as a maverick and as a spoiler and as someone who could not win, but he persevered and it was a historic campaign. Speaker 1: What were your thoughts, because as a nineteen year old you're old enough to-- Speaker 2: I thought he should run. I thought he could win. I thought that we needed some breaks, but the city needed a shot in the arm. The African American community needed to come into its own. My father was a great candidate because he was superbly qualified. I mean, he was a lawyer, he had been a judge, he had been a state legislator-- Speaker 1: How did he run (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) he had been an assistant U.S. attorney. He really ran because he was able to in the, in the primary really touch a nerve in the African American community, and, and was able to in the primary pick up about 60 percent of the African American vote. And in those days you had white candidates who were aggressively appealing for the black vote and they basically said, "Look you know if Morial gets in the runoff he's gonna get beat by a more conservative white candidate, so vote for one of us more liberal, more moderate whites." Anyway, he got in the runoff and he ended up in the runoff with the best possible matchup for him at the time was city councilman, Joseph DiRosa who was, who at the time was in his early sixties, who was a bit of, a bit of a plodding style speaker, a little big unimaginative, more of a populist, conservative populist. My father I think outclassed him in the runoff, and my father was also able to get significant support in the white community and that raised, 20 percent of the white, white voted for him. Story_ID: 343844 Speaker 1: You said your father [Ernest Morial] had touched a nerve in the African American community at the time what was it? What-- Speaker 2: Well my fath- my father's credentials, I mean he had been the first black, he had a civil rights record, he had been the first black elected to the legislature [Louisiana State Legislature], first black judge, first black appellate court judge, first black assistant U.S. attorney. He had credentials. I think it was a combination of him running the kind of campaign that the city had not seen, particularly the African American community had not seen, really running very, very hands on grassroots style campaign in the African American community, and I think his timing was good. I think the, the black community of New Orleans [Louisiana] had been shut out for so long, it had been shut out for so long that the timing was just right, and he was a great candidate and I think that many of the, you know kind of a little bit of the politics of the time was, it was some, some of the way in which the white community dealt with the black community. The white politicians basically would try to, you know, many people thought they would buy, try to buy interest in the black community through economic relationships and I think this campaign was, was really an assertion of independence. My father was also--I'll never forget the first candidate--it's interesting in '77 [1977] the first candidate to openly appeal to the gay community. And the city had a very small act-, but active gay community at the time, so he was probably the first candidate to kind of build support among or appeal to sort of environmentalist, very small at the time. But, these were the '70s [1970s]. This was a post-Vietnam [Vietnam War] era. This was, you know, returning Vietnam veterans. This was the post-civil rights era. You had a lot of people who came out of the tradition who were heavily influenced by it and they were a large bulk of his campaign. You know, he campaign on college campuses aggressively, campaigned in public housing aggressively, you know put together what became a very interesting, you know, coalition. In the runoff, he got a lot of support from mainstream establishment business leaders who at the time I think were more progressive minded than even the business leaders of New Orleans today in some, in some respects. They were more racially moderate. It's, it's, it's hard for people to, to recognize that I might say that, but I think even though some of the business leaders back then, you know, some of them had been, you know, they had been involved, but also I think that my father's election--my father was preceded by Moon Landrieu who was the first white mayor elected with strong black support. I mean Moon Landrieu won with a majority of the African American community and a minority of the white community and that's how he got elected mayor. See he was a liberal white mayor and the fact that he had been there I think also helped because he was a very intel-, smart lawyer, and I think more urbane and sophisticated and I think that a lot of voters when after Moon Landrieu were looking for another urbane sophisticated mayor. They didn't really want more, more or less what I call the old plodding, kind of a plodding city father style, you know, older nice person who would play, play a good ceremonial role, but not really be someone who would move the city and I think those factors were many, many factors. But fundamentally it was a grassroots uprising that really engineered his spot in the runoff, but then it was a skillfully put together co- biracial coalition that was able to elect him. Story_ID: 343845 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you to talk about and you can do it briefly 'cause I wanna connect it to your mayoralship. But, when your father [Ernest Morial] was the mayor of, of New Orleans [Louisiana], what were the wards like? I mean, I guess being outside of New Orleans you don't really understand what the, how the wards are made up, who live in which wards. Are they the same as now as they were then, like you always hear about, the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] was the black one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Geographic, the geographic lines are still the same, and the 9th Ward is the largest ward in the city, almost, it was, it is peculiar the ward lines haven't been redrawn in a hundred years. So, the ward lines more define neighborhoods and they definite political districts. The 9th Ward is predominantly African American, the largest block of the voters in the city. The 9th Ward in total includes many neighborhoods. New Orleans East [Eastern New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] is part of the 9th Ward. By, Bywater [New Orleans, Louisiana] is part of the 9th Ward. Pontchartrain Park [New Orleans, Louisiana] is part of the 9th Ward. The Vietnamese community in New Orleans is part of the 9th Ward. So, the 9th Ward now represents as it did then a very, very diverse, but always--one thing the 9th Ward has always been predominantly a working class. Before African Americans dominated the poli-, the, the 9th Ward was you had African Americans, you had Italians, you had Irish working class living, it might have been like Brooklyn [New York] or South Philly [South Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or you know very working class area and today it is, it is overwhelmingly African American. In 1977, it was substantially African American, but you still had large white neighborhoods that were still part of the 9th, part of the 9th Ward. And it's still a, a, very important African American community. It always was then and is now Morial country (laughter). It's always been 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] and the 9th Ward probably have been really the downtown, 5th [5th Ward, New Orleans, Louisiana], 6th [6th Ward, New Orleans, Louisiana], 7th, 8th [8th Ward, New Orleans, Louisiana], and 9th Wards have always been the strongest base of support for my father and I. I mean I don't think any time I ever ran or any time we ever ran we ever lost those precincts or didn't win 'em big. Story_ID: 343846 Speaker 1: So, if we just go back a little bit you, we talked about your father [Ernest Morial] and you were a freshman [at University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but we didn't talk about your, the process of you deciding which college you want, wanted to go to and graduating high school, and even your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --how was your father involved in your college choices? Speaker 2: You know it's funny I was, I think we were predisposed to go to top flight schools or Ivy League schools. I made my college choice completely on my own. My parents were not that involved in it. I think, I was, you know, somewhat independent you know, but it was, they didn't have to push me to want to go to a good school. And I didn't, I was, I was, I think I was very, always have been, self-motivated from the time I was very little. I didn't need to be pushed to do homework. I didn't need to be pushed to try to excel or participate in athletics. You know, I don't know, I don't remember ever--I was more or less self-motivated. I wanted to do well. It came, it came natural to be self-motivated and I went to Jesuit High School [New Orleans, Louisiana] and Jesuit was, it continued, you know as I said I left, I went to Christian Brothers [Christian Brothers School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and was the only black student in my class there, two in the school, and when my brother [Jacques Morial] came there, there were like three. I went to Jesuit and when I started at Jesuit there were only 14 black students out of like 1300, 1200 or 1300, very small African, very tough place. I found it to be very tough and excellent school academically. It is probably one of the top two or three schools in the city in terms of production of Merit Scholars [National Merit Scholars], Presidential Scholars probably over the last fifty years, I mean, it's a top flight school academically in the city and I went to school there. I was in honors classes there, honors English, honors Spanish, honors math. I played football, I played basketball. I was president of my junior class. I was probably in those days also a bit rebellious. Story_ID: 343847 Speaker 1: --Dealing with the fact that I had a lot of exposure, I had a chance to operate in a lot of circles as a youngster, and that's why I really promote that amongst, I'm gonna do that with, you know I do with my own children. Gotta get 'em around, I gotta, they gotta ground 'em in who they are, but you have to expose 'em so that they're not, they're not, they don't have culture shock at the age of twenty-five or thirty 'cause they see people don't look like 'em, don't think like 'em, don't worship like 'em, don't act like 'em, and then they have all kind of, you know attitudes because they view, most people view their life as the norm. Speaker 2: Right, you're right. Speaker 1: But, the world is full of multiple norms, you know, in the world, so I think that my parents [Sybil Haydel Morial and Ernest Morial] exposing us to many, many things as opposed to protecting us and sheltering us has a whole lot to do with the way, you know, the way we are, you know and I think that, you know from, from the playground to, to, to the schools we went to, to the professional activities that my parents were involved in that they took us to. I mean a lot of trips, parents just took us where they went. You know it was know just okay we're going to a rally, we're going to a meeting, you know we're going here, we're going there, we're going to a conference, you know you guys are just gonna come. Story_ID: 343848 Speaker 1: So, you said you were rebellious? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, you know in the times of the 1970s when I was in high school it was a time when people wanted to grow their hair long, you know. The white guys in high school wanted to let their hair grow long and across their collar and across their ears, and black guys wanted to grow afros and you, the, the girls wanted to wear shorter skirts and you know we started listening to you know the music of the times and it was, it was, it was a post-civil rights, post-Vietnam [Vietnam War] era. The high school I went to was extremely conservative in a sense that we had to wear uniforms. It was a military style uniform. We had to wear name tags, and there were very strict rules. I mean, you could not be late. You could not, not bring in your homework. All of those reinforcements were good, and I appreciate that kind of discipline because it, it helps to strengthen self-discipline when you're in a disciplined environment, but it was also a bit of a constraining environment, I mean, we decided and I don't know how this happened, but we started, kind of the black students I guess my sophomore year, the school changed principals and the new principal was a father by the name of Harry Thompson and just passed, was one of the ministers that actually married my wife [HistoryMaker Michelle Miller] and I. He was, he came to Jesuit and he wanted to change Jesuit. He hired the first black faculty members. He hired the first black assistant basketball coach. He increased the number of African American students. I think it went up to about forty or fifty while I was there. And he tried to have an impact and for some reason, I don't know, several of the black students and I was a little bit of the ringleader decided we wanted to have our own organization because we wanted to do a Black History Month celebration and we went to go see 'Emmett Till' and we wanted to have our own organization and he hesitated a bit and then said okay and I think he hesitated because he knew and we didn't know that the idea of black students organizing a black student union, which was very popular in college, was going to be not well received by students and faculty members. They would see it, they wouldn't see it as a peer support group, which is what it was. They would probably see it as some sort of effort for black students to separate themselves, not recognizing that black students had a tough time at Jesuit because there was really no social outlet. And you go to a predominantly white school and, and, and, and you know you're interested in people of the opposite sex, you're interested in girls. You know there's no, you know that the social environment was tough for African American students, especially when you saw what your friends participated in. I was in a different--I think I was in a position where I had, had a life away from school. I had friends. I had a social network. I had grown up in a neighborhood [Pontchartrain Park, New Orleans, Louisiana] with a lot of activity. I had, you know, because I had played sports--its interesting when you play sports in New Orleans [Louisiana] when you're young you also make friends all over town. You know, so I had friends I played ball with Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana], Downtown [New Orleans, Louisiana], Algiers [New Orleans, Louisiana], guys I had played on basketball teams with, so Jesuit [Jesuit High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] was tough, so I think after probably my junior year I think I was there, I was just like ready to graduate. I'm like I'm ready to leave this school, and I was a basketball player and a football player at the time and there were very few black, I think I was the only black on the basketball team. I think my first year there were two on the football team, then there were three, and so you know you're kind of in a pioneering, but sometimes when you're in that kind of role it is also lonely, you know, it's, it's, you don't have the same, the camaraderie is not the same with everyone because as is always the case there, there, there were boys who accepted you and boys who didn't. You know you just had to confront that and, but I will always say that one of the things Jesuit High School did for me is it put me in a position to never be afraid and never been intimidated and never feel--I never ever felt I was out of my element, you know, from the time I was--I never felt I could walk into a, and be in a group that's all white or black, all rich, and all poor, I never felt out of my element. Even to this day, I never feel out of my element and that's, I think I thank my parents [Sybil Haydel Morial and Ernest Morial] and, and then to some extent Jesuit High School and Christian Brothers [Christian Brothers School, New Orleans, Louisiana], good schools in New Orleans because you're talking about the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s], you're talking about coming out of a segregated New Orleans. Story_ID: 343849 Speaker 1: So did you date black and white girls at that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I never dated any white girls at that time. I mean it was--interracial dating was taboo. I mean when I say taboo I mean, I, you could see in the Northeast, you know in the West I mean you've seen interracial dating for a while. You didn't see it in, in New Orleans [Louisiana]. I mean it was completely, so-- Speaker 1: Was it taboo because your, it just, it's taboo within society or was it something you father [Ernest Morial] said you couldn't do? Speaker 2: Within society, within, no, within society. I mean I think it was, you know, would not be--in those days I don't, unaccepted especially at the high school level, I mean-- Speaker 1: Well what did you do when you went to the prom let's say for, at the Jesuit School [Jesuit High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]-- Speaker 2: Oh I knew girls. Speaker 1: Okay, Speaker 2: Oh, I had a social life. See I, I had, I had a social life away from the school that's what I wanted, I mean, that's what I meant to say. I had a complete social life away from the school, because I had my friends who went to other schools from my neighborhood that I grew up with that I, I mean I had a complete social life away from school, so I was not--you know that's what I mean, I had to, it became almost instinctive and effortless to operate in multiple worlds. You know and I mean I think that's, you know in those days I had school and then you know and then I had my social life and then I had my family, I mean, and operating in all these different worlds was, was very, very instinctive. When you grow up in Pontchartrain Park [New Orleans, Louisiana] where I grew up in you know it's, it's a it's a great neighborhood and you know you knew a lot of pe- and I knew a lot of people growing up 'cause I played ball and-- Speaker 1: Now did a part of your rebellion, I mean, part of being rebellious did you ever get into any trouble? Did your father ever have to come pick you-- Speaker 2: I got into a couple of fights at school, but nothing, I don't ever remember my father getting involved. I got in, I got in one little, you know one little, you know Ali-Frazier [Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier] fight at school. One little, one little fight and I, I got, I got into a fight 'cause a guy called, one, one of, a guy called me a nigger and I just, I just tagged him, you know, and then we were rumbling on the ground. You know 'cause sort of it's like you know you can't put up with people abusing you verbally, I mean that's, that's the way I grew up you know (laughter). I mean I didn't grow up you know as any kind of a thug or rough guy, but you know you just basically defend yourself. You weren't gonna let anybody abuse you. Story_ID: 343850 Speaker 1: So when you, when it was time to go off to college and graduate high school [Jesuit High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] how did the University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], how was that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My sister [Julie Morial] was a year older than me, had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and she had gone to the college admissions process and application process a year before me and I sort of watched what she did in the school, she, and we talked about it and you know in the home and at the house, but Penn came to our high school. They did a trip to New Orleans [Louisiana]. They had two black admissions counselors who actually came to New Orleans looking for students and I'll never forget they came to the university, they came to Penn and we had, I had a friend, Marlin Gusman, who was a senior when I was a freshman at the University of Penn, at, at Jesuit who was African American who had gone to Penn, and he liked Penn and he enjoyed the experience at Penn and the admissions counselors interviewed all over town and, and the class of '80 [1980], which started in '76 [1976] there were six or seven African American students from New Orleans that went to Penn. There were three from St. Augustine High School [New Orleans, Louisiana]. There was me, two from Jesuit, and then there was a student from Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. So, they came and I remember they came and they showed us a video of Penn and they talked. They were really on--we realized we were being sold and then when it came time to apply they called us up and reminded us to send in our application. I think I felt wanted, and I applied to many schools. I actually about a year ago found all the letters from schools I applied to, admission letters. Speaker 1: Did you apply to any of the historically black schools [HBCUs] like Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], which was right at home-- Speaker 2: I did not apply to any, I did not apply to any historical black schools, and I didn't apply to any schools in Louisiana. I was predisposed to leave. I wanted to leave. I either wanted to go to the Northeast or to the West. Speaker 1: Even though your father [Ernest Morial] had made such great strides in, in being the first black and you wanted to leave? Speaker 2: Yes I wanted to leave. I think it was part of wanting to be independent, and I think also wanting to go to top flight school. My sister had been admitted the year before, yeah. Speaker 1: And your brother Jacques [Jacques Morial] is younger than you? Speaker 2: Younger than me, went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. My sister got admitted to Yale, wanted to go to Yale. She went, she went to Yale. Speaker 1: But, I just wanna, can you, was there a reason you didn't look at places like Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. I wanted to, I, I don't why we didn't look, I didn't look at any HBCUs. I--you know my parents had gone to HBCUs and I think at the time too, you're talking about the '70s [1970s] I think the idea of going where no one else went was a powerful motivating factor. The fact that, you know my mother had gone to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], my father had gone to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], the idea was they went there because they, not, they were great schools, but they went there 'cause that's the only place they could go. My mother started at Xavier. My [maternal] grandfather [C.C. Haydel] had gone to Howard. My uncle had gone to Howard. My cousin had gone to Howard, you know what I'm saying. My father had been a professor at Southern University [Southern University at New Orleans] in New Orleans, I mean, you looked, you looked at those schools and said not that they were not good schools 'cause I loved Xavier, they gave me an honorary degree 'cause I ended up being a teacher there, but more that I wanna go where they couldn't go. I wanna go where my parents couldn't go. I wanna go where the generation, I wanna do things that the generation of my parents couldn't do because they were denied, and it was that was the motivation I think for me and I think for my sister and I think for my brother it was the idea of reaching for the stars. Story_ID: 343851 Speaker 1: So when you're, you're, you're at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and it's, let's just jump, 1979 and the police officers go on strike did your father [Ernest Morial], did you have conversations with your father back and forth while you were at school about what was going on (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No much, a little bit. I used to get the paper. I talked to my father occasionally. I talked to my mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] more frequently and kept up with my father through talking to my mom because father was incredibly busy and the police strike was a defining moment in my father's career. People talk about it even now-- Speaker 1: So what happened? Speaker 2: --because he, well the police officers in New Orleans [Louisiana] struck because they were trying to force my father to give their u- recognize their union [Police Association of New Orleans] and give them a contract. And it was back and forth, back and forth, and I think he, he was his first year in office [as mayor] and I think they decided to test him thinking he was weak. I don't know why they would think that 'cause they soon found out. And he basically stood them down and out-maneuvered them because they said we'll strike for ma- we'll threaten to strike for Mardi Gras in an effort to force you into acceding to our demands. He just said, "Okay, Mardi Gras is cancelled, now let's talk." And when he cancelled Mardi Gras and he didn't, it wasn't as immediate because there was a tremendous amount of back and forth going on, and I think basically people of New Orleans felt that the police were holding New Orleans hostage, that they were using Mardi Gras not to get a pay increase, 'cause they had just gotten a 15 percent pay increase, but they were trying to get my father to recognize the Police Association of New Orleans, which was a notorious, exclusive union and they had hooked up with the national Teamsters [International Brotherhood of Teamsters] and had brought the Teamsters in as their national affiliation. So, New Orleans rejected it. My father--people got a chance to see my father in a high profile dispute, and my father was extremely feisty, extremely determined and very strong-willed and the last thing that the union should have tried to do was put him in a corner. What ended up happening is he literally broke the union, the police union, and to this day they've never been the same. To--they didn't get a contract. They sought under his successor [Sidney Barthelemy] not with extreme tactics, but they sought under his successor through political maneuvers to get a contract and again when I was there, when I got elected too they, they, they challenged me on a number of police reform issues, but they were never the same. They were never the force. Speaker 1: And this is getting off beat and path a little bit, but it is known that like, well supposedly the police department [New Orleans Police Department] in, in New Orleans was extremely corrupt in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: It was not only corrupt it was very exclusionary in its hiring and promotional practices. There were African American officers a few had been promoted. My-- Speaker 1: So, they did have black officers. Speaker 2: They had black officers, a handful. I wouldn't say, more than a handful. Black officers began being hired in probably the '50s [1950s], but you had a larger trickle, handful in the '50s [1950s] and probably going back to the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] and then you had a handful, it became a small group, but you had very few who were above the rank of sergeant, which is the first supervisory level in the department. And, and the department was, you know, it's, it's fair to say it was, it was corrupt. It was fair to say it had difficult relationships with the community, particularly the African American community. My father was elected to reform the police department. He picked an outside police chief by the name of James Parsons from Birmingham [Alabama]. Parsons only lasted two years. They sort of forced him out. I picked an outside police chief. In my career frankly the eight years I was in was the most successful period of police reform in the city's history, and we'll talk about that probably in another one of our sit-downs because it's a very, very long, involved engaging story-- Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: --about how we turned the New Orleans Police Department around. To my chagrin after I left the people who succeeded me basically allowed corruption and brutality to retrench in the department. Story_ID: 343852 Speaker 1: But going back to your father [Ernest Morial] in the cancelling the Mar- what ended up happening? Was there a Mardi Gras in 1979? Speaker 2: There was Mardi Gras in the suburbs and there, there was, there was a Mardi Gras in a sense that people took to the streets on Mardi Gras day, but there were no parades. And in a sense my father became a bit of a hero because he stood up to the union [Police Association of New Orleans]. They were trying to hold the city hostage. They thought they could test him because he was a new mayor and a black, and they thought they could rally the white community to their side, but when my father cancelled, my father was extremely skillful. When he cancelled Mardi Gras, I don't know exactly, but he went, he had a press conference and he had the entire city council [New Orleans City Council], all of the business community, he had the archbishop and all of the religious community basically standing around him saying, "Okay we, meaning us, are not gonna let the police department [New Orleans Police Department] or the police union hold us hostage." And-- Speaker 1: So did they retaliate against your father, I mean in sort of race ways (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They threw--we had to have security at my father's house and they threw, you know, fruit and drove by yelling and screaming and the National Guard was called out and had to provide security at the time 'cause the police actually were on strike. Speaker 1: So, the National Guard was called to protect the city or just your father? Speaker 2: The city, the city. Speaker 1: The whole city. Speaker 2: But then part of their assignment was also to be at my father's house. Interestingly very few of the black officers went on strike, very few because they felt that if the police association became a recognized bargaining agent for the officers that the police association was anti-affirmative action, anti, basically anti any effort that would be made to increase the number of African Americans in the supervisory ranks of the department. Speaker 1: And that was sort of evident with the Teamsters [International Brotherhood of Teamsters] coming in. Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: So, in 19-, so you were getting that news basically from, you were at, you were in Pennsylvania (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A little bit of reading the paper and my mom [Sybil Haydel Morial] and a lot of it was on the national news at the time. Speaker 1: Did you ever fear for your father's life? Speaker 2: I didn't. Speaker 1: You did not? Speaker 2: I did not. I did not fear for his life. I, I don't you know, just didn't. Speaker 1: So 19-- Speaker 2: I knew he could handle 'em. Speaker 1: You, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: I knew he could handle the situation and handle these guys 'cause they, they, they got an opportunity to probably see how tough and resourceful he was, particularly in a crisis. Speaker 1: Did you learn anything from that incident? Speaker 2: I think what I learned is when you have a principled position you stand your ground. You know that doesn't mean being completely inflexible, but you stand your ground and that's probably a hallmark of Morial leadership in New Orleans [Louisiana], to stand our ground on things that we think are important to the city and you know he stood his ground. Story_ID: 343853 Speaker 1: So in 1980 you graduated from the University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], why economics? Why did you major in economics? Speaker 2: I think at the time I kind of had a--first of all it was interesting. Second of all it was a little bit more difficult and I didn't want to major in--it ended up being a double major in economics and African American studies, but I didn't want to major in political science or sociology or English or history, although I was interesting--because I thought that majoring in something like economics would, could take me further. Would go further and would also give me a skill set, more of a technical skill set that would lead, if I wanted to go to law school, if I wanted to be in business, whatever I wanted to be and I thought, you know to this day I think it's a good choice because, you know, I use in many ways, like law, economics teaches analytical and critical thinking, which is essential in leadership positions. You have to be able to size things up fast. You don't have time to go sit in the corner with a pile of briefing papers to figure everything out. I mean if you did that you wouldn't make any decisions. You have to be able to size and evaluate things quickly and, and clearly. Speaker 1: So, at that time what did you think you were going to do? Speaker 2: I wanted to be a lawyer, then one week I wanted to be a M.B.A. and then you know I, I think I, I went back and forth because if you're at the University of Pennsylvania it is a strong business orientation there, so either college recruiters were on campus recruiting people for management trainee programs and in those days you could go into management trainee program and start at like thirty, thirty-five thousand dollars a year, which was a king's ransom. You know that was like good money, big money, and you know and so they were recruiting, so it was very attractive. Many of my friends went into management trainee programs and have moved up the corporate ladder in, in, at various places. Story_ID: 343854 Speaker 1: We talked about graduation, but what had the, what was the overall experience at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] like, I mean--? Speaker 2: I loved the University of Pennsylvania. It was a great place to go to school. It had a strong, strong academics. Speaker 1: What about your social life? Speaker 2: It was, you had a large African American community. I think there were four or five hundred African American students there, so it was enough and then you were in the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and everything Philadelphia had, so there was a community that you could participate in and I joined Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, was active in the Black Student League. I played freshman football. I was active and involved in a whole bunch of stuff on campus. It was a great--the University of Pennsylvania it's a big campus. It was a big, so, it, it tends to be a little bit on the, it can be a little bit on the impersonal side, but I love Penn even to this day. I think I got--my Penn experience was very positive. It was also great to live four years in Philadelphia. I hated it at first. It was so cold. You know the first winter I was in Philadelphia it snowed. I didn't have the right clothes. I had to get right kind of--I had to figure out how to live in the cold and it also was a very different lifestyle in the Northeast when you live inside during the winter as opposed to New Orleans [Louisiana] when people kind of live outside, they like being outside. Speaker 1: What were the other differences in like being a southerner now in the North when you've grown up in the South? Speaker 2: I think I found that Phila- you know I felt that the North particularly at college campus was a little bit more open-minded, a little bit more progressive. You had, you know, issues, you know at the University of Pennsylvania, but compared to the South and it was also interesting to go to school with people--when I was in school at Penn there were very few, I mean there were a handful of people from the North, but there were very few students from the South, so you know 90 percent of the students, 95 percent of the students were from the Northeast. Speaker 1: Well you, you-- Speaker 2: New England, the Philadelphia area, Pennsylvania, heavily dominated by students from those areas. Speaker 1: You alluded to the fact that there were some problems. Speaker 2: At Penn? Speaker 1: At Penn. What were they? Speaker 2: Well you know you had some incidents at Penn. I mean, you know, Penn had some incidents, students in a frat house wearing black face, holding a Confederate flag up on Halloween night. You know you had incidents like that, that occurred. But, I think, you know Penn was such a big place that you could discover and find whatever you wanted. Story_ID: 340250 Speaker 1: Continuing on tape-- Speaker 2: With 'The Man from U.N.C.L.E.' Speaker 1: (Laughter) On tape five. Today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the 2nd day of May. Speaker 1: The year? Speaker 2: In the year of our Lord 2006 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Six [2006]. Story_ID: 340251 Speaker 1: We're gonna start with your college years today. So, how did you come to the University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Penn's an extraordinary great institution, and I grew up, I may have shared this with you, I wanted to go to school in the Ivy League. I don't know where that got, we got programmed that way, but my sister [Julie Morial] had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] a year before. I applied to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale, and Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and didn't get into either of those three, and I got into every other school I applied to, which was Penn and Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], and Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], and Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana], and the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], a whole host of schools. I can't even remember all of them, Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]. When it came down to it, Penn was doing recruiting for African American students in New Orleans [Louisiana] and a couple who were admissions officers, the Blacks [ph.], came by the school [Jesuit High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] in the, in 1975 and met with a group of students, showed us a video, talked about the University of Pennsylvania, and then stayed in touch with us, sort of almost being recruited to apply to attend the University of Pennsylvania. When it came down to it, I think there were a couple of factors that encouraged me to go to Penn. One, it was in a city, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I felt like I wanted to go to school in a city. I didn't want to go to a small town. I was a city boy and even though I was going from the North, from the South to the North, something about the city appealed to me. The second thing is Penn's strong academic curriculum in economics and business, which I knew I wanted to study, even though at that time I, I was torn. I thought I wanted to be a lawyer, but I didn't know, but I thought whatever I did I was gonna get a business oriented, economic policy oriented undergraduate education. And the third reason is a fellow by the name of Marlin Gusman who's a friend to this day who was three years ahead of me was a student at Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he'd gone to my high school and he was a bit of a mentor and role model of mine as well as a man, a young man, no those two, those, him, him, he's the one that, that got me to go to Penn. I'm thinking of somebody encouraged me to go to my high school. So, I'll never forget when I went to Penn, the first day I went to Penn I, my mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] drove me to the airport with two suitcases and put me on a plane. I got on Delta Air Lines flew, flew to the airport, I don't know I had about twenty, twenty-five, or thirty dollars in my pocket, got to the airport, landed in Philadelphia, picked up my bags, hopped in a cab and told 'em bring me to the University of Pennsylvania, and the driver said, "Where at the University of Pennsylvania." So, I pulled out my little papers that I had and said 37th [Street] and Pine [Street], which was a dorm where I was going to be staying. I remember showing up at Penn and probably 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 percent of the students were being brought to school by their parents and I wasn't and I, I remember immediately feeling one side of me said why do these eighteen year olds need their parents to bring them to college, aren't they independent enough. Another side of it was I wonder if my parents should have brought me here, and then I thought my parents are working, they got three other children at home. I said they couldn't even you know, afford the time nor the money to come up in here and bring me to school, which you know I guess was a custom of schools, it's more of a custom these days than I think it may have been a custom back then; I don't know. I went to the University of Pennsylvania and I showed up at the Quadrangle [Perelman Quadrangle], went and checked in, and went to my room. Luckily, it was a two bedroom dorm suite where one room was a single and the other was a double, and I got there first. So, naturally I seized the single room and that's where I stayed my first year at Penn. Story_ID: 340252 Speaker 1: Why do you think you had chosen not to pursue one of the historically black colleges [HBCUs], 'cause your father [Ernest Morial] was the first black mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You asked me that before and, and my parents both, my father was a product of Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and my mother [Sybil Haydel Morial] attended Xavier. At the time my mother was working at Xavier. I think there was something in me that wanted to do something my parents didn't do. Who--my parents were much part of the Civil Rights Movement, very much a part of opening doors, and I think the idea, and I think their idea is we want our kids to do things we couldn't do, things we couldn't reach to. Speaker 1: Had you talked to your father about going to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: My parents exercised almost no influence. Speaker 1: Well what did he think about it? Speaker 2: I have no idea. I thought, I think he thought it was a good choice. I always, I think we were programmed to leave, leave town and leave school, that by the time we got to eight-, be eighteen we ought to be independent and that meant going away to school and, and learning how to live on your own, and that was sort of the course my sister [Julie Morial] followed, I followed, and then my brother [Jacques Morial] who is three years younger than I followed. There was never sort of much of a, of a, of a programming to go to school in the city or in the area, stay at home while you go to college. We were programmed differently. We were programmed to explore. We were encouraged to get out. And I also think that our parents, my parents I think they saw us as, my sister and I and my brother, I mean, probably as we were all very good students, honor roll students, and we also had gone to the best high schools in New Orleans [Louisiana] and had in, in many cases been the first black students to attend those high schools and so we were pushing the envelope, you know, at a very young age in the South and I think there was, there was a suggestion we continue that. You should go to the best school and I think my parents took the approach that we'll make any sacrifice. I'm glad they did and I'm a big supporter of historically black colleges and universities. I have an honorary degree from Xavier. I taught at Xavier. I love Xavier University. It's a great institution. My choice had--I should say I'm pleased, I'm glad I did what I did because I got a chance to make relationships and explore far beyond the world I grew up in, to get to the Ivy League, to get to the University of Pennsylvania, to meet students from all over the world, to make friends with students who were not from the South, to learn that every place is not like your home town or your neighborhood. Everybody doesn't think like you think-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was a valuable part of my upbringing. Speaker 1: Do you think that you became more connected later on by having gone to the University of Penn-- Speaker 2: I could-- Speaker 1: --than had you would a historically black college? Speaker 2: I clearly believe that I had a set of relationships that helped me in my professional life, particularly being mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana] and now being at the league [National Urban League] that I wouldn't have had had I stayed at home. And I'm using that distinction. I mean, had I gone to a place like Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] or Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], one of the more you know Atlanta [Georgia], Washington [D.C.] I'd have a network of relationships too. But, I think the fact that I left town and went away to school gave me a set of relationships I wouldn't have had I stayed in New Orleans and attended college. So, I'm a, I'm a big believer in students should do what their--everybody's not comfortable. I wanted to get out on my own. I mean, I was independent when I was a teenager. I, I was, I was an independent person, and I think the idea of living alone or living by myself or living without parents, rules, restrictions, and that sort of thing really appealed to me and I thought it was a part of--I looked forward to it. I mean college was an exciting, I enjoyed college. Was always broke, but who isn't broke in college. Story_ID: 340253 Speaker 1: So, just during your years in college, I mean, actually there's one other question I wanna ask and I was debating whether I wanna ask it. And, and I wanna put sort of the color, like race to you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go ahead. Speaker 1: Do you think you became connected in a broader, meaning a white world in which you would not have been connected you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I don't because I'd gone to predominantly white, white schools. I mean, I, I--it's interesting I think I may have told you this from the time I was in fifth grade to the time I was in twelfth grade there was never another black student in class with me, which is incredible when I look back on it, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth. Any class I was the only black in the class. I was in high school [Jesuit High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I was, I was in a lot of honors classes. The schools that I went to had very few African American students. No, not at all I don't think it was a connection in a racial sense. I think it was a connection in this racial sense and that is when you live in the South you, the world is very black and it's very white and race is very defining and that's certainly not also the case in the North, but you learn that all black people don't think alike and all white people don't think alike and if you think that all black people think alike and all white people think alike, then you are a, a captive victim of a limited world and a limited experience. So, you come to the North and it's different. You meet a broader and are exposed to a broader white community. You're exposed to at a place like the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] very, very wealthy people. You're exposed to very, very liberal people. You're exposed to highly motivated people who have decided by the time they're eighteen or nineteen they are gonna be millionaires or billionaires. And then on the African American side you're exposed to the black community at Penn, which was rather, you know was a significant black community, maybe four or five hundred students at Penn. You had African Americans who were from Harlem [New York, New York] and Brooklyn [New York] and inner city Washington [D.C.] and inner city Baltimore [Maryland]. You had black students who were from Westchester County [New York] and the suburbs of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and people who were from West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so you saw, when you grow up in the South, my sense of the South that I grew up in, the class distinctions in the black community are not as marked. You know races is, is more dominant. You come to Penn and you know there's more quote unquote middle class African Americans who come from families that are, if not affluent, somewhat successful. So, you, you're exposed to a breadth. Also, at the University of Pennsylvania, there were students from Africa and the Caribbean, students from the Middle East and Europe and Asia and so all of a sudden you're exposed to all these communities and, and even if your, you don't make a lot of friends and relationships you get a chance to see 'em, you get a chance to interact with them sometimes in the classroom, I mean that's you know the Penn-- Speaker 1: Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Penn experience. Story_ID: 340254 Speaker 1: You talked about the four or five hundred black students at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Did you have--were, were they, were you, what was that community like? Were you a part (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That community was a community that--oh yeah, very much so. I mean I was part of the Black Student League. I was in the leadership of the Black Student League. I was a member of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity. I was one of the founders of the United Minorities Council, very much, I've always been sort of an activist-- Speaker 1: Why did you feel that those things were important for you to do at Penn? Speaker 2: I just, you know I don't why. I just felt it was--you know sometimes you're wired a certain way. Speaker 1: I mean particularly to start the minority organization. Why was that-- Speaker 2: Let me tell you why we started the United Minorities Council. It, it, it came out of a set of experiences. There was a student protest at Penn when I was there. The broad student body protested the cancellation of hockey, and that was you know shocking to me that people, 'cause I came from New Orleans [Louisiana] and hockey was a game you watched on television and the Montreal Canadiens and the Toronto Maple Leafs, I mean you didn't play hockey. There's no place to ice skate in New Orleans. African American students saw a bit of an opportunity to place some demands on the table and started our own protests over a series of issues related to African Americans at the University of Pennsylvania. What came out of the sort of student protest was a, and I don't remember exactly, but the creation of the United Minorities Council and the United Minorities Council was a--and I remember I was the Black Student League sort of representative to the United Minorities Council, and we were a group of minority students that went in and met with the provost, at the time Vartan Gregorian who went on to become president of Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], president--do you know his name? Now at the Carnegie foundation, the Carnegie endowment [Carnegie Corporation of New York, New York, New York] and, and Vartan was the new provost and he was tasked I think to help settle the waters. So, the United Minorities Council we went in and met with him in his office and one of our demands was, was a third world cultural center or United Minority, which incidentally they finally got at Penn I think sometime in the '90s [1990s], fifteen, twenty years later, but you know I think it was more of, you know I was preordained, I mean I grew up in a family that was involved in civil rights, politics, activism in the community, and it was something that I felt was purposeful and enjoyable. I'm the kind of person I believe life should have purpose, like to have fun, but I don't think life is a frivolous venture, not just trying to get through it, get to the next day, so you know we had, you know those kinds of things going on. So, I was active in those organizations and, and you know Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity during the time I was at Penn became the largest, probably one of the most significant black organizations on campus. When I got there, we only had two brothers in the chapter. When I left, I think we might have had about forty. In fact, I traded emails just yesterday with several of my line brothers because we were thinking of having a thirtieth year reunion next year 'cause it will make thirty years since we, we went over. Speaker 1: What has become of some of those boys? Speaker 2: Tremendously successful. Speaker 1: Can you list some of them? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ron Allen, he is currently a news correspondent with NBC; Clarence Armbrister is the executive vice president at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Burrell Ellis is currently a commissioner, elected county commissioner in DeKalb County, Georgia down in Atlanta [Georgia]. Ray Wallace [Raymond Wallace] is a chief operating officer of one of Disney's companies [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida], one of Disney's projects down in Florida. Let's see who else. Those are some, probably the best examples. Some of the, the better known, but it's interesting because we, we've taken a little inventory--Michael Miller is a prominent senior vice presidential level person with ACS computer systems [Affiliated Computer Services, Inc.]. I mean all of us were--it's, it's interesting everyone's been successful. I mean, it, it, you know I don't think we, we, we can't find everybody, but we don't know of anybody that kind of fell down or didn't make it or didn't achieve their career expectations. Story_ID: 340255 Speaker 1: What were you career expectations at the time, at the time you were on line pledging [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]? Speaker 2: I knew I wanted to be a lawyer. Speaker 1: By then you had decided for sure? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had pretty much decided, but I think I was always torn about what I would do with my law degree, you know where I would go with my law degree, how would I use my law degree, and I think at a very early age I also probably at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when I worked--in 1979 I had an opportunity to work on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] for the late United States Senator Russell Long [Russell B. Long], a senator from Louisiana, and at that time was probably one of the eight or ten most powerful men on, powerful people in the country and on Capitol Hill 'cause he chaired the tax writing senate finance committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Finance]. And I spent that summer between my junior and senior years working for him and then I went back and worked for him the summer after I graduated from college. The summer I spent on Capitol Hill-- Speaker 1: What year is this again? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 2: I was a junior. I came away from that saying I'm gonna be a member of [U.S.] Congress one day. I wanna come up here and work. I wanna be an elected official. I wanna be a member of a Cong- of Congress, maybe one day a member of the United States Senate. So, to a great extent, that was what my political ambition was for about a ten year period. And I actually went back to Louisiana and when the seat opened up I ran for Congress. First time I ever ran for office 1990, thirty-two years old and lost narrowly, lost to a much more experienced person who ran an underdog come from behind race and lost narrowly. So, that, you know, I knew that I had elected office, but I didn't, I didn't see myself as being a local elected official in those days. I saw myself playing a role nationally. Speaker 1: Is that because you felt that you would be standing in your father's [Ernest Morial] shadow in New Orleans [Louisiana] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It may have been a little of that. I don't really know. I just think that the, the adventuresome side of me, I mean, I had grown up in politics and grown up around my father and you know around city politics and state politics and then you know Capitol Hill is the top of the hill and you know I got an opportunity and, and members of the Congressional Black Caucus got an opportunity to meet many of them and see 'em in action, you know, Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums], Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III]. Shirley Chisholm was in the Congress at the time. Barbara Jordan, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young. You know these people were legendary for, you know, young people growing up. I mean, they were, they were dashing charismatic figures and, and I think I saw myself one day serving in the Congress of the United States. Story_ID: 340256 Speaker 1: So after the summer of '79 [1979] you, between your junior and senior year [at University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you go-- Speaker 2: Work for, work for, at, at, at, for Long, Russell Long [Russell B. Long], went back to finish my final year, went back to New Orleans [Louisiana] worked for Long in New Orleans for a year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were you doing for him specifically? Speaker 2: I was sort of like a fill-in legislative assistant. It's interesting, you know, they kind of hire you as an intern and they see what you can do, and I don't know they must have figured out I could write or something, so I found myself, I spent the summer--all of the legislative assistants took a week's vacation. So, when they went out I sat in their desk and did their work. That's what I did for an entire summer, so I was there, you know, answering correspondence and dealing with requests for information and it was much more (unclear) because a lot of the other interns, I mean, they would basically do nothing, get coffee, run errands, and then you know the, a man that hired me, lawyer in New Orleans by the name of Bruce Feingerts [Bruce L. Feingerts], he's now a lawyer in New Orleans. He was the legislative director. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Bruce Feingerts, great guy. Also would send me to these God awful boring hearings of the senate finance committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Finance] when they were going through these tax bills. Now, these things were boring, but I remember I'd go in there and you know there was Russell Long and there was Bob Dole and there was Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] and there was Daniel Patrick Moynihan and those are the people I remember, you know, and I'd sit there, you know like on the second row with a little pad. He said, "Go over there and take notes, go over there and keep up with what they, what they're doing over there." And I remember the healthcare legislation, and I mean these hearings were they were boring and, but the information was technical, but it was a great learning opportunity and a great learning experience, but a chance to see people you saw on TV, you know, and get into their little flare-ups. I'm trying to think of who else was on the committee. I remember Kennedy (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Those are some big names, Kennedy. Speaker 2: Kennedy and Dole and Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Democrats sat on the left, Republicans sat on the right. Democrats controlled the [U.S.] Senate at the time, so you know Long would kind of just you know lean back and you know lean back in his chair and, you know, and he'd walk over to different members and (whispers) whisper little things to them. I said what are these guys talking about? What are they talking about? Why can't they say, you know, talk in front, say it in the mic where everyone can hear. But, it was--and I remember thinking the Senate at the time was also very white, very white. I mean, Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] had just been defeated, so he was no longer, there were no black senators and I think almost no black staffers. I remember the summer I was there they started a black staff association, and the woman, one of the women who started it Jackie Parker [ph.] still works on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], great lady and we joke 'cause I remember I think the first time they had a meeting and typically, you know, interns didn't participate in that kind of stuff, but you know, I made friends, come let's have a meeting and it's like nine people I think or ten people showed up at the meeting and Senator Long at that time only had one other black staff person working. He didn't, he only had one black person working for him as a permanent staff person and that was a guy, older gentleman who ran the mailroom. So, it was an interesting kind of a world. Speaker 1: I mean you know probably don't remember or maybe do, but were those nine people also like clerks in the mailroom and--? Speaker 2: These were more professionals. I think most of these people were professionals. They were legislative assistants and several lawyers and-- Speaker 1: And what was the purpose of that group to be, to bring more blacks in? Speaker 2: I think to bring more blacks in. The idea that, that the numbers were too small and what could we do to get more blacks in, so when I go down there and I mean I'm not a very old person, I don't think of myself as old-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --and I go down to Capitol Hill and I see people and I said, and I said, "Man I remember when this place was a little bit different," and they're like, "How do you remember?" I said, "Well I was down here when I was twenty years old." I said, "I was down here very, very young." Speaker 1: So, can you tell me what it's like now, I mean, just jump, just to jump ahead and then we'll go back (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you see it's still, the numbers are not what they ought to be, but you see more faces than you ever saw back in those days. I don't know what the overall numbers are. I don't think it's, it's what it should be or, or adequately representative. Capitol Hill is, it's changed jobs on Capitol Hill. In those days, people would get those jobs and they'd stay in them a long, long time. That was before trade associations and K Street [Washington, D.C.] lobbyists and opportunities to make big money. Now, it's, it's, more common. You have a cadre of people that have made a career on Capitol Hill, but it's probably more common for people to go do their time, working down there and then seek other opportunities. Speaker 1: Does that association still exist, the black (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it does. Speaker 1: Is there still a need for it? Speaker 2: You know I saw Jackie Parker--yeah without question there is a need for it as a self-help group, as a peer support group, as a group to continue to advance the cause; it's definitely needed. Story_ID: 340257 Speaker 1: So who were your role models when you were at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: On the campus? Speaker 1: In what, yeah, or in life. Was it still your dad [Ernest Morial] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my God-- Speaker 1: Was your dad-- Speaker 2: --my dad was always a role model. My mom [Sybil Haydel Morial] was always a role model. Speaker 1: On campus then? Speaker 2: I don't remember if I had quote, you know role models on campus as much. Speaker 1: Did anyone, did you look to pattern yourself after anyone at this time in your life aside from your mother and father? Speaker 2: You know if I told you yes I'd be stretching 'cause I'm going deep into my memory and, and not so much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: So it was still your father then-- Speaker 2: --I always looked up, I always looked up to the, you know, students on campus who were in leadership roles. Speaker 1: Were there many black students in leadership roles at Penn during that time? Speaker 2: You know there were, there were, there were black students on the basketball team and on the football team, I mean, and there were black students involved in black organizations. So, to that extent the answer is yes. There were very few black students who were economics majors, which I was, very few. I think the year I graduated there may have been only two that finished. It was not a, there were a lot of African--there were a cadre of blacks that went to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. With Wharton you can major in accounting or finance and management and then I was in the school of arts and sciences, but I, I majored in economics, which meant I was taking most of my courses at Wharton. Story_ID: 360255 Speaker 1: Two professors that I, I sort of want to point out as people that had a profound positive effect, really three. Ernest Wilson [Ernest Wilson III], who taught me political science at the time was a very young professor in political science who taught me courses in African politics and black politics, very sharp, very smart, very supportive of me. In fact, when I was in office, he was in New Orleans [Louisiana] and he came to see me. The other one is Bernard Anderson who works with us here at the league [National Urban League] now. He is an esteemed, distinguished economist, the Whitney M. Young Professor [Whitney M. Young Professor of Management] at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], former assistant secretary of labor. Esteemed man that I just looked up to because he was, he was someone who wrote a lot and was quoted in the papers a lot for his work on unemployment and youth unemployment. And then the third person who taught me, who really had a great effect on me, was Judge A. Leon Higginbotham, Aloyisus Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] who taught me, he taught a course in the law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that was open to undergraduate students and Judge Higginbotham taught me and it was interesting because I had seen Judge Higginbotham speak when I was twelve years old when my parents [Sybil Haydel Morial and Ernest Morial] took, took us to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a convention of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, and Judge Higginbotham was one of the speakers and he had just been named a federal judge. So, Judge Higginbotham was also--those three people had great influences on me as professors and to a great extent as role models. Judge Higginbotham I'll never forget I went up to him and asked him, I said, "What does it take to make a great lawyer?" He looked at me and he just did like that (gesture). He pointed to his heart. "It takes heart. It takes compassion," you know. Erudite judge and a smart, smart lawyer, Yale-trained [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] lawyer, should have been on the United States Supreme Court. Would have made, made a great justice of the United States Supreme Court and probably I would, I would conjecture if he were probably ten years younger and President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had been in office he would have been a member of the United States Supreme Court. Story_ID: 360256 Speaker 1: To go back a little bit just to graduating at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], graduation day. Speaker 2: We had our graduation in May of, May of 1980. My entire family came up. It's a tradition in my family that we all go to the graduations of people in the family and so my mother [Sybil Haydel Morial], my father [Ernest Morial], and all my brothers [sic. brother, Jacques Morial] and sisters came up and went to a graduation at the Civic Center [Philadelphia Convention Hall and Civic Center] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And all I remember is, I think my parents they came up they were only there a day and we went out to dinner and then we went to the graduation. Speaker 1: So, did you know you would go immediately to law school? Speaker 2: Yeah I had already been accepted to Georgetown University [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Why did you want to go to Washington [D.C.] to go to law school? Speaker 2: Remember I had been the previous year-- Speaker 1: In '79 [1979]. Speaker 2: --working for Russell Long [Russell B. Long], so I knew I wanted to go to Washington. I loved Washington, the political environment, the court system. It just seemed to be a great place and I also said I'll go back down there and go back to work on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] while I'm in law school. I saw it as an employment opportunity. So, went down to Georgetown and, and my college and law school experiences were very positive. I loved Georgetown University Law Center. I loved the University of Pennsylvania. I felt I got a good education in, in, in many, many respects. Those schools were not perfect, but I would recommend, not hesitate to recommend either school. Story_ID: 360257 Speaker 1: I'm jumping to something else a little bit, but during the same time period when had you met Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] for the first time? Speaker 2: Oh, oh when I met Jesse Jackson (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean in a way that you would come to work on his campaign in 1984. How did you meet him for the first time? Speaker 2: I, you know Jesse Jackson knew my father [Ernest Morial] and my mother [Sybil Haydel Morial], and I guess the first time--let me tell you I remember about Jesse I remember that in 1974, '73 [1973], '74 [1974] the National Medical Association, I think I was fifteen or sixteen years old, had its meeting in New Orleans [Louisiana] and we went down to the hotel, it was at the Fairmont Hotel [The Fairmont New Orleans; The Roosevelt New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], some friends of mine because they were having like a teenage party, so we were going down there. We, we figured there's some, some, some nice action down here, so we're like fifteen, sixteen and one of my friends said, "Yeah there's a party going on and we're going to the party." We get down there. I don't know if we saw a sign, or if we hear that Jesse Jackson is speaking that night. So, we decide, and I don't remember the frie- but we decide we're gonna go see Jesse Jackson speak and we'll go to this party later. We got to go see Jesse Jackson. So, some sort of way, you know this is the Fairmont Hotel, we're fifteen and sixteen years old we just went in through the kitchen or through the side door, we just went in the little banquet and we just sat, sat on the little chairs on the back figuring uh-oh if somebody catches us they're gonna kick us out 'cause this is like an adult function. And I'll never forget, man seeing Jesse Jackson speak and man he would, this was when Jesse had his big afro, he was loaded with fire and brimstone, I mean he spoke. He had the people on, on their feet. He had them clapping and I remember thinking man this dude, this is a bad dude man. He's articulate, he's got a great you know, great message, so, you know, like wow Jesse Jackson. Story_ID: 360258 Speaker 1: And I guess the first time I remember, be it after that having close contact with Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] is 1980, I was home for the summer and my father [Ernest Morial] was mayor at the time and Push [National Rainbow Coalition; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] had its national convention in New Orleans [Louisiana] at the Hilton Hotel [Hilton New Orleans Riverside, New Orleans, Louisiana] and it was a big convention. President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was running for re-election, so he came and all these cabinet officers came and kind of hung out at the convention. And I think I ended up working on his campaign, I, I just always believed in what he stood for and what he was about and, and I really believed that the, it was time for someone, someone had to break the ice, an African American had to break the ice and run for president and it had to be someone who had the nerve and the guts to take the risk and Jesse was that kind of person. You know Jesse had kind of gone through a little bit of a routine in 1983 where he encouraged other people to run for president, members of [U.S.] Congress, people like Maynard Jackson. "You all should run, you all should run," and then Jesse ran and he was a historic campaign, but, but, but, but, but it was also a campaign that had great successes far beyond most people thought he couldn't get any votes, he couldn't raise any money, but he had a substantial impact on the electorate. Speaker 2: How so? Speaker 1: Well he demonstrated that a black man could hold his own. He was good in the debates. He commanded the issues. He also demonstrated because Jesse put together a multiracial coalition, that's where the rainbow concept came from. It really got developed in the '88 [1988] campaign, but it came out of the 1984 campaign and he won some primaries, the Louisiana primary and put together an effective campaign organization, kind of challenged the Democratic Party and then gave a great speech at the convention [1984 Democratic National Convention] in San Francisco [California]. That was my first opportunity to participate at another level because I participated in the '84 [1984] campaign as a Jesse Jackson delegate. Speaker 2: What did that open your eyes to? Speaker 1: That opened my eyes to the value of working through the process to change the process, you know, and that you could work through the process to change the process and that it was an important part of the change process and the reform and transformation process, to work through the, through the process. Speaker 2: During that campaign were, were you guys, did you believe he could win? Speaker 1: We believed he could win. We believed he could win several primaries, but it was a campaign about impact. Speaker 2: And what does that mean? Speaker 1: Win some primaries, move the platform of the party, register some people to vote, improve and increase the participation levels in rates of African Americans, get the party to emphasize urban issues, issues like affirmative action, which were important issues at that time. Speaker 2: So, what do you think was, I mean, and this is your, this is an opinion question. What, what do you feel was his--what led to his--what was his downfall? Speaker 1: As a candidate? Speaker 2: As a candidate. Speaker 1: I don't think he had any downfalls as a candidate. I think that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean I guess what I'm getting to is this issue in New York [New York] and the comment he made. What effect did that have on his candidacy? Or you don't even remember, so maybe not, not a big one. Okay. Speaker 1: No, no I think you know Jesse, Jesse's '84 [1984] campaign paved the way for his '88 [1988] campaign, and they were historic campaigns and because he ran those two races African Americans who run in the future are not gonna just be seen as history makers 'cause Jesse ran a serious campaign. He was a major candidate. He wasn't on the fringe. When there was a debate, Jesse Jackson was there and he probably appealed to people in places like Iowa and New Hampshire and in the rural South in ways that few people expected. Speaker 2: Who else was working on that campaign? I mean, was it a group? Were you all African Americans? Who were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. I, I remem- I worked mainly in Louisiana. Speaker 2: And who were you the team in Louisiana? Speaker 1: Paul Valteau [HistoryMaker Paul R. Valteau, Jr.], I mean my brother [Jacques Morial], state representative Sherman Copelin was involved. Speaker 2: Your father was involved, right? Speaker 1: My father, my father endorsed Jesse. I'll never forget he endorsed Jesse December 9, 1983, and there were only--he and [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry and Maynard Jackson were the only African, black, big city black mayors that endorsed Jesse. Most of the other guys had endorsed the mainstream candidates, Mondale [Walter Mondale], and whoever else was running at the time and so you know our whole family and political family was strongly behind Jesse. Speaker 2: And you father led the way on this. Speaker 1: He led the way. Yeah, he just believed it was the right thing to do at the time. Story_ID: 360259 Speaker 1: So at that time your father [Ernest Morial] seemed to have been creating an industry and I mean bringing more, what do you call--conventions to New Orleans [Louisiana] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --and more, how, how do you know, what, how he did that? Speaker 2: The key to that was the construction of the new convention center [New Orleans Convention Center; New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] which now bears his name-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --which is a project that had been on the drawing boards, but really probably one of the signature projects of his administration was the convention center and the Ralphs riverwalk shopping mall [The Outlet Collection at Riverwalk, New Orleans, Louisiana] development on the riverfront. And that convention center opened probably around '84 [1984], '85 [1985], and it really had a big role to play in New Orleans' emergence in the mid to late '80s [1980s] as a premier convention city. It was the building, and then it was probably the Superdome [Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana]. The Superdome and the convention center were probably the two smartest investments that the city made in the second half of the 20th century, because the dome made New Orleans a special events city. It made New Orleans a Super Bowl host, a Sugar Bowl. It made the Sugar, put the Sugar Bowl in the Bowl Championship Series [BCS]. It helped make New Orleans the best location for the ESSENCE Festival [Essence Music Festival]. Speaker 1: Was your father a forward thinker like that? Was he seeing that? Speaker 2: Oh I think my father was far ahead of his time, not only from the standpoint of politics, but also from the standpoint of government. I think he was well ahead of his time, thirty, forty years ahead of his time. I mean he created the Almonaster-Michoud Industrial District in an effort to try to create an area that could attract heavy industry. He aggressively--I remember he spent three years going after the Renault company [Groupe Renault], the French bus maker, see if they'd build a plant here in the United States and, and I think he also helped to preside over the reintroduction of the opening of the riverfront to tearing down the wharfs. Father was, was, was, was a pioneer. He conceived of an idea, of, of metropolitan earnings tax, a tax that would tax commuters who lived in the suburbs and worked in the city. He didn't succeed in getting it passed, but we were talking the other day, had it passed the City of New Orleans would not have had any of the fiscal problems it would have had a stronger and expanded tax base with people being just militantly anti-tax, didn't want to give up 1 percent of their income for the benefit of the city and the tax referendum failed 55/45, 55 against, 45 for. Story_ID: 360260 Speaker 1: Just to go back to when you graduated Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] what year was that? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983], graduated from Georgetown and went back to New Orleans [Louisiana] and joined the law firm of Barham and Churchill. Now, why I got back, why I went back to New Orleans I don't know. I swore I'd never go back. Speaker 1: Why do you think you went back because you went away to, to live a broader life. To be connected (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, I, you know it's funny I think I went back to New Orleans and it seemed like New Orleans was changing. The World's Fair [1984 Louisiana World Exposition, New Orleans, Louisiana] was coming. The convention center [New Orleans Convention Center; New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] was being built. In 1982, '83 [1983], the economy was booming. Oil and gas prices were high. It looked like New Orleans was on a path to, I, I go back '83 [1983] is a great year economically, '84 [1984] is and then the price of oil dropped. The World's Fair went bankrupt. New Orleans then began to experience the beginning of some of the most difficult times in its history in the mid to late '80s [1980s]. Crime went up, the economy went down. It was very, very difficult. Speaker 1: At Barham, Barham and Churchill what type-- Speaker 2: Barham, B-A-R-H-A-M and Churchill I was involved in civil litigation and I got a chance to work with the founding partner of the firm, Mack Barham. Mack Barham was a retired justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court and just a, a brilliant dogged lawyer and I had a chance, I learned so much from just watching this man about law and procedure and handling a case and handling clients. I mean, he was an outstanding, fiery guy, a fighter, and I worked on--his, his specialty was expropriation cases, that means eminent domain cases, condemnation cases. So, he represented--in condemnation case a lot of times you represented land owners whose land was being taken by the state or the city for bridges and roads, and, and, and public purposes, and he was just a great, great lawyer. Speaker 1: So, and, and did, in New Orleans does that mean that most of those people were African Americans whose land was being-- Speaker 2: No, he represented a lot of people outside of New Orleans. In fact, one of the big cases we worked on was the Luling Bridge case [Department of Highways v. Luling Industrial Park, Inc.], which is a bridge across the Mississippi River about thirty or forty miles upriver from New Orleans where the fight was over the value of the land and you know Barham would come up with these theories that to value the land the state had to pay what the commercial highest and best use, I mean, he knew how to make the law and make the constitution work, you know, and he, and he had all these appraisers and all of these maps and all of these projections and, I mean, he handle these huge cases and I mean I think the Luling Bridge case he might have gotten two to three million dollars for his clients, which was an enormous sum of money, you know twenty-five years ago for pieces of land out in rural Louisiana and he was a very, he, he, you know I haven't hadn't seen him. I think he's still living, I mean I learned so much from watching him and I only worked at the firm about eighteen, almost a little bit less than two years, about twenty-one months. Speaker 1: What did he teach you that you didn't know about yourself even though you started there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know if he taught me so much about myself. I didn't learn that much from, I learned from him it was the chance to see a master at work. I was, I've always been impressed with people at the top of their game. You know Russell B. Long who was a U.S. senator who I worked for he was at the top of his game. My father [Ernest Morial] was at the top of his game. I was always, Muhammad Ali, I always, the, the people at the top of their game were people who I study and watch. You know whether it's Bill Gates or Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] or whether its Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], whether its Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] or you know Ken Chenault, anybody who's at the top of their game, whether it's LeBron [LeBron James], you know, or Michael Jordan or Magic Johnson, people, athletics, you know, top of their game, business people top of their game. Presidents, I study these presidents. I've studied Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]. I studied Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. Speaker 1: What did you study-- Speaker 2: I studied Bush. I don't necessarily study them from a philosophical standpoint. When you study a per- pe- person doesn't mean you study them 'cause you agree with them because you want to emulate them, you study them because in the case of Reagan, Reagan was a brilliant communicator. Speaker 1: A great communicator. Speaker 2: He was a brilliant communicator. When you look back on the simplicity and clarity in the way in which he presented his, his things, there was brilliance to it. Speaker 1: Is that how you reached the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I always, and I was not a Reagan supporter at all, but I understand when I got in office the value and the importance of communicating as a, as a fundamental tool or weapon in any job and in any work you have to communicate as a leader. Story_ID: 360261 Speaker 1: At the law firm [Barham and Churchill] did, did you have aspirations that were beyond being a lawyer at that time, I mean did you think this is a stepping stone (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I think, I think, I thought it was always a stepping stone, but I think it was a way to make money, a way to learn, and I figured that it was the beginning of my career. I knew not where it would take me. One thing I did learn to come back about myself at the law firm is that I like being in charge. You know at the law firm it was probably the only time in my professional career where I really worked for somebody else. It's not that the people I worked for I didn't like. It didn't have anything to do with that. I just liked the sense of being in control of my own destiny. And where I was working, while I was working at the law firm I also started a business, and my business was in the hat, a T-shirt, cap, and specialty items business, so we should talk about that next time. Story_ID: 343855 Speaker 1: Rolling continuing with Mr. Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial]. Speaker 2: Great to be back with you. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Welcome. Speaker 1: We are being observed also today [November 29, 2006] by Mildred Antenor and Neculai Burghelea, the videographer. Shawn Wilson, the interviewer. We'll pick up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One sensational team. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Picking up where we left off. Speaker 2: An A plus Emmy [Emmy Awards], Oscar [Academy Awards] award-winning team. Speaker 1: Well, thank you sir. Story_ID: 343856 Speaker 1: So y- you were going to talk to me about your companies. You were practicing law. You said that you realized that you functioned better in a leadership role than working at the law firm, although you liked them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I started, I actually, yeah I actually started my little first, it's really the second, third business I started coming out of law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] and it was a hat and T-shirt specialty business. T-shirts have always been a hot item and I bid on a contract to do license caps for the 1984 New Orleans World's Fair [1984 Louisiana World Exposition, New Orleans, Louisiana]. They selected three or four contractors and I was picked as one. Little did I know at the time that the license they gave me didn't authorize me to sell the caps on site, that I had to go market them to sh-, shops and stores mainly in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana], and, and in other places in the city. But it was great experience. I found a partner who was in affect a supplier. We worked together and that led to the opportunity to do business with the United States Football League [USFL] team, the New Orleans Breakers, and, and a number of political candidates and small businesses and others. So, I worked--basically it was a very small business. I had one employee, one full-time employee and operated out of a small warehouse in the French Quarter section of the city and business probably, for about two to three years. We did business and probably didn't make much money, but it was a great experience of being an entrepreneur and I was doing that while at the same time holding a full-time job at a downtown law firm. So, I'd leave the firm around six-thirty, seven in the evening and go over to my business and, and do work there. So, it was, you know, it was fun. It was a chance to be in charge. It was a chance to kind of pursue a dream. Speaker 1: What was your father [Ernest Morial] doing at the time? Speaker 2: My father was the mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana] at the time. I had just return back home from Georgetown University law school, and I was working for a law firm called Barham and Churchill. Interestingly, just last week the founding partner, Mack Barham died, just found out today through a fellow who called my brother [Jacques Morial], from my brother that he, he'd had passed. He was a great, great man. I had a chance to work with him at the firm he founded. He was a retired justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court. There's nothing like owning your own business. There's nothing like entrepreneurship. There's nothing like sort of being able to create and, and, and that sense of independence, but you learned, I learned at least, you know, in my business experiences that, my small business experience is that it is a tremendous amount of work and you can't delegate it to anybody else. You gotta do it yourself. Story_ID: 343857 Speaker 1: So from the law firm [Barham and Churchill], we spoke about the law firm quite--we're gonna move forward to 1986. In '86 [1986] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. I, I left the law firm--I, I don't know if I talked about when I left the law firm. I left the law firm in 1985. I spent almost two years there. I had a great opportunity while I was there to argue a major case before the Louisiana Supreme Court. I was twenty-six years of age, twenty-seven exactly and argued a major criminal law case, State v. Shropshire [State of Louisiana v. Lonnie J. Shropshire, Jr., 1985], which doesn't mean anything if you're not from Louisiana as much, but it's, it's a case which made police records, public records and thus available to the public and to newspapers and also to those who were accused of crimes. And it was a great experience to argue a case that no one thought I could win, least of all people in the law firm I was with and able to win the case and, and basically have a big victory as a very young lawyer. It was, it was a very important part of my early career. Speaker 1: And your father [Ernest Morial] was still mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana] at the time? Speaker 2: I guess he was still mayor at this time, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, did he--what input was he having on your life at the time? Speaker 2: I mean my father's role modeling and expectations for achievement, but I never really was directed to go into law, never really directed to go into public service. You know it was very interesting. I think expectations were set to achieve and to accomplish and something about public service and the things I did was just instilled in me as a young, as a young boy and it stayed with me, but, I was never pushed and it's interesting I was allowed to make my own decisions. Speaker 1: So when you took the case what made you think you could win it? If everyone else thought you-- Speaker 2: I just felt a sense that it was--you know I took the case not knowing that this sort of ancillary evidentiary issue would be a part of the case. No idea that, you know, and, and I think I went to go investigate the case and I said well I need to get these police reports and these police records and these were confidential. I said you mean the report that the police drew up when they arrested my client that that's confidential. I said well how do I know when the police officer or when the people who are testifying against my client get on the stand whether they told the police officer the same thing at the time of the arrest? Well I challenged it. You know I challenged it, lost at the trial court. Then I went and filed a civil law suit and won the civil law suit and then I had a conflict between a criminal law, criminal court, criminal court, a criminal judge's ruling and the civil judge's ruling. I went to court of appeal [State of Louisiana Court of Appeal for the Fourth Circuit] and lost there, went to the supreme court and won seven to zero. So, it was, I just felt it was an unfair practice. Speaker 1: Do you think race had anything to do with it? Speaker 2: You know I don't know if race had anything to do with this case quite frankly. I think the idea that-- Speaker 1: I mean the conduct or, or just the, the fact that the police reports are confidential. You don't think so, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Honestly, I don't think it really had anything to do, that had anything to do with race. I think it had to do with the fact they were just, that had been the history and the idea would be was sort of a pro law enforcement's approach. And I argued before the court interestingly that if police reports were public it would promote plea bargains. Because if the defendant knew, if an accused person knew what evidence the police had on them--see before the police reports were public record, it was almost a shot in the dark you don't know what anybody was gonna say. Well, that's not the theory. That's not the American system of justice. The American system of justice is that a trial is not supposed to be a surprise. It's supposed to be a fair sort of presentation and debate over facts in a search for the truth, which leads to a quest for justice. Story_ID: 343858 Speaker 1: So you left the law firm [Barham and Churchill] after that big case [State of Louisiana v. Lonnie J. Shropshire, Jr., 1985] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Left the law firm and-- Speaker 1: In '85 [1985]. Speaker 2: Started my own little practice. Speaker 1: What was the name of your practice? Speaker 2: It was just Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], attorney At law (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you hang a shingle out front? Speaker 2: I hang a shingle out, I, I rented space at the Liberty Bank [Liberty Bank and Trust Company] building on South Pierce Street and then later moved to 1 Poydras Plaza [Poydras Street]. Speaker 1: And what type of law were you focusing on. Speaker 2: I practiced. I had a general practice. My first client was Dollar Rent A Car, which was an African American owned rent a car franchisee, and the, the man who owned it also owned the radio station [WYLD Radio, New Orleans, Louisiana] in town. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Tom Lewis and Jim Hutchinson, and they got, and they asked me to help them. It started out really just notarizing some papers and then it turned into assisting them in a wide range of issues. It was a business client, you know, and it was a, it was exciting and I had Dollar Rent A Car and I eventually was able to hook up with Vern Keeler, V. Keeler and Company [V. Keeler and Company, Inc.; V. Keeler and Associates], which was basically a big, a large minority heavy and highway construction firm and I had, I had a very general practice and I did tort work and criminal defense work. It was a very traditional let me hang up my shingle and let me basically take whatever comes through the door. Speaker 1: So how-- Speaker 2: So I learned a lot and it was fun and at the beginning I didn't make a lot of money to pay my bills and keep things moving. Speaker 1: How many African American lawyers would you say were in New Orleans [Louisiana] at the time? Doing the same thing that (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a growing, in the '80s [1980s] it was a growing number. Speaker 1: It was a growing number. Speaker 2: It was a growing number and at the time the judiciary was changing. When I got out of law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], there was only one black trial judge at the state level of Louisiana, in, in New Orleans, one, only one, Judge Revius Ortique [HistoryMaker Revius Oliver Ortique, Jr.] who became a mentor of mine. When I-- Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: O-R-T-I-Q-U-E, Revius Ortique. When I left after serving eight years in mayor--as mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana], which is nineteen years after I finished law school, the trial bench, the trial courts in New Orleans were majority African American. So, they went from virtually being all white, which was not reflective of the city because at the time the city was 40 to 45 percent back, to being a majority black judiciary. When I started in 1983, started my law business, there was only one woman trial judge in the city. About the time 2002 came, I bet maybe a third of the judges were women. So, I got an opportunity during the time to witness the transformation of the judiciary and-- Speaker 1: What would say were the catalysts for that to happen? Speaker 2: The African American voters 'cause we had elected judges and the fact that you had a growing number of African American lawyers who were prepared and well qualified to be judges and the fact that there were voters to vote 'em in. Story_ID: 343859 Speaker 1: So as your business is growing at some point in '86 [1986] you decide to run for office. Speaker 2: No, I didn't run for office until (yawn), until 1990 and-- Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990]. Speaker 2: --between, and, and some of the significant things I got involved-- Speaker 1: I'm gonna guess you were a member, a board member of Louisiana American Civil Liberties Union [American Civil Liberties Union of Louisiana]. Speaker 2: I got, I was involved in all kind of stuff. I was on the Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Club of America], Big Brothers Big Sisters of New Orleans. I was involved in Louisiana American Civil Liberties Union. I led the stop Bork coalition where we were trying to stop Robert Bork from becoming a [U.S.] Supreme Court justice. We had a Louisiana coalition for that. I had an opportunity to become general counsel of an organization called the Louisiana Voter Registration/Education Crusade, which was a non-profit voter registration organization. We got involved in some very interesting litigation. One was a case I handled to stop the voter purges of 1986 and 1987 where there was an effort to basically clean up the voting rules by doing an address check and knocking off all these African Americans. So, we went to court, federal and state court, and challenged those purges and challenged that. I got involved as the chair of the plaintiff's committee in a supreme court [Louisiana Supreme Court] case that eventually went to the United States Supreme Court called Chisom versus Roemer [Chisom v. Roemer, 1991], which led to the election of the first supreme court justice [sic. first black supreme court justice] in Louisiana State history. So, I got involved in a whole variety of things. I got involved in things that were important to me. I got involved, I was inspired. My father [Ernest Morial] was a great civil rights lawyer in his day. I was inspired to do civil rights work as a part of my practice. I got involved as the general counsel for the Louisiana association of minority women and women owned businesses. I was the general counsel for the New Orleans association of independent taxicab drivers. Now mind you a lot of these organizations you were functioning as a general counsel as a bit of a strategic advice. I mean, they might have paid you two hundred and fifty dollars a month, five hundred dollars a month. You were not doing it because it was handsomely paid, especially relative to the amount of time they wanted. But, it was part of my civic engagement and it was the way I built my practice because I got a chance to meet so many people and network with so many people in my position with those sorts of organizations. Speaker 1: So, did those organizations then become beneficial for you when it was time for you to run? Because you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think they were. I met so many interesting dynamic community leaders. I mean, you know, the New Orleans Independent Taxicab Drivers Association must have had five hundred members. Louisiana Association of Minority Woman Owned Businesses had hundreds of members. I mean, this was a time of, you know, organization or engagement and I had an opportunity in my practice to do a lot of that to get involved in significant cases, while at the same time just trying to build a living. I mean I remember I was proud when in 1986 I got an office in 1 Poydras Plaza [Poydras Street] on the sixteenth floor, man I was downtown. I had just arrived and I guess it was a proud time because my father who had practiced law had an office in the neighborhood. He had an office in what was then in the 1950s and, and '60s [1960s] the black profession building in New Orleans, the Knights of Peter Claver building [Peter Claver Building, New Orleans, Louisiana] and so for the idea--I remember in 1986 there were very few African American lawyers who had their own offices downtown and I had that and it was, and I thought it was a significant accomplishment. You know when you look back on it you're basically, you know just practicing law on, on the sixteenth floor. But, it was good because it was close to the courthouse [New Orleans Civil District Court, New Orleans, Louisiana], close to City Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Story_ID: 343860 Speaker 1: When did you start eyeing political office? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did the idea come from? Speaker 2: One thing I may not have mentioned is in 1984 Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] ran for-- Speaker 1: We, we talked about when you worked with Jesse Jackson. Speaker 2: Jesse Jackson and I think I was always involved in my father's [Ernest Morial] elections, particularly his '77 [1977] election [to mayor of New Orleans, Louisiana] and to some extent his 1982 election and then Jesse's election, so I had run for and I was a delegate to the Democratic National Convention in '84 [1984], in '88 [1988], in '92 [1992], '96 [1996], and 2000. 2004 was the first time I've not been a delegate to the Democratic Convention almost since I've been a voter. Speaker 1: So, what doors would you say Jesse opened up for you having worked with him in '84 [1984]-- Speaker 2: I think Jesse opened up doors to a great network: Donna Brazile who although she's from New Orleans [Louisiana], [HistoryMaker] Minyon Moore, Yolanda Caraway. I can name so many people that, that I had an opportunity to meet that are still allies and colleagues and friends to this day through Jesse Jackson. I mean, we all joke, you know we were all kids, we were all young, you know we're out there with Jesse and the campaign was a crusade; it was a cause. And not only did I meet a lot of people I think it was great, a great primer on national politics-- Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: An inside look. Because a national campaign is in effect a collection of different campaigns. A national campaign is also a chance to deal with the tough issues, the biggest issues, life, death, war, life and death, war and taxes. National campaigns are played out on a philosophical stage, sometimes in a way that local campaigns, which are about sometimes crime and jobs, trash, and personality are sim- are simply not in many cases, so you know having been a delegate in '84 [1984] and '88 [1988] for Jesse and his historic runs I'd always and when I was in law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] I worked for Mickey Leland, I don't know if I mentioned that. I always, I had my eye on running for [U.S.] Congress, and I always figured I'd go back to Louisiana. Robert Drinan, Father Robert Drinan who was a member of Congress in the '70s [1970s] and a Jesuit priest and a law professor of mine at Georgetown. I remember him saying when I went to go see him before I left to go back to Louisiana, he said, "You go back to Louisiana, you go run for Congress, I'll see you back up here in a couple of years." Well, I ended up running for Congress in 1990. It was a historic opportunity because the seat in New Orleans, the second congressional district had been held by the Boggs family, by Hale Boggs and then by his wife Lindy Boggs for almost fifty years. One family had held the seat, and the seat opened up. Lindy Boggs decided to retire, but I began to make noises as though I was gonna run early in 1990. Eventually she retired about a week before qualifying took place that I qualify for run for Congress in a race where there were eleven or twelve candidates, busy field. I eventually--I was the youngest candidate. I-- Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: Thirty-two and got out there, ran, made the runoff, got into the second primary in a very, very close election and in the second primary I lost very narrowly to the current holder of the seat, [HistoryMaker] William Jefferson who at the time was eleven or twelve years older than me, who at the time was the president of the, chairman rather, of the Louisiana Legislative Black Caucus. He was a very powerful U.S. senator and I know I gave him a race that he never forgot and a race that he was favored and I was the underdog, but nonetheless I wasn't successful. But, it was a tough loss-- Story_ID: 343861 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're just gonna put him into the timeline because this happens in 1989. Speaker 2: It happened in '91 [1991] actually. Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 2: Ninety [1990], '91 [1991] and, and in fact I ran for the [U.S.] Senate. So, I run for [U.S.] Congress--let me just go back to that. I run for Congress and it's an exciting race and it's a great race and it's a fun race and I have a grassroots campaign and, and we just don't quite make it, but we run a very, very energetic campaign I remain proud of today because we had an incredible grassroots coalition. Speaker 1: Now just--you were gonna name those people that were important on that campaign (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I had (unclear) Wilson in that campaign. I'm trying to remember who else worked on that came, on that campaign, Vincent Sylvain, had Mary Jo Givens [ph.], Sandra Gunner, Bob Tucker [Robert Tucker], Jimmy Fitzmorris [James E. Fitzmorris, Jr.], had a great collection of people who were so helpful to me at that early stage in my career and then so many grassroots, you know soldiers who were involved in that campaign. And so we ran, made the runoff, defeated to get to the runoffs some very prominent people who didn't make it, state Senator John Johnston [J. Bennett Johnston], school board member Woody Koppel, now Judge Michael Bagneris, a whole host of very, very good candidates who ran for that race. But, it was a historic race because it was the first time the seat had really been open in fifty years. There was also the first chance that Louisiana had to elect an African American in Congress since Reconstruction, and our theme was, Morial for Congress and our future, and we ran basically trying to focus on the idea that I was trying to overcome the fact that I was thirty-two and everyone else who was running was probably in their forties and older. I was trying to create a thematic by saying that it was important to elect a young person to Congress so they'd have time to generate seniority and thus have power on behalf of the city [New Orleans, Louisiana] and on behalf of the state. Speaker 1: Looking back do you think that was a good strategy to run on? Speaker 2: Yeah I do. I think it was, it was a strategy available to me and I was trying to create contrast between an older person who obviously had more quote, political experience than me and, and, and, and my candidacy as a hope for the future. And I'll never forget I announced my candidacy at Gallier Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana] and had you know literally hundreds and hundreds of people there. It was enthusiastic. It was energetic. We had our campaign headquarters at 1441 North Broad Street. We--it was a campaign with a lot of support from the ministerial community, a lot of grassroots support, but it was, it was an uphill campaign 'cause when you run sort of as an underdog and a little bit of an upstart, I mean, I had great name recognition because of my family name and because of my father [Ernest Morial]. At this time, my father had passed, so it wasn't as though I was running with his support or in his shadow, but certainly with the family legacy and running with someone who'd been sort of a community leader and a community activist, lawyer, and I, I learned so much in that campaign. And in fact, I built the political base and the name recognition that pretty much carried me through my next two races. Story_ID: 343862 Speaker 1: After we were not successful I really had no immediate plans to run for office again and opportunity knocked in the form of a new state senate [Louisiana State Senate] seat with no incumbent that I was located in, that I lived in that had about 55 percent African American and about 45 percent white, white constituency and I ran that race. It was a very different kind of race because I'd run in an entire congressional district, you know, with five to six hundred thousand people, now I was running in a small senate seat that had about a hundred thousand voters in it. I ran a very grassroots campaign. I remember what we used to do every Saturday morning we'd get all our volunteers together with clipboards and basically these little slips and we went out knocking door to door in all the neighborhoods in the district. The 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] was in the district, parts of the 6th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], parts of the 5th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], public housing development. St. Bernard [St. Bernard Projects, New Orleans, Louisiana], Lafitte [Lafitte Projects, New Orleans, Louisiana], Iberville [Iberville Projects, New Orleans, Louisiana], and the Guste [Gustavo Apartments, New Orleans, Louisiana] high rise, a lot of areas that I had carried in the race for [U.S.] Congress. We get out there and we knock on doors and a Saturday morning and basically collect locations for lawn signs and then in the afternoon we go back out and put 'em all up. So, we pretty much lit up the district and I was running against at that time a candidate you now has, has become a friend to this day. He is now a judge a guy named Kern Reese [Kern A. Reese] and another guy named Nick Fereckio [ph.] and another woman who, so four candidates that I was able to win against those three candidates without the necessity of a runoff. I got 51 percent of the vote, and I remember the night of the election we didn't know that we had won without a runoff until the final precinct came in and we just avoided the necessity of a runoff by three hundred votes. It was a good victory because the, my primary opponent was being supported by city hall, the then mayor [Buddy Roemer] at the time and all his forces. He outspent me three to one, had a tremendous amount of television, and I remember I was just struggling and eking out dollars and at the very end we go enough money to do a little television via twenty-five thousand dollars, did a little commercial. I remember we shot it in my mother's [Sybil Haydel Morial] backyard, just me standing in front of the camera almost saying please vote for me and it was, it was a great race, I mean and-- Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: --but you know it was a time, George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] for both my Congressional race, and this is pre-Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and at the time the issues in my, in my, in my senate race was really the issue of public safety and crime. We had a horrible murder rate emerging in New Orleans [Louisiana], a crime rate, so those were big issues you know in that campaign. Story_ID: 343863 Speaker 1: So, how, where does David Duke fit into this (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now when I'm running for the [U.S.] Senate-- Speaker 1: And this is 19-- Speaker 2: Both times I ran in 1990 and in 1991 David Duke was running. David Duke in 1990 was running. While I was running for [U.S.] Congress, he was running for the United States Senate against Senator J. Bennett Johnston. When I was running for the Senate in 1991, he was running for governor. So, in 1991 one of the effects of Duke was it allowed us to create a cause around the election. In other words, we could rally people against Duke. So, we had record turnout with people coming out to vote against Duke, of course his supporters voting for him, but against Duke. So, the Duke factor was a factor in both of my elections in terms of stimulating the electorate to turn out and vote. In '90 [1990], he lost, made the runoff for the United States Senate. Here's the imperial wizard of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] making a runoff for the United States Senate against a very good competent hard-working U.S. senator named J. Bennett Johnston who had been there twenty years and who had delivered buckets of money for the state. And then the following year Duke loses and then he runs for governor, makes the runoff again. This time in a runoff against Edwin Edwards and Edwin Edwards trounces him, but Duke still carries the majority of the African American, a majority of the white, white vote statewide slightly and in New Orleans [Louisiana] too. So, I remember seeing Duke the night of my election to the Senate. I was going to the television station Channel 4 [WWL-TV, New Orleans, Louisiana] to give an interview and almost literally ran smack into Duke coming in, going out of the station. So, it was an interesting, then you know you wonder when people look back and say how did he do it, and what David Duke did is David Duke was a, was a skillful demagogue. He made welfare recipients and the welfare system the primary issue in his rhetorical campaign by telling people that the welfare system was the reason for the problems in Louisiana and in America, that if you, if you did something about all, all these welfare recipients then you'd get away with all, you'd, you'd solve all economic, education, and social problems. It was demagoguery, and I think we were stunned at how well he was able to do with that campaign. Story_ID: 343864 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You asked me if David Duke, if I learned anything. David Duke couldn't teach anybody anything but how to hate. He couldn't teach anybody anything but how to divide. He was just a low down, you know despicable presence on the political scene because his aim was to divide. His aim was to spew hate and it was embarrassing to me as a Louisianian that someone like that could do as well as, as they did in an election contest, particularly a high profile election contest. Speaker 2: So, what do you think that says about Louisiana? Speaker 1: I think it says you can fool a lot of people some of the time. I think it demonstrates that hate can sell, demagoguery can sell, division can sell, which is why when people spew that they have to be challenged on the spot. There can be no, no, no, no, no letup in challenging Duke and people like him in terms of what he represents. Story_ID: 343865 Speaker 1: What year is it 19-- Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991], '92 [1992]. I, you know I got elected to the legislature [Louisiana State Legislature] in 1991, elected to the Senate [Louisiana State Senate] and took over in 1992. It was an interesting time. We had a record number of black members in the legislature because of reapportionment. I think we had thirty-two. Edwin Edwards was coming in as the governor again. Casino gambling was a hot issue in the legislature. It was an interesting time. I spent two years in the legislature. I guess I got there and I just, I proposed a lot of legislation. Speaker 1: But, this wasn't necessarily new for you because you had visited, I mean you'd hung out there as a child. Speaker 2: I had spent a lot of, yeah right, I mean I had spent a lot of time around the legislature (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you knew who it worked? Speaker 2: --and I had a sense of how it worked and it was, it, it allowed me to go there and have an impact pretty immediately and wasn't, I was a rookie who wasn't a rookie. Speaker 1: So you received the Rookie of the Year [Legislative Rookie of the Year]? Speaker 2: Rookie of the Year award, which is given by the Capitol Press Corps and also the Education Senator of the Year which was given by the Louisiana Association of Educators. Speaker 1: And what do you think you did to deserve that one? Speaker 2: I had a bill, basically I was very consistent and vocal in supporting full funding for education and equity of education funding. Secondly, I had a bill, which didn't pass, but was a great bill to authorize high school principals to be registrars of voters. This is prior to--in Louisiana you couldn't until 1993 register to vote through the mail. You had to personally go to the courthouse and fill out the papers, personally, or every once in a while the registrar would have a drive at a shopping center or, in the community. So, I said well why don't we just let high school principals become (unclear) so they can register people in the office. Why don't we let college, you know, deans and counselors. And I think it was a bill that the education community liked and it wasn't successful, but it generated a fair amount of media. Speaker 1: The bill was not successful? Speaker 2: No, the bill was not successful. It was not successful. You know that the reactionary interests in the legislature said, they started waving the flag of, "Fraud, fraud. Some high school principals might commit fraud, register people who aren't old enough." You know fear sells. And it gave those that didn't want to vote for it an excuse to say no. Speaker 1: Also conservationists. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a chance when I was in the Senate to be, to serve on the committee of environmental quality [Environmental Quality Committee], which was a brand new committee. I also got an opportunity to serve as vice chair of the committee, and the chair of the committee was a veteran senator who, if we could say he didn't really want to be chair of the Environmental Quality Committee. He wanted to be chair of another committee, but he ended up with the committee. And so sometimes he, he was on a committee that met at the same time. I would be left to chair the meeting. So, I got a chance probably about half the time my first two years to actually chair the senate committee on environmental quality. And you know in those days a lot of special interests, oil companies and timber companies and paper companies and they controlled these committees and I was probably a little bit of a thorn in their side. But, I was a thorn in their side, I mean, my, my strategy was to amend, try to amend bills. Couldn't stop 'em. And it was, it was great because I was put in a position of getting opportunities to negotiate with a lot of these folks with a lot of these interests and I think that is why, you know there were not too many people in the legislature in those days who openly said I'm an environmental champion, and I was probably one of the few and so the Sierra Club gave me a nice award. Speaker 1: So, at that time did you recognize any problems with the, the city [New Orleans, Louisiana], I mean with the levies you know, and how low the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have to be honest I think people fundamentally trusted the idea that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers had built good levies. I mean because after Hurricane Betsy, during Betsy the levies were a nonexistent in many areas and very low in a lot of areas. So, after Hurricane Betsy, there was a process of raising the levies. I don't think that anyone thought about the strength of the levies. In fact, a lot of the levies in bulk had been raised. So you see the levy going up, you don't think as a, as a lay person as a civilian that hum maybe that levy's not strong enough. No matter how high it is, if it falls, if falls. What was an issue, but not a big issue back then was there was also concern about the wetlands and about the erosion of the marsh in Southeastern Louisiana, but in those days a lot of people scoffed at people who were concerned about the marsh, suggesting that that was a fringe issue, that it didn't have anything to do with flood protection, hurricane protection, or anything of that sort. Story_ID: 343866 Speaker 1: So I had two years and a little bit more in the Senate [Louisiana State Senate] and after my second year in the Senate I started entertaining the thoughts of running for mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana]. And it's funny because I, I sort of vowed at the time that I didn't want to run for mayor, that I was gonna stay in the Senate because I liked the Senate. Really being in the Senate is probably the single best political job I ever had. I mean, I enjoyed being mayor. It, it trumps everything, but the Senate was a place where you had colleagues. The Senate was a place of collegiality. The Senate was a place in those days where we could get something done. The Senate was a place where we had a nice coalition. The Senate was a place that I learned a lot, and you know then I decided and it was in effect-- Speaker 2: Who convinced you that you should run? Speaker 1: I don't really know who convinced me. It's almost like it was spontaneous combustion. I was very peaked, upset, not happy about the direction of the city. Crime had gotten out of control. There seem to be just complete lethargy in the government. I went to a meeting in City Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana] and it looked like they hadn't polished the floors. The bathrooms were dirty, you know, and you see these sorts of things and I think something went off in me and said you know what I can do a better job. The other thing is there were a number of people running for mayor. I call it, it was four people running, five people running, all of them were fifty and over and I was thirty-five and I'm, I sort of remember reading the paper, you know, and saying you know what are we gonna get if any of these guys win? It's gonna be more of the same, the same old things, no fire, no change, no nothing. And I decided to run very late. I remember I announced my candidacy on November 10th, 1993. The final deadline was December 1st, and got out there and just put the old grassroots Morial coalition together and we stormed the barracks. And it was, you know, I got in the race and several of the candidates, particularly some of the African American candidates were cross with me. They were mad with me. Why am I running? Speaker 2: Why were they? Speaker 1: Well they were jealous because they knew that my presence in the race meant that they, it made their job much more difficult. You know I had a-- Speaker 2: How much did the legacy play into your running? Speaker 1: I think the legacy played a lot into the idea that at thirty-five and with two years in the Senate I can be a credible candidate. I think that the brand name, the Morial name in New Orleans [Louisiana] represents probably progressive effective leadership, effective leadership. The idea of getting things done, making things happen, and the idea of strength and the idea of you know multiracial coalitions. I think that's what the Morial political brand represents in New Orleans. Story_ID: 343867 Speaker 1: So you mount a campaign [for mayor of New Orleans, Louisiana], I mean you, a successful campaign and you, you win what, what's the, what was the biggest challenge from the day you said okay I'm gonna run until actually--? Speaker 2: Gotta do something about crime. I gotta fix this police department [New Orleans Police Department]. The police department was corrupt. The police department--you had out of control murders and crime. We had drug problems and we had a dysfun- I have to fix this. I've gotta do something about this. I gotta get me a police chief. I've gotta come up with a plan. And that was really the defining issue of my time in office. Defining if I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that how you ran the campaign? Speaker 2: I ran on crime. Speaker 1: That you were going to--ran on crime, okay. Speaker 2: Public safety, jobs, and housing, same things I-- Speaker 1: Public safety, housing, and jobs? Speaker 2: Jobs and, but they were all tied together. I tied them together. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: Well, the crime problem, we had an abandoned housing problem. I said these cri- these abandoned housing are havens for crack dealers. One of the reasons why the crime rate was high is because there were not enough jobs. Tied them together. Said that the way to make our city safe was not just better police, but was a better criminal justice system and good solid positive things for youth to do, so that was our theme. Speaker 1: What were the other professional careers of the other gentlemen-- Speaker 2: They were mainly-- Speaker 1: --gentlemen you were running against? Speaker 2: You had one guy who was a city council [New Orleans City Council] member. You had one guy who was an elected tax assessor. You had another guy who was a state legislator. You had another guy who was a corporate lawyer. You had, those were the main candidates. And one thing I remember I think early in the campaign, this is one of the things that we had a debate at Walter L. Cohen High School [New Orleans, Louisiana], all-black high school. We go to the debate, we have the debate, but after the debate there is a mock election. You know like we're all there so all these kids are gonna vote and I think we had the mock election, I think I got 75 percent of the vote in the mock election and you these guys were so upset. I mean they were like just you know upset and you know what happens in a, interesting in a campaign particularly a local campaign you literally debate every day. We'd go to candidate, so you'd see your opponents all the time, so you know you'd, they, a lot of times you go to a debate and they put you in a room together so you don't be like you and your opponents in a room and so you know you kind of notice after a while some of these guys don't want to talk to you, you know you're saying, you, you, you're reading this chemistry, saying, "Uh-oh must be winning (laughter). I must be winning." Story_ID: 343868 Speaker 1: When do politics play into your job as, as, as, I mean as far as doing what you say you're gonna do, I mean when did you start, I mean do you know what I'm asking? I mean when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Politics is a process I mean po- the word politics has gotten a bad name. Politics is the art of democracy. That's what it is. It comes from the Greek word polis, or polis, P-O-L-I-S, which really means city and it's the art of practicing democracy and it gets a bad name because we think of it as only trading and making deals and making trade-offs, and that's always, negotiating and compromising are always a part of democracy. However, I think at least I viewed my career as starting with a stand, starting with a position, starting with a vision, starting with some views. I didn't walk into situations, very seldom without a stand, without a view, without a thought process about an issue. Whether it was the arts, whether it was animal protection, whether it was streets and neighborhood development, whether it was recreation, whether it was fire protection, whether it was public safety, whether it was hurricane protection, whether it was historic preservation you walked in, I walked in with a, with a vision, with a view, with a stand, philosophical core, and but, but understanding in the process of trying to move a ball. Mayor, an executive, has to work with a council, a legislative arm and, and that council for me was made up of seven people I had to in effect put together four of seven votes on major initiatives. That required at times give and take with members of the city council [New Orleans City Council], but I think in eight years we never lost a vote, never lost a vote. Story_ID: 343869 Speaker 1: In eight years [as mayor of New Orleans, Louisiana] I had, I had for the most part a generally supportive, pretty supportive city council [New Orleans City Council]. They supported me and you know we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what, what, what did, what did, what were the, you said crime, police corruption-- Speaker 1: Budget issues, crime issues, infrastructure. Tell you what we did, we had--well at first, my first big legislative package after being mayor was a public safety package. What did, what did it have in it? I had a curfew. I had-- Speaker 2: Let's talk about that curfew though 'cause it was pretty, I mean it, you, you were asking teenagers be home by nine o'clock was it? It was controversial. People thought you-- Speaker 1: It was somewhat controversial, although it's interesting because sometimes you do this when you make--but I remember before we did the curfew I had an idea, I had a lot of things we wanted to do. I said let's go do a public opinion poll before we announce it. Let's see how this community, because I was looking for, but it's important that the curfew got the publicity, but the summer jobs and the summer camps and the after-school programs is where we put the money. So, this was a, a, a tough love package. It wasn't me thinking--and the other thing is a destung the curfew by not arresting offenders. We picked them up, we brought them to a curfew center and we called their parents to come and pick them up. That's what we did. Speaker 2: Well, where did the idea come from? What, what, initiating the curfew-- Speaker 1: We're sitting around the table, we're sitting around the table in a, in a staff meeting and a strategy meeting and we're talking about this and we said okay let's talk about this curfew. What do you think? Well how can we do it? Well what are we gonna do? How do we do this? I said what's the downside? Well people don't want these kids to have records, said what can we do about that? Said why do we have to take 'em to jail? Can we get another place and just take 'em. So, things evolved, okay good that makes sense. So, we got a curfew center and we basically had people call the mamas, call the daddies, come and get your child, we have your child here. Enormously successful. It was highly, you know very, very positive and, but, but it's important it was combined with a whole lot of other things. It wasn't by itself. It wasn't standing alone, and I also combined it with a transfer of two hundred police officers from desk jobs to the streets. I took all the police officers out of City Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana]. I took all the police officers out of the court system, and I basically put sheriffs who were security guards in there because we had too many people, too many police officers in cushy jobs. Fifteen, twenty police officers working at City Hall for what, didn't make any sense. Police are for public safety, not for building security. So, we had a package and while at the same time we were looking for a chief of police. We conducted a national search. It took a long time. I ended up picking Richard Pennington, the current chief in Atlanta [Georgia], he turned out to be an excellent chief, probably the best chief in New Orleans' [New Orleans, Louisiana] history. And much to my regret and his regret after we left office and Ray Nagin took over with his police chief they pretty much dismantled all the progress we made. It didn't make any sense and the city paid for it. The city paid for it in, in an increased crime rate. It paid for it in many of the same problems that we had gotten rid of in the police department [New Orleans Police Department]. Story_ID: 343870 Speaker 1: During your, your eight year tenor as mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana], what do you consider to be the successes, the greatest successes? And the biggest failures (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The biggest success I believe is reducing crime by 60 percent, fixing a corrupt, broken down raggedy dysfunctional police department [New Orleans Police Department]. Number two changing the citizens' attitudes about the city from being negative to being positive. Third, housing, we increased the home ownership rate, we added fifteen thousand new homeowners. Fourth, jobs on a comprehensive basis. We built tourisms. I bought the ESSENCE Festival [Essence Music Festival] to New Orleans [Louisiana], two Super Bowls [Super Bowl XXXI and Super Bowl XXXVI] to New Orleans. The Super Bowl, Sugar Bowl became the college football championship game twice. The Satchmo Fest [Satchmo SummerFest], Jazzland [Six Flags New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], the Navy Technology Park [Research and Technology Park] at the University of New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana], relocated the Hornets [Charlotte Hornets; New Orleans Pelicans] basketball team from Charlotte [North Carolina] to New Orleans after building a downtown arena [New Orleans Arena; Smoothie King Center, New Orleans, Louisiana]. We had enormous success. I have no regrets whatsoever. If there's an issue, I wish I could have impacted it would have been schools and education, but the mayor has no control whatsoever over schools and education in New Orleans; it's a separate entity. So, in a sense you sort of pretend that you can do something about it, but I wish I had figured out a way, because I think that the key to most cities--I think the two most important functions of local government are education and public safety. Story_ID: 343871 Speaker 1: You, like your father [Ernest Morial] tried to change, to amend the charter so that you could have a third term, what did you want to do in the third term (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It may not have been, may not have been the best decision by me to pursue that. I liked the job and I frankly thought I was on, on a roll and had momentum and I thought I could do better than anyone else, not that I was indispensable, so I said let me do one more term I'm forty-two years old, forty-three years old, I'm still young enough, I still think I have a lot to contribute; I was defeated. It was risk. It was a gamble. It was like a fifty-nine yard field goal try, you know, it was like a half-court jump shot. Speaker 1: So, do you think you build on your, built on your father's legacy? Did you add, did you finish anything that he had started years ago? Speaker 2: I think he started police, he started police, he started police reform. Speaker 1: With that, when he did the strike for the Mardi Gras. Speaker 2: He started police reform, and he was not able to succeed on many, many counts because he had encountered a lot of resistance from entrenched interests in the police department [New Orleans Police Department], and at some point he may have gave up on really, really changing the police department. I think I picked up that ball eight years later and made it happen. I think that he had a great record on economic development. A lot of the new buildings downtown, the Riverwalk [New Orleans, Louisiana], New Orleans Centre [New Orleans, Louisiana], good bit of, good deal of things, good, good, good deal of important projects took place and I think I continued the legacy of pursuing large, large scale projects, which a mayor has to do; they're complex to put together. Story_ID: 343872 Speaker 1: On your watch, the, didn't Hurricane Andrew? Speaker 2: Hurricane-- Speaker 1: Was it Andrew? Speaker 2: --Georges [Hurricane Georges] took place. I was the first mayor to have to evacuate the city. We did it successfully. We-- Speaker 1: How did you do it? Speaker 2: We had a good plan. We did it by working with the state government, with FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency], and with the surrounding parishes. We did it by starting early, forty-eight hours out, not equivocating or waiting before we ordered the evacuation. We did it by opening the Dome [Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana] and the Convention Center [New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] as shelter of last resort and providing food, water, and medical supplies at those facilities, which a fundamental failure in Hurricane Katrina. People with no food, people with no water, people with no medical supplies for days. It's a humanitarian outrage for that to have happened. It didn't need to happen that way, even though (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay I want you to give some blame to people. Speaker 2: Hurricane Georges, well I, I mean I'm very-- Speaker 1: Or just, I mean, if you had been-- Speaker 2: Let me tell you something-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I ful- I believe-- Speaker 1: If you had been doing the job, what would have been done differently? Speaker 2: I'd of ordered the evacuation earlier, no question. I would have figured out a way to have food and water. I would have demand that the National Guard mobilize in the city before the hurricane hit and got them there beforehand to provide anything needed. If they weren't there beforehand, I would have asked the president and FEMA to immediately helicopter them in. I would have gotten food, water. No one could have stopped the bust of the levies. The question is how did you respond? The question is what did you do? That's the question and I'm not gonna suggest that if I had been quote, there all would have been great, all would have been saved, but what I saw is in action. I saw lack of compassion. I saw a failure of leadership. A perfect storm of federal officials, state officials, local officials basically neglecting, equivocating, waiting, pointing fingers. It is one of the great crises and tragedies in American history. Speaker 1: Do you feel the city can be rebuilt? Speaker 2: The city can be rebuilt, but it's long and hard and tough. Speaker 1: Twenty years, thirty years? Speaker 2: At least. It may never be like the old New Orleans [Louisiana] we love, it may never be. People have been displaced, many neighborhoods are, are fighting for their very survival, but the will of the people, the people who love New Orleans are determined to see it rebuilt. The question is what will it look like and what will it be like? Speaker 1: Why did it appear to us that there are so many poor people? Speaker 2: There are, but what a lot of people don't realize is that they saw it concentrated for the first time. New Orleans has a high rate of poverty, but so does Cleveland [Ohio] and so does St. Louis [Missouri], so does New York City [New York, New York], so does Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so does Baltimore [Maryland], so does Atlanta [Georgia], so does Oakland [California], but you saw it. Let no, people shouldn't pretend that the poverty they saw was just a New Orleans thing. And then again if you take people and they're running from their homes with no clothing and they spend a day and a half with no facilities to use, no grooming, no change of clothes, everybody is gonna look bad, everybody is gonna look bad. There is a lot of poverty in New Orleans, no doubt. Speaker 1: So, when you walked into the stadium, was it the Dome or the stadium? Speaker 2: The Dome, the Dome, the Dome. What in Georges or in-- Speaker 1: No, the, the, didn't you, did you go to the one in New Orleans? Speaker 2: No, I didn't go down during, during the storm. Speaker 1: I saw some pictures of you at one I couldn't-- Speaker 2: That was at the Astrodome [Houston Astrodome; NRG Astrodome, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to Houston [Texas] a week after the storm where they people had been evacuated to, to go see my old constituents and to go just try to comfort people. Speaker 1: And your reception? Speaker 2: I was, I was, I felt very well received, I mean it was, it was heart-warming for people to--people just wanted someone to come see 'em. Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] came that same day. Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] came that same day. Speaker 1: While being-- Speaker 2: George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], the father, came that same day. Story_ID: 343873 Speaker 1: What do you feel your responsibility is now to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To do whatever I can from my position as president of the National Urban League, to affect public policy and so that our efforts in the Gulf Coast, mainly our efforts to, through our affiliate, we have job training programs, financial, literacy programs are as effective as they can be. Speaker 1: So, just to back track a little bit the stadium in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Was it the stadium in New Orleans, that was, or the convention center that was named after your father [Ernest Morial]? Speaker 2: Convention center named after my father, the Ernest N. Morial Convention Center [New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was one of the triumphs of his administration. He built Phase I and started on Phase II, and under my administration we built Phase III. That was named after him in 1992. Story_ID: 343874 Speaker 1: At the end of the first term [as mayor of New Orleans, Louisiana], your decision to go for a second term you knew you'd win (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah it was an easy decision and we had a historic reelection, got 80 percent of the vote. Speaker 1: Who'd you run against the first time? Speaker 2: Donald Mintz. Speaker 1: Was it Donald Mintz? Speaker 2: Donald Mintz. Speaker 1: Who died. Speaker 2: Died in 1996. He was a prominent lawyer-- Speaker 1: He worked for the Defamation League [Anti-Defamation League]? Speaker 2: --and he worked, he, he was a civic activist and he was a founding partner of a law firm, the McGlinchey law firm [McGlinchey, Stafford, Mintz, Cellini and Lang; McGlinchey Stafford], and he was a tough opponent, a resourceful candidate, a smart guy. We had a very, very hard fought, it was like Ali-Frazier [Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier]. It was one, one, one battle, one historic battle for the big ring in New Orleans [Louisiana] and we were able to win the first time with 54, 55 percent. Speaker 1: Did it ever get dirty between you? Speaker 2: It was a very, very hard-hitting, a dirty campaign by, by, by convention, but it was a sharp campaign because he utilized what I thought were inappropriate tactics. He-- Speaker 1: Which were? What do you consider inappropriate? Speaker 2: Basically he put out these racist flyers and-- Speaker 1: What made them racist? Speaker 2: Well, this is what he did, he, you know he, and this got revealed because one of his campaign aides got indicted and charged with putting out and violating the campaign laws. But what basically happened is that he began--these anonymous began to emerge, very negative flyers began to emerge on all of the African American candidates in the African American community and accused a guy of being corrupt. It showed another guy's address. It said all kind of nasty things about me and my family and all these flyers started, they started showing up on people's doors, very slick flyers, very negative. They tried to be somewhat humorous, but they were very negative. Donald Mintz apparently when the flyer issue became a public issue took the position, he says well I, you know 'cause everyone started looking at each other saying, "Who's putting these flyers out?" Someone says, "Well who didn't get any?" Donald Mintz says, "Well they put out flyers on me too. The flyers on me are anti-Semitic," so there were anti-Semitic flyers being put out on Donald Mintz. Come to find out he was distributing anti-Semitic flyers on himself. Then, he took the flyers and he direct mailed them to people across the country to raise money. So, this kind of got exposed. Speaker 1: And that is a violation of Louisiana law (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Violation--Louisiana law requires you to, at the time required you, any campaign literature had to have a disclaimer, paid for and authorized by. You couldn't put out an anonymous flyer and so he it got very hard-hitting, and I took him to task. Speaker 1: What did you-- Speaker 2: Basically took him to task and, and said that he was, that he would do anything to get elected, that he was in fact an insolent figure. Story_ID: 343875 Speaker 1: Did race (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I respected him [Donald Mintz] and yeah race did play an issue. Speaker 1: How big or how small? Speaker 2: It was a big, I mean race has been an issue in every New Orleans [Louisiana] election for fifty years. It's an issue even when you have two black candidates it's, it's an issue. It was an issue when you had two white candidates. In the old days when two white candidates ran against each other, invariably one would accuse the other of being a Negro sympathizer, an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] sympathizer and it's funny you know back in the days if you look at the old archives of Louisiana politics you'd see they put out flyers on a guy showing a guy on the same looking, looking, look, making it appear as though the guy is talking to Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Say Sam Jones at NAACP meeting with Martin Luther King (laughter), I mean those were the tactics. When black candidates became, we've had a few races where the black candidates ran against each other, then you'd have the reverse phenomenon where you'd have one candidate who'd run mainly as the candidate of the white community and the other who run as mainly the candidate of the black community. You can't get away. You know a lot of people like to sweet talk, nice talk, but you know race it's not a factor, it's not the only factor. It's not a dominant factor in every voter's mind, but it's a dominant factor in the election, dominant factor in my, on my re-election. It was interesting I had a token opposition and I carried probably, I got 80 percent of the vote, and I carried 80 percent of the precincts in the city, but 20 percent of the precincts I didn't carry were conservative precincts who voted for a nobody candidate over me. It was stunning. But, I got 80 percent of the vote, which was the largest first primary victory by anybody in a hundred years. So, when you win you win and when you win you're happy and when you win you're glad, but you know post, post analysis and that gave me a lot of momentum. My approval rating remained at 70 percent the entire time I was in office [as mayor]. The community really stuck with me, a broad coalition. We had support in the white community, support in the black community. We had support in the business community. We had support amongst labor unions. We had broad-based support, because I think we were able to articulate a common vision, public safety, jobs for the community, and let's rebuild the housing. Let's make New Orleans progress. Story_ID: 343876 Speaker 1: Second term [as mayor of New Orleans, Louisiana] as effective as the first term? Speaker 2: I think it was effective because, mainly because many projects that we began to work on in the first term came to fruition, the completion of phase III of the convention center [New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana], the completion of police reform, the building of the Jazzland theme park [Six Flags New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], the Navy Technology Center [Research and Technology Park, New Orleans, Louisiana] opened, the street car on Canal Street came together in our second term, the major improvements at the airport [New Orleans International Airport; Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana]. The most important thing I think we did is we got most of our big things started in the first term, not everything, and they came to fruition, but second terms you don't, it's hard to maintain the continuous excitement. It's hard to maintain that on an ongoing basis. So I noticed, you know, probably in my last year in office a little of the enthusiasm. People began to have a great sense that success is automatic, you know that you lose a little momentum. People start moving away from you when you get to the end. It's just a natural occurrence. You see it with presidents. You see it with governors. You see it with mayors, but at the end of the day the final poll I took just a few months before I left office had a 70 percent approval rating. You know, I, I got great satisfaction-- Speaker 1: How did you get the Hornets [Charlotte Hornets; New Orleans Pelicans] to leave Charlotte [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: That was team work. I had the gov- the governor [Murphy J. Foster, Jr.] and, the governor at the time and I were really on the same page and he was willing 'cause the state owned the arena [New Orleans Arena; Smoothie King Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] and had the incentives to give the team. We pursued it doggedly. I mean, we had gone after the Minnesota Timberwolves my first year in office. That was completely unsuccessful. We went after the Vancouver Grizzlies [Memphis Grizzlies], and they ended up in Memphis [Tennessee]. And then I had six months to go in office Doug Thornton who ran the arena and the Dome [Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana] called me up and said, "I gotta come see you." He said, "I think we have a shot at another team," and I remember saying, "Doug come on man really." He said, "I think we can make this one happen." I said, "You know I'm 100 percent let's go do it, let's go, let's go see if we can do it." So, we worked on it and it happened and we had a historic coalition and one of the keys was we had a building, a first class arena with no debt that no one had a major lease to that was available to the team. Secondly, the team absolutely, the owners of the team absolutely were gonna leave Carolina. They had been unsuccessful in getting a referendum to build a new stadium passed. The owner of there, one of the owners up there had run into some public relations issues, and then the second owner Ray Wooldridge, who was a businessman from Georgia, part owner of the team, really drove, he loved New Orleans [Louisiana]. He still lives in New Orleans, even post Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]. He loved the city. He really drove the decision to New Orleans. It was a great success and I'm a sports guy, I'm a basket, played basketball, played football. I as a boy went to the New Orleans Buccaneers games, New Orleans Buccaneers, the old ABA [American Basketball Association] team. I remember you know going to see Connie Hawkins, going to see you know all those great ABA greats, you know Larry Brown I remember who was the famous coach, was a player back in those days, Cliff Hagan. You know the, the great Jimmy Jones, Steve Jones. I remember as a boy growing up I, I just, you know, I think a lot of us felt New Orleans was a big league sports town and we ought to have a basketball team. So, it was team work. I think it was perseverance because we had gone after teams before and I think it was a little bit of lady luck, which counts. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 343877 Speaker 1: After September 11th you were able to successfully negotiate to push everything. What did you do? With the-- Speaker 2: Well let me just say this. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One part that we probably haven't talked about is my involvement with the United States Conference of Mayors, which was a great part and important part. I got to be president of the Conference of Mayors. My father [Ernest Morial] had been president of the Conference of Mayors. Only the Morials and the Daleys [Richard J. Daley and Richard M. Daley] are the two father and son teams who had, who had been president of the Conference of Mayors. And I got involved with the conference my first year and being involved in the conference gave me an opportunity to put New Orleans [Louisiana] in the national spotlight a little bit, gave me an opportunity to be involved in national issues and when 9/11 [September 11, 2001] took place I was actually the president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors and got an opportunity to work with the City of New York [New York] and Mayor Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani] and mayors across the country in doing something about the security issues. We federalized airport security. We pushed for the creation of the [U.S.] Department of Homeland Security, a whole range of things like that. So, the Conference of Mayors was, was a very important part of my--I really enjoyed being president. I really learned a lot and met a great network of friends and people and felt like we had impact because the Conference of Mayors was a bipartisan organization. The Republicans and Democratic mayors could work together. Speaker 1: So of that Conference of Mayors you got to see all of the black mayors from other big cities. Speaker 2: Got a chance to see all the mayors of black and white, all of the mayors, Hispanic and Asians, all the mayors because the U.S. Conference of Mayors is the big multi-partisan, multi-racial. Got a chance to meet so many great Norm Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice], [HistoryMaker] Wellington Webb, Ed Rendell [Edward G. Rendell], Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], Tony Williams [Anthony Williams], Tommy Menino [Thomas Menino], Paul Helmke [Walter Paul Helmke, Jr.], Richard Daley, Dennis Archer, [HistoryMaker] Ron Kirk, Bill Campbell (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's the gentleman's name in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] Marion, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry? Speaker 2: Marion Barry, but of course I've known Marion Barry because Marion Barry was a contemporary of my dad's, and they were friends in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], so I've known Marion Barry for many, many, many years. And so yeah, so many great colleagues, Sharon Sayles Belton, the mayor or Minneapolis [Minnesota] she happened to be, former mayor of Minneapolis happen to be here in our office today 'cause she's doing some work now with the Homeownership Preservation Foundation. So, you know we had, we had an incredible group of mayors in the '70 [1970], in the '90s [1990s] rather, credible group of mayors who we saved the Community Development of Block Grant program [sic. Community Development Block Grant]. We saved NEA [National Endowment for the Arts]. We got the Welfare to Work legislation on the books. We, not welfare reform, but Welfare to Work. We, we, we got the community oriented policing passed. We were a force. Speaker 1: So, do you think Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] presidency had anything to do with the way things were running? Speaker 2: Yeah I do. I think Clinton was a great president. I think Clinton became a great president. I think Clinton his first year or two wasn't, had, he had struggles, but when he focused and when he really developed a partnership with the mayors is really when he flowered. He was, Bill Clinton is an incredibly bright guy, incredibly engaging guy, and, and I think a creative leader and had a lot of appeal and I think he will go down as one of the great presidents of the last fifty years. When people will take a look at his accomplishments, you know, balancing the budget, creating a surplus, strengthening the economy, the empowerment zone program, so many things. Story_ID: 343878 Speaker 1: Did you have any idea what you would do after leaving office [as mayor of New Orleans, Louisiana] with a 70 percent approval rating (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I left, I left office I needed a job. I had a baby. I had a one-month old [Mason Morial], I was term limited, and I, I wanted to go into the private sector. Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this. Was it a crushing defeat not to get the amendment on the charter or-- Speaker 2: No. Let me tell you something I knew we weren't gonna win after 9/11 [September 11, 2001] particularly the election took place in October. I knew we were going to be unsuccessful because it just, people's foc- were not focused on the referendum and it, it was not a crushing defeat and I immediately began to think about what I would do and I got an opportunity through a great friendship with a lawyer by the name of Sam LeBlanc [Samuel A. LeBlanc III] had an opportunity to join a great law firm Adams and Reese [Adams and Reese LLP], a great New Orleans [Louisiana] law firm, great Louisiana institution, great group of lawyers doing important things, building a regional law firm and I spent a year there and I enjoyed and it was a chance to transition and-- Speaker 1: Now that's interesting, a chance to transition. Speaker 2: Yeah I figured when I joined the firm that I'd be there three to five years. I had no idea, no eye, no thought, no notion of looking for another job. I wanted to build a law practice and low and behold the opportunity to interview for presidency of the league, the National Urban League came up. Speaker 1: How did that come up, I mean there must have been hundreds of candidates (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got a call from, they must have been I, you know I got a call from someone I know who said, "You know the presidency of the National Urban League is up," oh said, "You ought to go after that." I said, "Well how, how do you go after that? It's not really a job you apply for is it?" He said, "Well I'm gonna call somebody who is on the search committee and tell them they ought to take a look at you." I said, "Well go ahead," thinking really nothing of it, thinking you know this will be interesting, but don't hold your breath, low and behold a couple of months later I get a call from the chairman of the search committee who says you know, "Your name has been given to us. Do you think you could come to New York [New York] and interview with us?" I said, "Fine." Story_ID: 343879 Speaker 1: How do you even interview for a job like this [president, National Urban League]? Speaker 2: You really, it's really hard to interview for a job like that 'cause it's really a conversation. So, I flew up. I'll never forget the first interview was the same day of the Final Four [NCAA Final Four] in 2003, same exact day of the Final Four and it was also the, the day of my son's [Mason Morial] first birthday, which is good luck so we, we had to, knew we were gonna, we had to hold his birthday party the day before and on April the 6th and I flew up and came to New York [New York] and went to a law office in Midtown [New York, New York] and interviewed with four or five people and it was just delightful and interesting, it was an interesting conversation. Speaker 1: Can you tell me anything about the conversation? Speaker 2: I mean, I, I don't remember tons about the conversation except it was a conversation about me and about the league and about civil rights and about vision. It was that kind of conversation. And as I left they said, "Well we, we'll probably be in touch with you to invite you back." I said well that's a good sign. I didn't hear from them. They called me back and said, "Can you come up you know this Saturday." So, I said fine, meet with the whole search committee. So I go back to the same law office thinking I'm going to be meeting with about ten people or five people or seven people. I walk in the room it's about twenty people. I'm like whoa. Interviewed for about two hours. I felt like I did okay. All these interviews make you nervous, they're tough and a lot of good questions, a lot of engagement. Speaker 1: What kind of questions do they ask though? Speaker 2: You know I mean they questioned everything from why do you want this job and what could you do for us and-- Speaker 1: And I mean they say to you, "Why do you want this job?" and you say to them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and what do you think, what do you think about our organization. Yeah they said why, 'cause you think you can, you think you can provide direction and leadership that is consistent with your commitment to equal justice in public policy that the tremendous personalities of the Vernon Jordans [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and the Whitney Youngs who've held this position, are role models of mine. And after all there have only been eight presidents in almost a hundred years. There have been seventeen U.S. presidents. So lo and behold I interviewed with this big group of folks and it's a wonderful interview. I rushed to LaGuardia [LaGuardia Airport, New York, New York], I fly back to New Orleans [Louisiana] and I get back my wife [HistoryMaker Michelle Miller] says, "How'd it go, how'd it go." I said, "I thought I did good." She said, "They're gonna call you tomorrow." Speaker 1: On a Sunday? Speaker 2: Exactly. That's exactly what I said. I said, "Ain't nobody's calling," I said, "Michelle nobody's calling me on a Sunday about a job." Truth of the matter is early Sunday morning about nine thirty the phone rings and you know the phone doesn't ring on Sunday morning unless it's my mama [Sybil Haydel Morial] calling, or my daughter [Kemah Dennis-Morial] calling, and my wife answers the phone and she picks up the phone she says (gesture). I think she's joking me, so I pick up the phone and it's the chair of the search committee. He says well this is it we want to talk to you about becoming the next president of the league and the rest-- Speaker 1: Well what do you do you drop (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The rest is history. Speaker 1: You drop the phone, you fall to your knees Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was a great opportunity--you fall to your knees--I said wow, but then they said, "Wow we want you to start right away." And of course (yawn) my involvement, excuse me, in the process had been completely confidential 'cause I had a job [at Adams and Reese LLP] and I had a job with a group of people I respected and liked and an opportunity and here I was less than a year later and I'm gonna pick up and leave. But, here it is, it's the job you can't say no to. Speaker 1: And that I'm sure they understood. Speaker 2: They understood it. They were disappointed, but they certainly understood it. Story_ID: 343880 Speaker 1: This job [president, National Urban League] in a lot of ways definitely has more prestige possibly than, or what are the differences between (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's a national post. It's the non-profit world versus government. It's got the sort of sterling history of being one of the nation's historic civil rights organization, but it's a smaller organization. You know you run the city, New Orleans [Louisiana] with its outside agencies as close to a billion dollar operation, where you, you're running a very complex organization to running a, a, an organization which by non-profit standards is a nice size, but by the, but in comparison to a large government agency or large private sector company it's relatively small. So, one of the challenges you face in this kind of work is a necessity to focus your energies and focus your efforts 'cause you can't do everything. You know you have a limited staff. You have an affiliate network, which is great, but I mean you're community based. You're a network of community-based organizations. You are a, you know, incredibly, you know, you have an incredible brand of history and you have, it's, the, the, the job and the cache of the organization is a door opener. It's a door opener to the business community. It's a door opener to the political community. It's a door opener to civil rights. So, in that sense that job has a level of prestige and a level of, you know, there are only a handful of national civil rights organizations, you know, six, seven national, not ten, not twenty, not thirty, not forty. So in that sense you're in an exclusive sort of club and you've also got here the, just the history of the place. You see the, the people, the involvement it's a great deal of responsibility, but you know being mayor I feel prepared, it's preparation for wanting to do anything. If you can run a city, you can run anything mainly because-- Speaker 1: Can you run a country? But go ahead mainly because. Speaker 2: The pressure. What you do as mayor is you make decisions with pressure. There are very few decisions that you have the luxury of long thoughtful deliberation, you know. You do on some, but usually you're pressure tested every single day. So, I've learned to, you know, in this job I don't have to make every decision right away, but I try to move things because moving things fast, the transformation of this organization means moving fast or picking up the pace, the pace of change, the pace of transformation. Story_ID: 343881 Speaker 1: What are the challenges here? Speaker 2: Raising money. Raising the money and assembling the resources you need to do everything you need. The problems are massive. The social and economic problems that face the urban community and that face black America are significant, they're massive. Twenty-five percent poverty rate, a high unemployment, high, high school dropout, myriad of difficult social problems. The problems are massive. The programs are far beyond the ability of any single community-based organization to solve them all and that's what tough and that's what's challenging. Speaker 1: So, it boils, it boils down to money, having enough money. Speaker 2: Well it boils down to not only money, but resources are important, resources and vision and the ability to lead and mobilize people. But, if you ask, you know the great challenge is to have the resources you need. I mean from where I sit my job is in large measure resource development job, money, people, support, vision, and direction. That's the job [as president of the National Urban League]. Speaker 1: What are the rewarding parts of the job? Speaker 2: I've always been satisfied by seeing things that you work on come to fruition, the new programs, the changed lives. Those things have had just a tremendous impact, give me a great joy, great satisfaction. The, the, the idea that we can take a historic organization and transform it, prepare it, make it relevant for the 21st century, but really ultimately in changing people's lives, that's where the joy is. Speaker 1: So, let me ask you this, we, you talked about 25 percent poverty and education, like how do you go about or how, how do you go about changing those things? Speaker 2: You've gotta work directly with people in communities. Speaker 1: So when you came here you said you had a five prong approach to-- Speaker 2: We have a five prong approach: education, economic empowerment, health and quality of life, civic engagement, and civil rights. Of the five, the lead horse for us is economics. Job training, housing, financial literacy. Entrepreneurship and business development is a lead horse. It all leads to that. Education is about preparing people to be fully productive citizens fundamentally. Story_ID: 343882 Speaker 1: When you look back over what you've been able to accomplish so far what stands out most for you? Speaker 2: The ability to work on things I love and to get paid to do it. To feel that I've been able to use the talents that God gave me and the values that my parents [Sybil Haydel Morial and Ernest Morial] instilled in me and a sense of the times that I am blessed to live in to try to make a difference in people's lives. Everything that I've had an opportunity to do professionally I never had a plan. I never had a master plan. I didn't approach my career in that fashion. I did things that I thought were interesting. I did things that I thought were challenging. I think the toughest assignment I've had was serving as mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana]. Ultimately, that job is definitional in my career, but rewarding when the chance to be president of the Conference of Mayors [U.S. Conference of Mayors] and the president of the National Urban League and since I'm only three years in you have to come back and talk to me in another five or six years to really get a sense. But, the reason why I say rewarding is because it's a chance to operate on a national level and to impact communities from coast to coast. But, there is perhaps nothing more special than playing a leadership role in your own hometown where you know the people, where your DNA and your history is rooted, and that's what being mayor was for me. Speaker 1: How has New York [New York] been for you? Speaker 2: This has been an experience of learning, an experience of discovery, an experience of connecting with old friends and making new relationships. It has been an energizing experience. New York is the center of the universe. It's a place of so many and varied things. There's all sorts of business and economics here. There's all sorts of politics here. There's world affairs. There is a myriad of communities. There is a powerful African American community, a Caribbean American community, all sorts of European American communities, a Latino community. It's interesting to be a New Yorker now because as a visitor to the city over my entire life I very seldom ever left Manhattan [New York]. I think I've been to Brooklyn [New York] once, had only been to Queens [New York] to go to the airports, and never really been to the Bronx [New York], never been to Staten Island [New York]. And you realize New York is huge, that it's almost a nation unto itself, a republic if you will, if you look at Metro New York. Story_ID: 343883 Speaker 1: What are you hopes for the black community, the African American community? Speaker 2: I hope for the black community economic self-sufficiency, economic independence, economic, and I also hope for the black community that we can achieve full and equal justice and our rightful place in American society, which we are a ways off from. But, so much of what I think is if we achieve economic parity, I think that many of the social and economic problems are symptomatic of the lack of economic parity. They will not go away, but I think if we had economic parity many problems would dissipate and reduce. Story_ID: 343884 Speaker 1: This will be the last question. You're not a man who said, you haven't, you, you didn't have a plan, you didn't, your career hasn't been a plan it's all simply fallen into place, you've been where you needed to be to receive what you needed to receive, being at this place in your life and the tenure for this job [president, National Urban League] on average is what eight years. Speaker 2: Ten years. Eight to ten (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ten years. So you're three years in. Seven years from now you'll still, still be a very young man, what do you see yourself doing? Speaker 2: I'm gonna follow my passions because while I haven't had a plan I followed my passions. I've followed my passions. I've followed my interests, and I think I followed the guidance of God. I mean when I say that I mean it's the silent sort of beating voice, which directs you and guides you. I'm gonna simply be able to continue to contribute throughout my life and contribute to be a change agent, continue to make a difference. That's my hope for myself and, and to continue to be one who puts his family and his community first. Story_ID: 343885 Speaker 1: I forgot to talk about your wife, Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Miller]. What year did you guys meet (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh. My wife, my wife and I married on September 11, 1999. We started going out in 1995. My wife has been a wonderful supporter and partner, partner. Speaker 1: She herself is a journalist. Speaker 2: She's a journalist and a very accomplished woman in her own right. Speaker 1: Is she working with CBS News? Speaker 2: She works for CBC News now here in New York [New York] in the northeast bureau. We have two beautiful children, Mason [Mason Morial] who is four and a half and Margeaux [Margeaux Morial] who's almost one and then I had an older daughter Kemah [Kemah Dennis-Morial] who's twenty-four and a graduate of Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts], so we have a great family and my wife is a confidant and an advisor. She is enormously talented, and she has been a very important part of my life the last ten years...