 Story_ID: 187600 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns and observing is Mary DeBrunner [ph.]. Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Renetta Earldeanne McCann, so that's R-E-N-E-T-T-A, E-A-R-L-D-E-A-N-N-E, McCann, M-C-C-A-N-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and now McCann is your married name, right? Speaker 2: It's my married name. Speaker 1: What was your maiden name? Speaker 2: Walker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: W-A-L-K-E-R. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on December 8, 1956 at Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is I am the CEO for the Starcom Mediavest Group and my territory is the Americas. So I work across North America and Latin America. Speaker 1: Okay, we'll later on explain what that is (laughs). Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 25, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At the present time, we are in one of the conference rooms at my offices at 35 West Wacker Drive in Chicago. Story_ID: 187601 Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, hamburgers. Speaker 1: Okay, I read that, do, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Scottsdale [Arizona]. Speaker 1: And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: That's easy, well, no it's hard, actually I have so many. So I, I sort of cycle through them so what's currently on deck is "Do or do not, there is no try," spoken by the esteemed Yoda. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, a 'Star Wars' fan. Speaker 2: That's right-- Story_ID: 187602 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. We'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Editha, E-D-I-T-H-A, Lorraine, L-O-R-R-A-I-N-E, maiden name was Collymore, C-O-L-L-Y-M-O-R-E and her current, her married name is Walker, W-A-L-K-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay and, and in terms of her name now, Editha and, is, there a story behind that name? Speaker 2: She was named after my great, great Aunt Edith, so she's named after her aunt, yeah; she's named after her aunt. Speaker 1: And Collymore is a name you don't hear that of-often is there a story behind that one? Speaker 2: There probably is, my grandfather and his line was from Barbados as well as Panama, so Collymore is a very well-known name on the island of Barbados and they come from the parish of St. Thomas. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Can you give us your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born June 3, 1935 in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace back the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: Actually not very far, I know a little, and I cannot go very far back, because unlike maybe some other people you've interviewed, my family sort of exists with no history. So my grandfather came from Barbados, his father, and actually my grandfather was born in Gatun [Panama], which is on the Isthmus of Panama. My grandfather's parents came out of Barbados, but my grand, my great-grandfather, Lemuel Collymore, was actually one of the workers on the Panama Canal. And they eventually immigrated to the United States, and when I pick up their history, they're in Chicago. So between, between, between the time my great-grandparents, Lemuel and Blanche left Panama and the canal, and Barbados, I don't know if they stopped anywhere else before they came to Chicago. So sort of two points of history--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: You know there's a movie about the building of the Panama Canal, about the workers, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah and--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: It's historic. Speaker 2: My great-grandfather was one of them, and in fact he was blinded as part of that work. So when I was born, my, I had, my great-grandfather and he was blind at that point in time. And--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: I think the movie you know the documentary being talked about how in the haste to get it done they often would set off explosives when people were still--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, in the area and things like that so I can't rem-you know, I supposed it's plausible that given his work on the canal that maybe one of the benefits, if you will was being able to immigrate into the United States. But somehow or another my great-grandparents got here. My grandmother--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: So this would be? Speaker 2: My mother's, my, it's still my mother's father's side came out of Barbados--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: This would be around the turn of the century that they--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Would come here? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 187603 Speaker 1: Actually they [McCann's grandparents] got here around the 1940s, maybe not, no, no, they were actually here as early as 1935. Because my mother [Editha Collymore Walker] was born here, so at some point my great-grandparents [Lemuel and Blanche Collymore] had to get to Chicago [Illinois] and my grandparents had to meet in order to have my mother. So my guess is sometime prior to 1935, my great-grandparents got here and met my grandfather and grandmother met, courted, did whatever they were gonna do and they got married. So--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: That'd be around 1900 or earlier, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe so, maybe so. My grandmother is from Mobile, Alabama, I actually know very little about her. Well oh, what I can tell you, is that my grandfather was born on, let me, I gotta get this straight, March 14, 1913, and my grandmother was born on March 13, 1914, so they were born one day apart and one year apart. But it sort of switches, so one was born on the thirteenth in the year of the fourteenth [1914] and born on the fourteenth in the year of the thirteenth [1913], there you go. And so they were sort of back to back in terms of birthdays, and in fact my grandmother just celebrated her ninety-first birthday, and I am named after her. I know very little about her, she has been fairly close-lipped about her past. And in fact in what I consider to be a remarkable breakthrough, I was talking to her on her birthday and said to her, you know, I really do need to be able to capture your history and where you came from. And she finally said, oh, okay, so in the forty-eight plus years I've known her, and I suppose I could only talk for forty-six of them, but in the length of my relationship with my grandmother, this is the first time that she's elected to share her history with me. But she came up from Mobile, Alabama; it was her and her brother, John, my grandmother's mother died on Mother's Day when she was twenty-one. And I think that was probably part of the precipitating events that got her from Mobile into Chicago. Not quite sure what she did here, but she eventually met my grandfather and decided to make a life with him. And by time I came on the scene in 1956, my great-grandparents owned the family home at 64th [Street] and Ingleside [Avenue]. So it's 6418 Ingleside, which is where I spent the first seven years of my, my life and I grew up in a decidedly multi-generational home. So on the first floor lived my great-grandparents, Lemuel and Blanche, as well as my great, again, great aunt and uncle Edith and Uncle Conn [ph.]. And then on the second floor were my grandparents, and I actually lived with my grandparents as well as the younger of my two uncles, who lived upstairs. My mother had a small studio apartment in the basement of the home and that's where she lived, and then in the front part of the second floor were a variety of boarders who rented from my great-grandparents and to whom I don't remember having much of a relationship. I, I can barely remember who they were, and in fact today, my mother and grandmother and my youngest brother still live at 6418. So the family home is still the family home, right now. So my childhood and birth were anchored in the Woodlawn community inside of Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 187604 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Editha Collymore Walker] talk about growing up, or what it was like when she grew up? Speaker 2: Nope, I actually come from a family that, that doesn't tell, well, my side does not talk about its history. It is not a backward looking family at all, it's, I don't wanna say it's as if there's no past, but they don't spend much time talking about the past. Speaker 1: Did your mother go to school on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: My mother went to school; she is a graduate of the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois], as well as she holds a couple of master's degrees. So my mother is really well educated, and she pretty much devoted her life to education. She worked as a teacher basically in the elementary school side for both the Catholic School System Diocese of Chicago [sic, Archdiocese of Chicago Catholic Schools], as well as later the public school system in Chicago [Chicago Public Schools]. So my mother was always in the teaching profession. My grandmother, I think had a host of, or a number of you know hourly jobs. Sewing or, or piecework. My grandfather was a bus driver for the Chicago Transit Authority. And I spent a lot of my youth riding buses with him. Speaker 1: Okay, just for fun or? Speaker 2: Just for fun, it was something to do. Story_ID: 187605 Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your, your father's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: On that regard I cannot be very helpful to you, my father's name was Joseph, J-O-S-E-P-H, Williamson, and I'm not sure about his date of birth. And actually what happened in that part of the history is that shortly after I was born, probably within of six months after I was born, my parents got divorced. And as part of the settlement, my father agreed that in return for paying no alimony that he would not invoke his paternal rights or participate. So I have never met him, don't know very much about him, I only know what sort of on the, well not sort of, I know what's on the birth certificate. He too was a student at the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois], so I know he was down in Champaign [Illinois] in some point in time. And I suppose the only other material maybe piece of information I have is my grandmother telling me I look one of his sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So not much history there. Speaker 1: So they presumably they, that they met? Speaker 2: In college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Had me and then decided to divorce. Speaker 1: Was he from Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: I believe so, but don't hold me to that, my memory says yes, but its, it's, I have not studied his history in great detail. Speaker 1: So have you ever met him? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay. Speaker 2: No, I believe that he is deceased, I did have a private investigator try to locate him for me, and by time I did that I was very much an adult by then. And by time I had done that, the, the private investigator pretty much came back and said based on what you've told me, a person who would fit those demographics, that timeframe, whatever would've been this person. They're dead, you can go get the death certificate, and so I did and so I believe he is deceased, but I don't know if he is or if he isn't. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, but it, I mean logistically it makes sense, but don't know. Story_ID: 187606 Speaker 1: Now, do you have a, a first childhood memory, an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Geez. My earliest childhood memory is probably, and some of these are, you remember whatever you remember. It's probably of being photographed by my grandfather, my grand--among my grandfather's numerous hobbies were photography. And since I was the first grandchild, I think I was the subject of many of his early photographs, I was probably his test dummy. So I can remember being photographed by him, and of course there are a series of photographs which eventually I'll dig up for you guys. But there are a series of photographs of me that he would've taken and so I think that those are probably the--I can remember being photographed in this cute little black velvet dress with a bunny. Speaker 1: Did he develop his own photos? Speaker 2: He developed his own photos--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Okay, so he was really--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: He had a darkroom in the basement, and he belonged to the [Washington Park] Camera Club that's, oh, over in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois], there was a camera club and he was a member of that. Story_ID: 187607 Speaker 1: What was the community like and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, the (laughter) that's really kind of interesting. My, I, so where I lived at 6418, that block of Ingleside [Avenue] goes from 63rd Street, which was a very vibrant community for African Americans in the late 1950s and early '60s [1960s], on up to 65th Street. So it's sort of one long block, even though it's two streets, so there's no cross street at 64th Street. And my great-grandparents [Lemuel and Blanche Collymore] who I spent, I spent a lot of my childhood with my great-grandparents and my great aunt [Edith Collymore], really believed that the world was inside of the gray cyclone fence that we lived in. So as a child, as long as I had an adult escort, I could travel our community wherever we went on foot, so down to 63rd Street, the Woolworth's, the grocery store. But when I was sort of by myself, I had to stay in the confines of the gray cyclone fence, that, that bordered the front of our house, as well as the back of our house. Intriguingly, the back of our house was far more interesting than the front of our house, because the garage was there. My grandfather's pink and white Chevrolet was there and the apple trees were there. So and I have fond memories of my great-grandmother actually making the most wonderful applesauce that you could ever imagine. The other thing, and this just tells you what memory, so it's a bustling kind of street, it was also the kind of street where everybody knew each other's kids. So one memory that strikes me very vividly, as I was about, I think I was six at the time, and it was the last day of grammar school. And I went to school about four or five blocks away and I had elected to stay after and help the teacher you know clean erasers or clean the blackboard or clean whatever. And I was late beyond my expected time coming home, and so as I was walking across 65th Street, I turned the corner to come now down Ingleside, and there's courthouse right there at the corner. And a little old lady appears, and says to me, you're late, your great-grandmother is looking for you, where have you been? And I was a very polite child and I said well, I stayed after school, cleaned the erasers, cleaned whatever I'd done. And she said okay, and then I got a couple more doors, and another little old lady appeared and said you're late, your grandmother has been looking for you, where have you been (laughter). And then I got about three or four more houses and another woman appears and she says you're late, where have you been? And I give her the same story and the good news is my, my great-grandmother was a very stern, sort of no-nonsense woman and with each successive little old lady that I've encountered, I am now becoming more and more terrified because, I, I really get it that she's called everybody on the block. And that she is going to let me have it for not being on time, and I get home and it was actually kind of pleasant, I guess all the subseque--the previous ladies had called her and that my answer was good enough. And that it was plausible, so that by time I got home it was, it was fine, I was home. But that sort of the kind of community where, you know, everybody on the block knew when I was supposed to be home. My grand, my great-grandmother said, "She is not where I expect her to be, you all look for her," and they looked for me, and each one of them sort of managed the process on down the line. The other thing I remember distinctively, I mean there lots of things, but was there was at that point in time, and this will be politically incorrect. But there appeared to be a crazy old woman who would walk down the street, and I'm not sure now that I'm an adult what made her crazy, but she would talk to herself and she'd dressed in black and long black clothing, even in the heat of summer. And so I assumed in 1960 that was enough to make you present yourself as crazy, I don't know if she had some other characteristics that I as a four or five year old was not allowed to know. But whenever, I mean I would be sort of playing in front, I was outside the gate and sort of playing in front, and my great-grandmother who would sit on the porch in sort of those metal, a lot of times they're red, but you know we've had green ones. Those sort of, they're not lawn chairs, but front porch chairs that we all had, they're sort of have like a fan kind of imprint on them. And ours were normally red when I was growing up, my great grandmother would be sitting up there and she'd see the woman sort of half way down on the 63rd Street block. She'd say, "Get in here!" So I always remember having to avoid the crazy lady, not of course once again not understanding why she was crazy. But knowing that I had to avoid her--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Was there a name for her in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: No, in my mind she was just the crazy lady, she was obviously the person that when she was on the street, that I was not supposed to be anywhere in her grasp. And I tried to dissect it but she just wore kind of funny clothing and talked to herself, but (laughing) so I, I remember that part of it. I remember you know sort of going in the garage and playing with one of my cousins and we would drive all over America. I remember we used to have, in those days, telephone system was very much more antiquated than it is now. And from time to time the telephone man would show up and he'd bring the box that the telephone is in and I get to keep the box and, and you know. And it would become a purse or something like that, and all my toys were in it. I remember eating fried plantain, which was certainly a, a, food from Barbados and not a food from the U.S., if you will. Lots of Cream of Wheat with bay leaf and cinnamon, and so, a house that was always populated, but a very adult household. I grew up in a very adult household; I would spend time with my great-grandmother and watch Divorce Court, which had no meaning for me. But it was a black and white TV and it would be on and that's she would watch. And some other soap operas, which I didn't find very interesting, but I'd sit with my great-grandmother and watch, you know, old lady television shows in the middle of the day. So I had a, I had an interesting childhood, but it was, it was just, it was a contained childhood. It was a, it was an adult managed childhood. Story_ID: 187608 Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up at all? Speaker 2: Not particularly. I'm Roman Catholic and have been all my life, and my grandmother is Roman Catholic and my mother [Editha Collymore Walker] is Roman Catholic. As best I can tell, my grandfather did not practice any particular faith at all, nor did my grandfather's side of the family. I don't get the impression that they were anti-religion, it's just I can't, I can't recall that they had any of their own. Later in his life, I think my grandmother did her best to get him as Catholic as anybody who hasn't been baptized Catholic could be, but that came much later, rather than much earlier. And so I would go to church with my grandmother, and I went to, I've, I'm a product of the parochial schools in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: What, what church did she go to? Speaker 2: Well, we started out at Holy Cross [Church, Chicago, Illinois] which is at 65th [Street] and Maryland [Avenue] I want to say, and that was my initial school. So I went to Holy Cross up until about the first grade was the last grade that I spent there. And then I went to, finish my grammar school at St. Philip Neri [School, Chicago, Illinois] which is on 72nd Street, and then went to high school at St. Aquinas Dominican [High School, Chicago, Illinois] which was next door to St. Philip Neri. It was an all-girls school, which is now the parking lot for a Dominick's. Speaker 1: Right, it sure is. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: St. Philip Neri is right behind that big Dominick's facility. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's right-- Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: It's right to the east of it. Speaker 1: I didn't, I never knew that there was a school--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: With that. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's where I went to grammar school, yes. And it's still there and St. Philip Neri Church is still there, and, and actually members of my husband's family are now parishioners there, and I'm a parishioner of a, of a different church. I go St. Thomas the Apostle [Church, Chicago, Illinois] on 55th Street. Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you like school, when you went to-- Speaker 2: I loved school, I thought it was fascinating, however, I was, in a very interesting way, I, the parochial school system [Archdiocese of Chicago Catholic Schools, Chicago, Illinois] in the 1950s and '60s [1960s] was a very interesting place to be then. If only because it was inhabited by the nuns, and very sort of strict, law and order. I don't want to call it process oriented but there was a way things done and the right way to do things and the wrong way to do things. And, and certainly a very moral environment to be, to be educated in. In hindsight, it, it's clear to me that I was part of the wave of children that brought diversity to the Chicago parochial system, I'm of that right age and right time where there was now a growing influx of African Americans into the parochial school system. And so I think as, as time went on in, in some ways I was in the vanguard of it, but I liked school well enough. Speaker 1: Well was the school mostly white when you started? I mean, this is Holy Cross-- Speaker 2: I think Holy Cross, I have, I'd have to, my mind is kind of foggy on that one, that, I would say that one was far more African American even when I was in first grade than not. But when I got to St. Philip Neri there were very few African Americans when I was there in second grade, so that sort of and in fact, that's an interesting break for me. Because that was the first time that I went from being in the majority demographic of the world as I knew it, to being a minority. So if you, if you were to ask me, I was never a minority until I was about seven or eight, because the world I grew up in was sort of decidedly African American. And all the people I knew and the places I shopped, for the most part, were driven by an African American community, and the schooling was, and the religion was. It really wasn't until we had moved to South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] and I transferred schools that I began to realize that perhaps I was not part of the majority, that I was actually part of the minority. Speaker 1: Yeah, Chicago was going through sort of a transition then too, yeah--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, but, it, but I think it's in reference to where you live could govern how you saw yourself in the world and, and whether you were a majority or minority-- Story_ID: 187609 Speaker 1: So when you were seven or eight, you--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was it you and your mother that moved to South Shore [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: My mother had remarried when I was about six, and when I was seven, my brother was born, so I am the oldest of five. I have four brothers and sisters behind me. Two sisters, two brothers, the closest one in age to me is seven years younger, then I have one who is nine years younger. Then I have a sister whose, the one whose nine years younger is a sister, I have another sister who is eighteen years younger than me then I have a brother who is twenty-four years younger than me. So quite a spread in family there, but after my mother remarried and my, my first brother was born, we moved to South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] and we moved to apartment at 6901 South Clyde [Avenue]. And at that point, I transferred into St. Philip Neri [School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when the world took on a decidedly different cast. Speaker 1: Now South Shore was changing in, predominately Jewish I think before--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes, Jewish and Caucasian, yeah, very much so. However, because of where I went to school, I was more in the Caucasian Irish sect of South Shore as opposed to the Caucasian Jewish sect of South Shore. But yes, there are, there were pockets of everybody there, but I was sort of hanging out with one and not the other. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187610 Speaker 1: Now, was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: To some degree it was, my great-grandparents, no, my grandparents had the piano. My great-grandfather [Lemuel Collymore] played the guitar, and he would play it for me, so even though he was blind he knew how to play the guitar. And my grandfather was a pianist and so he would play the piano, and there was the family piano and I learned how to play piano on that. In fact I actually still have the piano, it's not in very good shape, and it's actually in my husband and I's garage right now. And in fact probably the biggest value to it is that it really has ivory keys and that it has a great deal of sentimental value. But in terms of musical value, it has very little at this point, but it was. But the other thing is we would always have record players and I was allowed to play records, and I had my own little grouping of records. And in fact, I'm quite proud of the fact that I still have my 'Peter and the Wolf' record and, and other kind of stories that I used to play when I was a kid to entertain myself. So music was a, was a big part. Story_ID: 187611 Speaker 1: Can you describe yourself as a little girl? What kind of a little girl were you, what did you like to do and how did you feel about things around you [in Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: (Laughing) if anybody ever picks up this video history, they're gonna be in shock. As a little girl, I was shy and retiring and quiet. The fact that I was very tiny, I was very small, very skinny, very short. My grandmother's very short, my mother's [Editha Collymore Walker] very short, I come from a long line of short people, I suppose. Even though my grandfather was six feet, I didn't get any of the tall genes. And so, I was small and tiny and because of growing up with a whole bunch of an, adults, including my great-grandparents [Lemuel and Blanche Collymore], I was quiet and retiring and polite. And you'd almost call me shy, and I would keep to myself, I was an only child for the most part, for at least seven years, an only child. I learned how to amuse myself, I know that from time to time I could be precocious, so I think I already ha, I always had that in me. But I describe myself as a nice, mild-mannered polite, obedient, pleasant little girl. Speaker 1: Okay, so you did okay in school, you didn't ever, you never were a troublemaker in school? Speaker 2: Never a troublemaker, always at the top of my class, always I would be considered an A student, and a very good student. And if there is one thing that I think that came through loud and clear through--a couple of things actually came through loud and clear for my family is that they really believed that education was the ticket to future success. So the rule was I was supposed to do well, the good news about my family though was, in many ways, all you had to do was do your best, and they were happy with that. So I didn't grow up in a family that had its heart set on me being a doctor, and I didn't have, I didn't grow up in a family that had its heart set on me being a lawyer. Or anything I would've picked would've been fine, as long as I could convince them that I had done my best, and that I had excelled. So those are sort of the two parallel things, so the first job I was ever given, if you will, was going to school. And the expectation was always that I would always do my best and I would excel, and I think I did that for the most part. Speaker 1: Now were you involved in other activities like the [Girl] Scouts [of the United States of America] or Camp Fire Girls or any of that kind of stuff? Speaker 2: I took ballet, and so for a while I was a ballerina, and it was my younger uncle's job to get me to ballet class and ballet recitals, and things like that. And from what I vaguely remember and what I've been told of my history that from time to time, we would stop in at the pool hall on the way to ballet (laughs) or on the way back from ballet. So I know that I spent some time in the pool hall with my uncle--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Of course that was his idea (laughter). Speaker 2: That was his idea, certainly not my idea, so I was familiar with pool halls, it's something--but you know I will impress upon, I sort of grew up as--in a really contained world. And by the time I got a little bit older like eight, nine or ten and my mother had had a couple more children, I would go to school, do a whole lot. Then I would come home and help her with the kids, with my younger brothers and sisters, so I, in no stretch of the imagination did I have sort of the active social life or after, after-school life that for instance my children now have or other people have. So I didn't really play sports. And I didn't do a whole lot outside of, outside of the home. Story_ID: 187612 Speaker 1: Okay, and so you went to high school [at Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois] in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], there. Speaker 2: Yes, yes I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now what was high school like? Speaker 2: Well high school was fascinating, and in fact it, you know I--let me step back and I'm gonna like not answer that question yet. Grammar school [at St. Philip Neri School, Chicago, Illinois], from the time I was eight on became kind of fascinating because when I was in second grade, and I was talking to somebody about this the other day. Second grade was the first time that I really encountered racism, and sort of didn't know what to do with it, if you will. And I remember decidedly coloring in the second grade classroom, and we were coloring, coloring some picture of Jesus in a religious, whatever I guess coloring book. And I had my best brown crayon out only to be told by the young boy sitting next to me that I was not supposed to paint Jesus brown, because Jesus looked like him and not like me. And so I think the beginning of my awakening that there were groups of people that were us and them, became very kind of present for me as I moved through grammar school. And also at that point, the thing, the building that's now called the South Shore Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois] at that point was the South Shore Country Club. And it was a decidedly white environment, there were no people of color who were members, and I distinctly remember spending lots of Saturdays playing with my classmates of all races and colors. We'd go, after we finished playing in the churchyard or the schoolyard or whatever, and the school was happy to have us there, we would go to the local ice cream store and I would always have chocolate chip milk shakes, and then they would go off to the country club. And it was sort of like that's when the worlds parted where you knew that it was, you were good enough to play with them in the morning and play dodgeball and whip the line or whatever. And you could even go to the soda fountain, but at a certain point, your social lives would digress. And that there were places that you could and couldn't go even--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: As a young kid. Speaker 1: The country club is an interesting place because it's; it's right on the lake [Lake Michigan]--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right adjacent to a heavily populated urban-- kind (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Kind of area. Speaker 2: And it was a very prominent structure at that point and time and, and it was a very large reinforcement of where and it's, this is the first time I thought of this, this way. But it was another reinforcement of where you could go and where you couldn't go. Just like when I was kid, I could, when and when I couldn't cross the cyclone fence. And so this was another sort of reminder that in life that there were places that you could go and places where you couldn't go--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: 'Cause--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: And place where--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: The, the country club is actually some place, you, black people couldn't go--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They could not become a member. Speaker 2: Absolutely not, and in fact I gotta tell you after it reverted over to the city, there were many years, I don't know maybe five or six where I wouldn't go in it, even though it was now publicly owned. Because my memories of not being able go in it were so strong. As if, as if the building had indeed prevented me from entering it. And I ad--I, I'm smart enough to know that, but there was just an emotional sort of moment or an emotional--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: It became an icon of--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: It was an icon of racism for me and therefore, I sort of had to make my peace with it. I've been in it, I've played golf there, it's a fine building, and they do fine things, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Story_ID: 187613 Speaker 1: So that's sort of where it is, so when I go to high school [Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois], high school was fine it was all girls. Although by the time it was three o'clock or three fifteen you would've thought that it was a co-ed building (laughs) so it didn't matter. It was a small environment, I think in hindsight--and so it was fine. It was a smaller environment, in hindsight, my impression of high school was that the nuns were preparing us to go off and be good housewives. Or to be good, you know, teachers or to be--they, they were not training us to be professional women, so could we work and would we work in the home. And, and even though, I wouldn't consider myself a feminist, I'm, I'm, I wouldn't say any of that, I sort of purposefully stayed cleared of those kind of things. So I never took sewing, I never took home economics, and my, actually the point of youth rebellion that I am most delighted in is that my stepfather said to me, well you should excel at typing, because if all else fails, you can become a secretary. And secretaries are fine with me, nothing against them, but I decided that failing would not be an option for me. So I never really learned to type much past twenty five words with five errors, which then became a hindrance in college. But it was never, that was never going to be an option for me, so I don't know what I was gonna do but, that would not, failure would not be an option. So it was a very fine high school, I took four years of math, I took four years of French, I took English, I remember being just mesmerized by [Charles] Dickens' 'A Tale of Two Cities.' I remember, I think the opening couple paragraphs of that are just some of the best pieces of literature, one of the best pieces of literature out there. Studied [William] Shakespeare, fell in love with the 'The Little Prince,' the book 'The Little Prince,' which I read in both French and English. And that was about it, I mean so fine memories of high school, did well, graduated in a class of 105 girls. I was number five out of 105 and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: What was the year that you graduated? Speaker 1: I graduated in 1974. Speaker 2: Okay now tell me this, in, in grade school or high school is there a teacher that, that was particularly helpful to you and or concerned about you and, or that you had a strong relationship with? Speaker 1: I'd say decidedly no, no, I really, I was, I was, no, no, I don't think so. Speaker 2: So who, who were your heroes when you were growing up, did you have any? Speaker 1: I think my heroes were my mother [Editha Walker] and I credit her with teaching me a lot about my life, so in, in terms of the people that I looked up to, were definitely my mother, my grandmother, my grandfather. And I think it was because those were the people who, who really believed in me and were the ones who would encourage me to go do anything. I mean, encourage me to believe that there were a world of possibilities out there; interestingly they were part of the same group of people that constructed a very small world for me to live in. But by the same token, intellectually, there were a world of possibilities out there. Eventually I got old enough to be intrigued by Arthur Ashe, who I would say was probably one of my young heroes. But other than that, it was pretty much family members who were sort of the inspiration or the catalyst or motivation to move me along. Story_ID: 187614 Speaker 1: Now, did your family talk about politics or civil rights at home a lot? Speaker 2: Believe it or not, no, I mean, and in fact you know it's interesting, Larry [Crowe], as you ask me these questions, it at some point when we finish the video history, I think the part I'm gonna have to think about for the next time when we see each other is so how did I get from there to here? Because the story is not sort of there, and the story in some ways is not here, the story is the transition of how I got from of sort of small world, tightly managed, contained, focused. My parents, my grandparents, didn't really talk about politics or the politics of race, and I think part of it becomes--there's a strong strain of individualism that runs as a philosophy under my family. So it's almost if the individual, if well focused and committed, can sort of make all those other things melt away. Which now as an adult I would take great exception to, but anyway, I, I'm not sure I believe that's true at all, but I would say that growing up kind of philosophy. But by the same token, they didn't avoid it, and one of the bigger memories I have, once again of my lessons in racism. When I was about ten, we moved to 77th [Street] and Crandon [Avenue] and what was remarkable about that location is that it was exactly eight blocks away from St. Philip Neri [School, Chicago, Illinois]. And it was exactly, so it's blocks south of St. Philip Neri, give or take, and it was about eight blocks east of Our Lady of Peace [Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois]. And the, the student demographics of Our Lady of Peace and St. Philip Neri were decidedly different, so St. Philip Neri was far more white and Our Lady of Peace was far more black at that point in time. And I distinctly remember my mother [Editha Collymore Walker] going in to see the monsignor; I think it was Monsignor Moran [ph.], down at St. Philip Neri. And he had sent her a letter saying that they were gonna transfer me to Our Lady of Peace. And my mother went to see him and said, oh no you're not, and he invoked location and she, she put on the table her knowledge of the Caucasian girls who were being bused off of 55th Street, when they could've been going to St. Thomas [the Apostle School, Chicago, Illinois]. And as best I can tell she came back home and she says well you're still going to St. Philip Neri (laughter). So he put his jacks on the table, I think she had kings, queens and aces, he backed off, I'm not quite sure what else she said to him, but she exactly the right things to him to make him understand that she was not going to let him take me out of that school. I mean for whatever reasons, he conceded so but that's, that's another reflection of, you know, you're doing what you're doing. You're productive member of the school, excellent student, there's this thing running over here where people are trying to manipulate what can or can't happen to you. And so it was another sort of exercise in you know lessons of racism, but, but so my parents did know that it existed, they were willing to fight it. But they didn't make big statements about it, we didn't have lots of people in our house talking about the injustices of racism. I think to a large degree of our family was, you know, put your head down, do your work and just get through it. So a very stoic approach to racism, and I don't know if that's because of my grandmother coming from the south and whatever experiences she had had. Or that my great-grandparents and my grandfather had come from a place where it didn't exist the way it existed in America. Maybe they just didn't have a context for it, I don't know, but they didn't talk about it very much. Or if they did, they didn't talk about it around children. Story_ID: 187615 Speaker 1: Did you feel very much different from the rest of the people in the neighborhood [South Shore, Chicago, Illinois] and stuff when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, not, yeah, I sort of did, but here's, here's why. It was because I was sort of the egghead (laughing) so I had built to be, I was being built to excel educationally and taking no points off. There are many things in life to be interested in beyond books or knowledge or getting good grades. But if that appears to be your singular focus, then you're sort of considered an egghead. And eggheads are treated differently than non-eggheads, so other than that, I rode my bike, I hung out, I had girlfriends in the neighborhood, I went to the McDonald's, especially the new one that built up on 79th [Street] and Colfax [Avenue]. And then there's the Burger King on over on Paxton [Street], and I had, it was decidedly normal, so it wasn't as if I was, you know, a special black child or anything. You know, it was, 77th [Street] and Crandon [Avenue] was sort of in the middle of a middle class African American neighborhood. But I think that things, the two things that strike me as potentially setting me apart were that I was an egghead and that I was kind of small and that would be it. So yeah, if I was different, but I accredit it to that you have to go find some of my younger classmate, or classmates and see if there were any other differences that would notice. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: I probably would have to say it would be reading and English, not necessarily the grammatical part of it, but I'd probably say that it was reading. It wasn't math, it definitely wasn't science, I managed to escape high school [Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois] with only taking biology and was most grateful that my frog had died. When I went to dissect him, he had died by banging his head against the top of the jar, so I didn't even have to kill him. And that was very comforting (laughing) so I was decidedly in the language, language arts part of it as opposed to the math and science part of it. Speaker 1: They actually made you kill the frog and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah you were supposed to stick this needled, it's called pithing the brain, you're supposed to stick this needle in and somehow find the part you know, and like kill him. And I was not up for that, when I got to the classroom that day and luckily my frog in my jar had killed by jumping up against the top of the jar. So he was dead, so it worked for me, I still dissected him. Speaker 1: Okay, that's the first time I've heard of that, 'cause they usually, they delivered them to us in a vat of formaldehyde or something--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, some girls in there had to kill their frogs, yuck (laughing). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did not. Story_ID: 187616 Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school [Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois], how did you wind up choosing Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], now you went to Northwestern? Speaker 2: I went to Northwestern, well here's the thing. You won't be surprised, my mother [Editha Collymore Walker] did not want me to go far from home (laughing). There's a whole theme, there. So actually my two choices were the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and then Northwestern. And I had gotten into both, and I decided that the University of Chicago was just too close to home, so I was at 77th Street, and it was at 59th Street. I decided that they were real eggheads, no matter whether I thought was an egghead or not, I wasn't going to go there. My mother tried to bribe me by saying that she'd buy me a car if I'd stay at home and go to the U of C [University of Chicago], I sort of said, well, show me the car, and it never showed up. So I went up to Evanston [Illinois] (laughing), so other people have all these big dreams of where they're gonna go, I went into a great Big Ten university. All these other people have dreams of it and mine was sort of picking between the U of C and Northwestern and how far away was far, while still being close to home. And actually, Northwestern ended up being almost light years away. I could start at the Davis Street train station, and if I stood on the platform and somebody stood at O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport], I had friends who could be home faster than I could. 'Cause I had to take the train out of Evanston to Howard [Street], Howard downtown, switch to the Dan Ryan [Expressway] to get to 79th Street then I had to take the 79th Street bus home. So on a good or bad day, it could take me an hour and half to two hours to cut the north/south divide of the city. Speaker 1: You're absolutely right (laughing). Speaker 2: Yes, and people could get to Memphis [Tennessee] or Cleveland [Ohio] or Milwaukee [Wisconsin] or other places much faster than I could. Story_ID: 187617 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, today's date is? Speaker 2: June 1, 2005. Speaker 1: And you are? Speaker 2: Renetta McCann. Speaker 1: All right. We're resuming an interview we started around Easter time [March 25, 2005]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Of this year. Story_ID: 187618 Speaker 1: Tell us about St. Philip Neri [School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay, it's at 2110 East 71st Street, it's still standing today, I attended in second grade after I had finished at Holy Cross [School, Chicago, Illinois]. My family had moved from Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] into South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], and it was--I'm a product of parochial schooling for both grammar school and high school [Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And so it was a continuation of where I had started. I tend to remember St. Philip Neri as the school where I began to understand the difference races or racism and certainly class. And that people were in different income stratas, and it was, I don't want to say a rude awakening, but it was a very interesting awakening. Because I had grown up in a very protected and homogeneous world up until the time I was seven. So Woodlawn was all, for the most part, African American, and just sort of a very rich environment, but now I was in a broader world. And I distinctly remember in-- Speaker 1: Now South Shore, let's talk a little bit about the demographics of South Shore in those days. Speaker 2: South Shore when we got there, and jeez, I guess that would've been about 1963 or 1964, was probably changing in its demographics. There was a very wealthy section of South Shore known as the Jackson Park Highlands [Chicago, Illinois], which is roughly between Jeffery [Avenue] and Stony [Island Avenue], between 67th [Street] and 70th [Street], if you will. And that's where a number of the wealthy, white families lived at that period of time. And there were houses that for me then were just beyond belief, would have four or five bedrooms and great expanses of yards, and, and all sorts of things. So a number of my classmates lived there. But then when you got east of Jeffery, that was populated more by the traditional South Side bungalows and three-flats and six-flats and sort of, of a more mixed residential kind of area. And I think it was clear to me even though I was very young that the neighborhood was changing, that there was a growing influx of African Americans, and a disappearance or diminishment in the numbers of, of whites that lived in the area. But St. Philip Neri was sort of the place where a number of the, the white children went to school in South Shore. And then a growing number of African Americans, and I can't remember at this point and time, I would say maybe there were three African Americans out of a class of thirty when I started. But I don't get the sense--I just don't remember there being very many of us, but I distinctively remember in second grade, we were--it was the afternoon, and we were coloring. And we were coloring in a religious coloring book, and I had pulled out one of my best brown crayons to color Jesus. At which point the little boy who was sitting next to me on my right who happened to be white, looked over and said oh no he's not your color, he's mine. And so, that was a very, it had never occurred to me that Jesus did not look like me, and I didn't argue with him. And I sort of contemplated it, but-- Speaker 1: Well wait a minute now-- Speaker 2: But sort of moved on-- Speaker 1: Nineteen-sixty three [1963]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There weren't a lot of black images of Jesus in '63 [1963] you know around-- Speaker 2: But no, there weren't, but it had never occurred to me that he wouldn't be my color. Speaker 1: But did you not see the, you know, iconography of Jesus in the--most, most black homes had a picture of a white Jesus--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well sure. Speaker 1: With brown hair and blue eyes and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: I guess I was egotistical enough to think no matter what the statue was like, that if I went to color him, I could color him my color. Story_ID: 187619 Speaker 1: Well, it was unique in those days for, for--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A black child to think of Jesus as being black, and I think--do you think it's, it was because your parents [Editha Collymore Walker and Joseph Williamson] or just your own kind of--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I think it was just my own thing that I was going to--this'll, this will sound totally egotistical, but make him in my image, I mean of course. Because my world was a brown world, and it would never have occurred to me not to color him brown. I don't, I can remember the day pretty clearly and I can't even remember things that happened you know two days ago. But I can remember that day pretty clearly, and I distinctly remember being shocked that I was not gonna be allowed to color Jesus the color I thought he should be. No matter what color he really was, I thought he should be my color. Speaker 1: I just want to make sure the people understand that in '63 [1963] it would be unusual for you to think that, that's--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So you were sort of a progressive, ahead of the pack. Speaker 2: I was a, I was ahead of the curve but I was quickly counseled that I was not approaching it the right way. And so moved on, the thing--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: What happened, did you, did you change the color or did you--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I don't remember, I think I actually stopped coloring because I decided I didn't want to do that, but nor did I want to, to address his comments. I think I just had a little tiny mini revolt and just didn't color that picture anymore, I mean you always have the option of moving on. But one of the things is you know so I'm now in this environment where I'm the minority. One of the, the big icons in South Shore, or the big buildings, was the South Shore Country Club [later the South Shore Cultural Center, Chicago, Illinois] and I quickly began to understand that I was not allowed to go there. So even though I was allowed to go to school with my classmates, there came a point in time where our paths would diverge. And while I was good enough go to school with them, I was not good enough to socialize with them and that message, it was never explicit. It was always implied, where you realize that at a certain point in time on the weekends that you would be in one place, and a number of your classmates would be in another. And I think it's made it even more pointed by the fact that all of us would get together on Saturday mornings and play in the schoolyard and play dodgeball and whip the line or whatever. You know jump rope or do whatever, and then about noon, we'd all go to this ice cream parlor on 71st street and have sundaes. And then eventually we'd all split up and it would become apparent that my white classmates would end up going to the country club for afternoon activities, whether it was golf or boating or dances or whatever. And I would just go back to you know my apartment or some other playground or whatever, so it was very interesting from that standpoint. Story_ID: 187620 Speaker 1: The other sort of interesting sort of exposure to racism came when we moved, when I was about, I think I might've been, I don't know, ten or eleven. We moved to 77th [Street] and Crandon [Avenue], and at that point, I was exactly eight blocks away from St. Philip Neri [School, Chicago, Illinois], my then current school. And eight blocks away from Our Lady of Peace [Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] which was at 79th and Jeffery, and the thing was the racial construction of the schools couldn't have been more different. So while whites were still in the majority at St. Philip Neri, blacks were in the majority at Our Lady of Peace. So the monsignor at St. Philip Neri called my mother [Editha Collymore Walker] up to have a meeting, because he had decided that I should be moved to Our Lady of Peace. Because I was closer to it, when in reality I was equidistant between the two. My mother went to have a meeting with him, it might've been a spring or summer day, I remember it being warm. She did not take me with her, she did choose to recount a little bit of the discussion, which was that he wanted me to move schools, she was not having any of it. When he talked to her about where we lived, she reminded him of the two white girls who were being bused in from 55th Street, and that distance should not be a big factor in terms of where I went to school, and the issue went away. But there was no doubt in my mind that the leadership at St. Philip was trying to move me into a different place. My parents didn't want it, he had used an argument that couldn't stand up, and so my mother won that argument. And I stayed there and graduated and had a fine, you know, it was a fine grammar school education, nothing notable, and went on to Aquinas [Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois] next door for high school. Speaker 2: Okay, now, Aquinas is--I mean, the space that Aquinas occupied in those days is now occupied by a big Dominick's Food Store--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And shopping center. Speaker 1: Yes, and that's because over time, not able to sustain a all-girls Catholic high school on the south side of--in South Shore. There would've been some other ones on the south side like Mercy [High School, Chicago, Illinois] or Longwood [Academy of Our Lady, Chicago, Illinois], or even, I think Mother McAuley [Liberal Arts High School, Chicago, Illiois] is much further south now. But I went there for four years, it--I would call it racially balanced, I don't remember what the proportion was, there were a mixed of white girls and black girls. And I think what struck me more about it is that I think the nuns were committed to giving us a great education that would prepare to be homemakers and I, sort of, well I didn't know what I wanted to do. I wasn't necessarily interested in the homemaker track so, I never taugh, took home economics, even though I knew how to sew and I knew how to cook from my mom. I didn't take much of those, and I had what I considered to be a classical education for that period of time. So I took four years of math and I read Shakespeare and I read Charles Dickens and I took French for four years. I would have been considered and it will be interesting to see if any of my classmates see this tape. I think I would've been considered an egghead in high school, I was, and still a small, meaning short, thin girl. And, studied a lot, got good grades, graduated number five in a class of 105, so very small class, but graduated near the top of it. And had a, had a pretty fine experience, had a, you know, despite the lack of boys in the school environment, had a couple of boyfriends in high school, so. Speaker 2: Were they from the neighborhood or from other Catholic schools--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Other Catholic schools, so one had gone to Mt. Carmel [High School, Chicago, Illinois], and another one had gone to Mendel [Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois] for a while, so other Catholic boys schools. And that was sort of the circuit, and that was fine and meanwhile I had a very nice neighborhood life. Between Crandon [Avenue] and Luella [Avenue] and Oglesby [Avenue], there was a nice smattering of teenagers, boys and girls. And a lot of them went to public schools, but that was fine, but pretty much stayed within the block. And I can remember taking many walking trips to Rainbow Beach [Park, Chicago, Illinois] and hanging out at the beach on 78th Street, and, and things like that. But I would consider myself to have a non-eventful kind of teenage years, so not a whole lot of rebellion, not a whole lot of excitement. Had a couple of summer jobs, would sometimes do summer studies and summer camps. By this time, I had a brother and a sister, by time I got into high school, that I spent a lot of time around the house, sort of minding where they were. I was fortunate because my mother was a school teacher, first in the parochial school system [Archdiocese of Chicago Catholic Schools, Chicago, Illinois], then eventually she went into the public school system [Chicago Public Schools]. So she was off in the summers, so I had the benefit of having my mother around and stuff like that, and hanging out with my brothers and sisters, and then the people in the immediate neighborhood. But I would consider myself to have just a very uneventful kind of teenage years. Story_ID: 187621 Speaker 1: But South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] was--now South Shore had a large Jewish population--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: As well as a large Catholic population. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At one time both of those populations, the white Jewish and Catholic population, were shrinking, I guess while you were living--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But that and, it also had a large activist kind of population in terms of those South Shore United Church [South Shore United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois] and other you know and some of the other real big churches around there. Speaker 2: Right, absolutely, it was a fertile environment, so I knew that there were Catholics and Jews and Baptists, it was fine, it was a very rich environment. But you know I had my little corner of it, and that's sort of where I hung out, I mean I had sort of my spot in it and that's where I was--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Was there a lot of discussion about civil rights in your school [Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, definitely not in my school, and actually not in my family either, and, I can't remember if we touched on this in the first interview. But my family was not--I wouldn't call them political in that sense of the word. So clearly aware of the times that we lived in, meaning you know the assassination of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] or Malcolm X or just the upheaval of the Civil Rights Movement. But if I had to characterize it, I would say my family, a, held whatever they thought about it close to their vest. And my family, meaning my mother [Editha Collymore Walker], my stepfather, my uncles and my grandparents held it very close to their vest and didn't actively participate in it. So not a whole lot of buttons, no posters in the window, no pictures on the wall of notable African American leaders, nothing like that. Very much aware but uninvolved, is, is what I'd say. But clearly there was a sense, and it think this is something that is definitely impacted me. Clearly there was a sense that race mattered, but I think the subtle instruction I was getting was that, it may matter, but you still have to do your best. We are not going to let you use that as any sort of crutch, excuse, X factor, whatever, you just have to go out there everyday and do your best. And if you do that, that will be just fine, so I what, so if you're not allowed to use it sort of isn't a factor in any way. But clearly it existed, I--sometimes I considered it like humidity, you can feel it, and some days, it's very oppressive. But you can't touch it, and then on the other days, it goes away, but you realize it's sort of always there at some level. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an interesting way to put it. Story_ID: 187622 Speaker 1: Now you were at St. Philip Neri [School, Chicago, Illinois] when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] died? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And being a minority in a minority situation, how did you feel? Speaker 2: It didn't matter from a school situation, in fact I think the more interesting part of that is--or maybe it was when, no, no, I think it was when Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert Kennedy] was killed. I was spending the night at a friend's house and sort of, there's this how do you get from point A to point B? And so my memory of it is more of safety and impact on the neighborhood [South Shore, Chicago, Illinois], but the school was, I'd say relatively neutral on it. I don't remember the school having an opinion on it one way or the other. Speaker 1: On Dr. King's assassination? Speaker 2: Yeah I don't, this, this--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Did your parents make a big deal out of it? Speaker 2: I don't remember them making a big deal out of it, quite frankly. Speaker 1: But you said Bobby Kennedy's assassination was different--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I remember they, nobody make a big deal of it, but I just remember having slept over at a friend's house and you wake up and it's another one, a couple months later and thinking that the world is really sometimes a crazy place. But other than that, no, and the neighborhood I lived in did not suffer a lot of violence, I mean 71st Street did, and 75th [Street] did. But my neighborhood, there wasn't a lot of violence associated with either of those assassinations. But yeah, clearly we knew about it and we watched it on TV and, and all of that, but no, awareness, but not a whole lot of involvement. Story_ID: 187623 Speaker 1: Now in terms of television--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, since you're in advertising now, but did you pay much attention to radio and television and movies when you were growing up? I know you read a lot. Speaker 2: I read a lot, listened to the radio a lot, and I think it's just to pick up popular music, so you know WVON [1690AM] and whatever was the precursor of what's now WVAZ [formerly known as WOPA-FM, WGLD, and WBMX] and, and things like that. So I definitely, by time I got to high school, had a preference for listening to black hit radio. Before that, I was, I was probably sort of agnostic and just sort of listened to anything, I wasn't a big media consumer. We didn't go to the movies a lot, and I think quite frankly, I can think about this now in hindsight, it, it wasn't very apparent in the moment. But in hindsight, we were actually kind of poor, so to take all five of us--we would go to the drive-in which is just crazy. And I remember once going to the drive-in to see 'Patton,' which clearly my stepfather picked, 'cause there's no reason why three kids under, I can't remember what year it came out. But three kids under fifteen wouldn't want to see 'Patton' and there some other bad movies at the, at the drive-in. We had this old, red, I think it was a Plymouth Valiant, so it was a four-door and this little red car and I could remember all of us sort of piling in and, and driving to wherever the, the drive-ins were at that point. I think it might've been one on 68th [Street] and Western [Avenue], I don't even remember, but we didn't do a lot of recreation, and I didn't watch a lot of television either. And in fact, just to, just to complete the circle, I grew up at the time of Vietnam War, didn't spend much time talking about that either. Clearly that was real far away, in a different country, you know would come home and sometimes the TV would be playing during dinner. And you realize what was going on, but there wasn't a large hue and cry or outrage in my house over the war. And I think of all of us were pretty--it didn't touch us that way, because one uncle was too old to go, the other one was disqualified from going. So we didn't have anybody who was going to be impacted that way, so it was another thing that happened. But aware of it, but not very involved, and, I watched the usual suspects, so I watched 'Julia' and I watched 'Batman' and I watched probably 'The Beverly Hillbillies', and 'Laugh-In' and whatever. Then by time I got into high school, I was clever enough to watch sports from time to time, so I, being a girl, would watch baseball and basketball, 'cause it helped in the few times that you had to talk to boys. I think I probably started watching a little tennis, but I'd watch a little sports, but I wasn't a big TV viewer at all. But the selection wasn't very good back then either. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187624 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite teacher in high school [Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, not, not particularly, my freshmen year algebra teacher was an African American man, who I thought was absolutely cute, but I didn't have a favorite one (laughs) no. Not a, no, not really, not really, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well were you in, did you run for class office or anything like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I ran for class office my senior year and lost, it was, you know, thrilling, I was on the forensics team so would go off on, for three years from my sophomore year to my senior year. Which is where I picked up my public speaking skills, and--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Pretty much had to write and give different kind of oratories. I was in the choir, not much of an actress, didn't bother with plays or anything like that, but I was in the choir. And yeah, pretty normal, wasn't an athlete though. Story_ID: 187625 Speaker 1: So did you graduate with honors in high school [Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Oh, I think so, I'd have to go back (laughing) and look, I think so, but yeah and I--it was kind of quizzical because I was torn between leaving home and where would I go, and what would I do? And essentially I made the decision not to leave home, if you will, and so my two choices boiled down to, and, and I got into both of them. The University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] down in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], which was sort of a bus ride away from home and then Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] in Evanston [Illinois]. And my mother [Editha Collymore Walker] tried to bribe me to go to the University of Chicago; she said that if I did that and lived at home, she'd buy me a car. And I didn't really believe her, so I got on the train and went up to Evanston and spent four years there. And between the two, I made the right choice. University of Chicago was I think in some ways too intellectual for me, fine school, great academics; I think I wanted a broader experience. And I clearly wanted to have some distance from home, and, and this is sort of, I guess, an oxymoron which is, that I really wanted to be away from home, but I picked some place that was only an hour and a half away, by train. But it opened up a different world, living on campus, living you know, by my--not quite by myself. But living on my own, meeting people from different parts of the country, having--it was, it's a long narrow campus, so having to traverse the campus. And, just sort of the establishment of independence a more, much--it's probably the first time that there was very clear distinction between me and them. Meaning my family where I was a separate entity versus them, but I went to college, I think in many ways college was a ball. It certainly expanded my social view, and even, and I wanna say it the right way, just a more diverse view of what was out in the world. So things that I had imagined at home I was now actually being exposed to, so that was pretty good. I got on campus, fell quite naturally into the African American student community there, which was really pretty small. There were on an undergrad basis, about 600 of us at any point in time on a campus that probably had forty-five, five thousand total students on an undergrad. So we were clearly in the, you know, eight to ten percent of the student population, and, and would hang out on the black house at Sheridan Road. The first trimester of my freshman year, I along with several other classmates and peers decided to become Kappa Kittens, so I sort of attached myself to a fraternity, and then later in my freshman year in the spring of 1975, I became a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta]. And my mother was a Delta, she had pledged down at the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois], and then I became a Delta in the Theta Alpha Chapter of Northwestern-- Story_ID: 187626 Speaker 1: So, very much connected to the African American community within Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], but then, also had an academic life. I went to school; initially I was, as many people of my generation were, a political science major. Started out studying politics and governments and political structures, actually in Latin America and in Russia actually, along with America. So sort of an international flavor to it, and I started there because I went to college with the intention of coming out a lawyer, not quite sure what kind of lawyer, in today's lingo. I don't think it would've been a litigator; it probably would've been a general practitioner more so than a corporate litigation type. But, but went with the intention of becoming a lawyer. Somewhere during my sophomore year, decided that I didn't want to spend three more years in school after I had finished. And that I wanted to perhaps go into public relations that I had found a niche in the area of communications. And that is the area of persuasion and how people communicate with each other, how they use language to transfer ideas, and so I moved into what was then called the School of Speech, it's now called the School of Communications at Northwestern. Speaker 2: Now what, what sparked this interest in--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: You know I can't--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Speech and language? Speaker 1: I can't, I can't find a trigger for it, I think--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Were there any public figures or--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: No public figures, actually my boyfriend at the time was in this School of Speech and really seemed to enjoy his major. But there was something more, even if I want to stay on the law track, there was something about the analytics and, and the attachment to how people communicate that was just more, what's the word I'm looking for? That was just more attractive to me than going the route of political science, and I don't know, over time, it's pretty clear. I mean if I, if I had to go back and do it all over again, and I'm not the type of person who, plays, you know, goes through this exercise very much. But if I really had to go back, I'd probably come out and be a psychologist today, so I'd probably be in a different field. Still one relying on how people communicate and how they communicate with each other, and where are the places where it can be enhanced, or where it can break down-- Story_ID: 186292 Speaker 1: I think I would've gone back and been maybe a psychologist or even an economist, I am fascinated with the application of incentives or disincentives toward behavioral. So I might've been something different but none of those things would've occurred to me at that point and time. So it's sort of mox nix. I decided that I wanted to go into public relations [PR] because I had an intense interest in how people use language to persuade. And if nothing else, it picked up out of my oratory training in high school with forensics, and once again how you persuade people to do things. And--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Politicians are also very much interested in how to persuade people to vote for them. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: And did, did political science like you know kind of feed this interest? Speaker 1: It might've in some very subconscious way, but I didn't have any intent--interest in going into politics. Although from time to time, even now people will come up to me and say, "You'd make a great politician," but that, I'm not sure that that's my thing. So I wanted to go into PR, but by time I really figured out that I want to do that, at that time most of the people who went into that discipline or industry, certainly from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], had come out of Medill [School of Journalism, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], which is the school of journalism. And I had no prayer of transferring in as a junior, and it was focused on the editorial side. So it was actually focused on getting people to be newspaper editors and journalists and things like that, and even its PR practice was much smaller. So one day, a company called Leo Burnett [Company Inc.] came to campus, and they were an advertising company and I went to the informational presentation. And I sat there and I went, well, PR and advertising are cousins, they just use different devices to persuade people, I think I could do that. There's a big famous well-known company here in town that does that, so I'm going to apply. And I sort of worked the interview lotto or whatever that was, and got an on-campus interview with the two recruiters that came. And actually one of them interviewed me and recommended that I come downtown, Leo Burnett was then in the Prudential Building [One Prudential Plaza, Chicago, Illinois], for a round of interviews. And I remember wearing a very nice blue suit with a white blouse and interviewing with, I don't know, I think it was about six people over the course of a day, from nine to three or so. And eventually I got a letter saying that I had been invited to join the company and I started at Leo Burnett on July 10, 1978. And I was hired into the Clients Service Training Program, where I was supposed to go on and become an account executive, what was called an account executive. And they were the people who did the business analysis and helped inform the creative product and managed client relationships and budgets and project management and a whole robust set of functions. And everyone who came in as a trainee, started in the media department. Story_ID: 186293 Speaker 1: And the media department [at Leo Burnett Company Inc.]--and this is fascinating, I've been doing this now for twenty-seven years, and it is just very difficult for people to conceive of what I do. So I'll--for the purposes of tape, I'll try to explain it. There basically--the basic product of an advertising agency is the creative, or that's the most noticeable product. Which are the ads either thirty second ads or sixty second ads, or print ads, or newspaper ads, radio ads. In today's environments, there can be web ads there can be all sorts of advertising out of home. And there are people who create those messages, and those are the creative, and they have art directors and they have copywriters. And they have their own system and functionality but eventually, those messages have to get to the consumer. And so, what the professionals in the media organization do, is we are the ones who work with clients to determine what is your budget, how large it is, how large should it be. Who do you want to talk to? Why would you want to talk to men thirty-five to fifty-four, why would you wanna talk to teenage girls who are thirteen to seventeen, who do you want to talk to? Why do you want to talk to them, what is the value of those targets, what's the value on a short-term basis or immediate basis? What's the value of them long-term, what are their mindsets, all of those kinds of things revolving around the consumer. Then we do analysis around what time of year is best for your product to talk to those kinds of consumers. So there are products that people use everyday like toothpaste and then there are products that have very long life cycles like cars. And what is the best timing based on the client's goals to actually have the advertising messages appear for the consumer. We talk about the right time of the, right time of the year, right time of the day, so should it be morning, should it be evening, should it be night? And then we get into analysis of what kind of vehicle, so, should it be television, should it be radio, should it be some form of printed media? In today's world, should it be some emerging contact, so should we try to do video on-demand experiments? Or should we be advertising on different search engines run by Google or Yahoo or what have you. But essentially, we are the people who write the plan and it has multiple components, but we write the plan for when consumers encounter the message. And then we actually get the message there, so we work with various partners in the media sales community. So we work with the people who sell television time, we work with the people who sell printed time. We work with the people who sell Internet or web-based advertising, and we negotiate the pricing. And so when you hear that one unit in the Super Bowl cost $2.4 million per sec, its people like us that have tried to negotiate that price on behalf of our particular clients. So in a very short way--and then after the advertising has run, we make sure that it got to the right consumer. So did it get there on the day at the time that we wanted, were we charged the right price for it? Did we ultimately get the true value, and then how did our efforts impact the client's business? So were we able to get movements in awareness or movements in persuasion or even movements in sales based on our activities. So in a very short way, we are the people who make sure that consumers see, hear, read, interact with the advertising. But we don't create it. And so it's-- Speaker 2: But you're essential to it? Speaker 1: We're essential to it--simultaneous) Speaker 2: You do everything from, you do the research yourself on--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: We do research on consumers, on vehicles, we do--and we use proprietary research that we conduct. We use research that clients have conducted and, and merge it into one holistic research point of view or knowledge. We try to drive the industry to create new kind of tools, create new kind of media vehicles, or ways of, of measuring the impact of what we do. So we interact with companies like Nielsen [The Nielsen Corporation], which is the primary rating service for broadcast television, both national and local. And we just interface in a whole lot of ways with a whole lot of groups, so we are both client facing. We are both sales community facing, meaning we have interactions with those types of people. And so it's a very, it's been a very robust look, but we're sort of the people for, traditionally and for a long part of my career, we're the people who've been inside the engine really making it go on many levels. But next time you see an ad, just know that someone like me got it there, and that it's there on purpose, not--very little of it is random. There are objectives and strategies and executions that go behind what you're seeing or hearing and when you're seeing or hearing it. Story_ID: 186294 Speaker 1: So starting in 1978 [at Leo Burnett Company Inc.], decided that--started in media, decided that I liked media and had a philosophy of when you find something that you really like, well you should keep doing it. And elected not to go into client service, I decided on my own that I probably needed more exposure to business and more exposure to business practices. I was twenty-one, sort of fresh out of school, I'm first generation, well, my uncle got pretty far in Commonwealth Edison. But I was sort of first generation corporate, and so there wasn't a lot at home to rely on. I can remember learning at the age of twenty-one, it was fascinating to me, almost crazy to admit it that you could have as many as twelve pieces of silverware on a formal table. And so when you go out to business luncheons, now I commonly have six pieces of silverware, where I didn't grow up in a house where you'd have six pieces of silverware. So there were a lot of conventions of business that I had to learn, in addition to learning the business that I was in. And I would say not a whole lot of, lots of love and support from my family, but not a whole lot of knowledge that could be conveyed. And a lot, each situation was sort a new one for all of us--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: A new world. Speaker 1: New world, and in many ways, and I've been called this in many ways, definitely a trailblazer in terms of, certainly my family and what it's like to live in a corporate world. And then eventually, what it meant to be an African American in this industry, and then to be an African American woman in this industry. And with, with all due humility as, as you trace my career, it's a series of firsts, so in 1979, I became the first African American and African American woman media supervisor that the company had ever had. So the company had been formed in 1935, so by time you get to 1979, the company is, what, forty-six years old. And I was the first, you know, African American media supervisor, when I became assistant media director, I was the first one of those. I was the first African American media vice president. At the time I came in, there were other African Americans in a pretty large class that year in 1978, and a number attritioned out, the majority went into client service and had very fine and robust careers there, but on the media path, I was sort of at most points the first one and the only one. Story_ID: 186295 Speaker 1: Were you aware, when you started [at Leo Burnett Company Inc.], of the black agencies in town and Barbara Proctor, Vince Cullers and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes I was. Speaker 1: Tom Burrell [HM Thomas J. Burrell]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was, the thing is and sort of you know it's there, the way it appeared that they operated to me, you know--if somebody says I'm wrong, I, I probably wouldn't debate it a whole lot--is that to some degree they did not do lots of training and instead would focus on hiring people who had already been in the industry. As a way of bringing tenured professionals into, into their ranks. So when I started on the general market side, a number of my friends and colleagues went off to work at Burrell [Communications Group] and different agencies, which is fine. But they just weren't known as a place to go get trained, and Leo Burnett just had the most robust training program at that point in time. I think, and I'm not so sure when I--well I think I probably came into clearest conscience on me and staying on the general market side, probably in the mid-1980s. And at that point, I'd been doing it for eight or ten years, and quite frankly, and quite simply, realized that we can do this. African Americans can do this, we can do the math, we can do the analysis, we can write the point of views, we can build productive client relationships. So why aren't there more of us, which is just an age old question not to be the subject of other things. But it's a question that you begin to ponder and I think with some degree of hubris and some degree of humility, I decided to plant my flag on the general market side. If only because I felt that if I left, maybe they wouldn't have to look for any more. And, and I don't, that's not a valued judgment necessarily on my part, so for people who are African American who wanna be in the advertising industry, I say pick whatever part of the industry you wanna be in. If you wanna, if you wanna work for a multi-cultural agency, right on, if you wanna work for the general market agencies, right on. But the truth of the matter is, we do have contributions to make on whichever side, and I decided to, as I said plant my flag on the general market side. And say I'm gonna stay here and sort of be the trailblazer or beacon for people who want to follow this path, as opposed to any of the other paths that are out there. So once again, no value judgment on why people pick any path, it's just that both should, in my mind should've been open. And here I was, and I was doing it, and so well, if I stay maybe more will come; if you build it they will come. And slowly but surely, the numbers of African Americans who entered into Leo Burnett on the media side, began to increase. Today, there, there are pretty meaningful numbers of people who are practitioners in the media space and some of them choose to go work at Burrell. I was just at a sort of team meeting and lots of people are transferring out of our organization over to Burrell. And I think that's fantastic. Or some go to work for Ebony or Essence here in the local market. I think that's great, I think it's great that we're populating the advertising industry with people of color. Story_ID: 186296 Speaker 1: But 1986 was about the first time that I really firmly or consciously planted the flag. And part of it was I was in a cohort set where it was time for us to become vice presidents [at Leo Burnett Company, Inc.], and I was passed over. And the person I was working for at the time, pretty much in a sort of defused way, pretty much said it's not the quality of your work, it must be something else. And you know, with the obvious being (laughing) once again, the, subtle--the humidity went up that day, if you will (laughing) it's a very humid day. And I realized that once again, you know, you can do the work, you can have the success, but that on some levels, there was always some other X factor. And you begin to contemplate which assignments you're given and which ones you're not given. And how the deck is actually stacked, if you will, and sometimes it's stacked randomly, and sometimes it's not. And the tricky part is to sort of decide when which is which. But the truth is, both exist; you just sort of have to pick one. I was not too pleased about being--in fact I was not pleased at all, I was very distraught over not having been made a vice president. And, but also made the commitment that I wasn't gonna leave in a huff, and wasn't gonna do all those kind of things. I kept doing my work and then eventually my window came up to prove that I should achieve vice president status. And even to this day, it was pretty intense, the head of the department called me in. It was a Friday and he said, I've gotta go away to a convention next week, it was in, would've been in late January, early February. And he said, "I've gotta go away to a convention, and when I come back, I want you to have produced a presentation on the state of network television as it exists today." And provide analysis on different viewing trends across a variety of demos, as we call them. So it would be women eighteen to thirty-four or women twenty-five to fifty-four, adults or men or whatever, variety of demos and include some other stuff. And also give me a point of view on whether you think FOX, which was then launching as a new television network, the fourth network. If they're gonna make it, and what's the impact of cable and how far can network television shares fall. And a pretty robust document that we can take to clients explaining where we are in network television, and he gave me a week to do it. So he said I'm--it was a Friday he gave me the assignment he says, next Friday I want you to be able to present this. I went, okay, and I quickly did an outline, showed it to my boss and then recruited, it was, one of the first major--many hands make light work. And recruited everybody I sort of knew in the department who had levels of expertise and because I was well-liked and well regarded, people did the work for me. And by time the head of the department came back, I had the presentation, I think I have a copy of it still today. It ended up, this was in the days of typewriters and daisy wheels so the production of it was a long-term issue is what--you know, just much different than producing documents today. And, and I wanna say the document ended up being probably close to 200 pages with all the analysis and points of view. And it went out to clients and was successfully received; it went up into the creative agency and was successfully received. And then at some point, later, I can't remember when, I mean probably within months, I got to be a vice president. Story_ID: 186297 Speaker 1: And then my career [at Leo Burnett Company Inc.] sort of seemed to get back on track, but I can't think of anybody else who was given the assignment to write something so significant in such a short period of time. As though one proof point for why you should be an officer of a company, I can't think of anybody else, in my career history that would do that. But once again, and this gets back to maybe where we were earlier. I think based on what--how I've been brought up failure wasn't an option, I had do my best, I had to pull out everything that I knew. Even if it was unfair because, even if I thought it was unfair because of race, there wasn't nothing, I couldn't act on that, I mean so, I had to get it done and I did get it done, and got it done with excellence. And so, that sort of where the theme, you know, the continuing thread on that. Then I went on to become a media director in 1989 where I got my own group, eventually became a senior vice president and then sort of fast forward and lots of other things went on. But I think a current, a constant undercurrent of excelling perhaps in an environment that at times didn't know what, that was benign towards my presence. Every now and then it might've been pejorative to my presence, but then, and when it suited it quite frankly, 'cause that's the way of the commercial world, was positive about my association. So it's, it's the full corporate monty, if you will, where corporations act in their interest. Story_ID: 186298 Speaker 1: Eventually we got to 1998 or so, the [advertising] industry had been changing and what was happening, this is at the media departments of the creative agencies were being, what we call unbundled. So they were being spun off into their own operationally and financially separate organizations and constructed as businesses of their own. And that's because there was a model in Europe that had done--a company in Europe that had done this very successfully. It also seemed to meet a true client need, and it also seemed to be the play to make in order to make the best investments for product and, and for the future. And so it spun off and sometime late in the fall of 1998, when I realized all this was happening, I made appointments to see, I had two bosses at the time [at Leo Burnett Company Inc.], and I made appointments to see each of them separately. And I said, "I don't know what's going on, I can't tell how the business is gonna be reshaped, but if there are opportunities to move into management or for me to contribute a different way, I just want you to know that I'm interested, and that my hat is in the ring." Unbeknownst to me, that they were thinking about how to restructure the organization and, and my name was sort of on the whiteboard. One of the dominos that would be flipped in play. And in February of 1999, I formally moved into management. And became the managing director of Starcom North America, I had both the U.S.A. footprint as well as the Canadian one. And that was in some ways pretty interesting as I've been known to say, I was moved into an operational kind of role, and so I had people in HR [human resources] and housing and staffing and contracts. And I was pulled offline, I'd no longer had any direct client responsibilities, and sort of our world, a large part of what goes on in ad agencies is driven by client relationships, and which ones you have and which ones you don't have. And how large they are, and how many of them you have, and all that other kind of stuff. And so for the first time in what about, what, twenty plus years, I no longer had any active client relationships. I think the secret, if you--it's sort of Cracker Jacks, the secret prize in the box though, was that I also picked up responsibility for the operating statement. And once you begin to understand how a company makes its money, so what are the sources of revenue, are those sources long-term or short-term? How you manipulate revenue, how you phase revenue, how you guarantee it, how the client relationship and its revenue stream, what that really means for the importance of a client. Or how you service a client, you begin to learn all about revenue and what it means. And then you learn about cost structures and what they mean so, with the money that's earned, how is it spent and how much of it is fixed? How much of it is variable, how much of it is going to overhead, how can you manipulate overhead, what are the ways you can't manipulate overhead? What kind of ratios or benchmarks get applied to the business that are best practice for business in general or best practice for your industry, you begin to learn all of those. And then also you figure out what happens with the profit, so the money that's left over, how is it invested, are those investments long-term or short-term? Are they people based or they are they not people based? And once you begin to see that, you really begin to see the innards of the machine, if you will. Because corporations are built to make money and we can talk about the kind and gentle aspects, we can talk about the prosocial aspects, we can talk about all of that kind of stuff. But at the heart of any for-profit corporation is profit and how you make money and how you manage your assets and resources in order to make the most money that you can. And once you see inside that world, you know, you can never look back, you already know what you know so. I think if I've done one level, if I had been if I had been concerned about losing client relationships, well certainly the fact that I got to see how the money is handled, was absolutely fascinating. Then over time, you work your way back into client relationships, but it's just at a different level. And it's a different kind of relationship and nobody thinks I do media plans anymore, and I think they would be horrified if they thought I was doing media plans anymore. But clearly by this point in time my job is to figure out what are the resources and assets and thinking of this company. And how it can be applied to the benefit of our client companies and somebody has to think about that. And where do those pieces mesh and where are they too far apart and how do we bring them together? And how do we do that in a way that is beneficial in the long term to both companies? And so that's pretty much where I am today, is in a leadership position with client relationships and monetary relation--you know, responsibilities and that's about it. Story_ID: 186299 Speaker 1: What you're really asking me to do is sort of condense some of the things I've learned in how might a student who is watching this tape be able to benefit from it. And what I will say is that there are a number of inherent tensions in business, and they might even be paradoxes, and so there is always a tension between status quo and innovation. And at a certain point every company has to decide, and it's all around growth or stasis, if you will. And right now the way American business is really constructed is that the benefits really go to those companies that are most innovative. So what that mean is you're always working some diminishing returns curve, and when you get to a certain point where you've gotten either maximum revenue for maximum efficiency, or you've just gotten maximum gain for the cost you put in, every business person is thinking about how do I reshape my organization, either the people who are in it, and talent sense, how do I reshape my product? How do I reshape what we all affectionately call the value proposition, meaning what we deliver to our end client, customer, consumer in a way that drives innovation and lets me continue growing my business? And so that's one of the essential struggles, and it's one that the media, not excuse me, the advertising industry is undergoing. Because what we're in now is a time where there's been this huge proliferation of vehicles, none like we've ever seen before. So there's network television and radio, there's video on demand, there's broadband, there's magazines, there's podcasting. There's just a whole wide variety of things, and you have to have a new model. And clients are asking for a new model and we within the advertising industry really have to deliver a new model, in order to keep up with the explosion of vehicles. Keep up with the fact that consumers are now in control of how our messages get to them. And in fact have much more power to say, yes, we gonna let ad A in and no, we're not gonna let ad B in than ever before, certainly ever before in my career, but I think what students need to understand is that there's this natural cycle that companies move through where they maximize what they do. And then everyone has to make a decision, every company has to make decision about where do they find--where and if they find innovation so that they can continue to grow profitably. Another paradox is how do you deliver profit, while maintaining an environment that is, has the highest morale for the people who work there? Depending on the kind of industry you're in, you have to keep your employees motivated both in a thinking standpoint and an economic standpoint, and an opportunity standpoint. But at the same time you have to drive profit, and I think one of the things that people don't realize is that these things are paradoxical. They're sometimes just downright contradictory and that a lot of the leaders in business who really get to the top are the people who understand that there is a paradox, that they're willing to stand inside of that paradox. That they are comfortable traveling one diminishing returns curve and then jumping off and creating a new curve, because they're following the growth. And that's something that we're not all taught, you know we sort of think that, and some of my personal philosophy is coming through. But we all tend to think of the world as linear, and it's not very linear. In fact it's cyclical and it moves on, you know, overlapping circles, and there's a little bit of chaos theory where you start here and eventually spend out and you end up over there. And so one thing I would tell, you know, students is that they have to be prepared in the business world to deal with paradox. They have to be prepared to deal with the fact that it's non-linear, and that a certain amount of uncertainty comes with that-- Story_ID: 186300 Speaker 1: And then what kind of skills do you need to develop in order to maneuver successfully? So for instance, I was taught that, and by the nuns [at Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois], maybe by my family, that when you start something, you finish it out till the bitter end. In business, eek, don't, that's not necessarily valued. What you do is you start the right things and you finish them out to their productive end. And if that's 72 percent, great, if it's 86 percent, fine, if its 97 percent fine. But my job is to find the most productive intersection and then when it's no longer productive, whatever that point is, is to move on. And do the next thing that's gonna add value for clients, and so in many ways when you get into leadership, you are always looking for the next thing. Because you know that there's a pretty finite life cycle to the current thing, and that your job isn't to manage the current thing until its useful end. But that's a very different way of, you start here, you end there, you walk through all the steps. No, that's not my job. My job, if, I can be very successful and never complete anything till its end, as long as I'm doing the right things. And so I think that's a very different way of looking at so between paradox and diminishing returns curve, and whether you're actually supposed to finish everything, it's a different way of looking at business. If you get high enough in the leadership of the company, right now it's 2005, I'm totally thinking about 2007. I'm not even operating in today, because I've gotta think about what is my client's world gonna look like two years from now, what is my business environment gonna look like two or three years from now? Because my job is actually to prepare the company for the future, not to manage it currently, so now even my role is very different. Am I setting us up for the maximum amount of success in the future, well most of us are trained to just look at the world as it is today. Well, that's not really, that is not always rewarded or that is not always your job. So it's, where's the future? So for young people going into business, it's always important to know how does your company make money now? And how will it make money three to five years from now, are those answers similar, are those answers different? If they're different, how different are they, what are the skill sets needed to deliver that kind of success three to five years from now? How do you either get those skills to the people who work there right now or how do you find new people to have those skills? But it's a forward looking kind of assignment or exercise, who's my competition now, and who's my competition gonna be three to four years from now? And depending on whether the competition or the competitive set is gonna be similar, or whether it's gonna be different, will lead to how I construct and drive the company. And so what I like to tell people is you always have to be looking a little bit further out because that's really what leaders do in terms of pulling their companies into the future. So you're always creating and visioning as a leader, you're creating and visioning the future. There's somebody else who manages today, and so when you get into what allows, you know, people of color to get into high leadership positions. It's because eventually you realize you have to shift this mindset from today to tomorrow, and that you're living in a different kind of world. So it's tomorrow, with paradox, with diminishing return curve, and all you're looking for is the productive intersection of where you can push your product and get maximum revenue. And when you maximize that, you go on to the next one, very interesting exercise and I'm not sure I would've thought about it that way. I'm not sure that what I'm saying is some great aha for large groups of people, but for somebody whose first generation corporate, wow. Didn't quite know that this is ex--that this is how the sausage is made. You know once you get that insight you what is it and how do you communicate it and I think for a number of people of color, you just don't get a view that's close enough to say, well if it's really that, then here are the five things I need to do or here are the five behaviors I have, I need to have, versus oh, it really looks like that. Because you gotta know what you're dealing with. I tell people all the time that--when 'cause I'm asked a lot about diversity and what it means. At the top of any corporation, there's only one color, and it's green. It's the color. After that, once you deal with that color, then all other sorts of colors are possible. But corporation, once again, is built to make money, and that's why I encourage people to know how does your company make money now? How can they make money in the future, how do you attach yourself to those kind of revenue streams, can you create something new that will enhance the revenue in the future? And I suspect that a lot of times people of color don't always think in that way, no. Absolutely some do, those who've now gone into banking and Wall Street understand this even much more clearly than I do. But it sort of the rules of the road, there are some pretty clear rules and they are what they are, and once you see them, you know them. So they're totally understandable, I suspect that what happens with a number of us is that we just don't get close enough to actually see them. But they're not totally mysterious, they're not unknowable, they're not undecipherable. So that's sort of what I would tell students if they ask me what it's like and what they should be thinking about. Story_ID: 186301 Speaker 1: The other thing I'd say is, each one of them should ultimately think about, are they willing to work for themselves? Because I--a lot of what goes on is really about wealth creation and, and actually inside the corporate structure, unless you're in a very hot industry or growth industry, it's very hard to get wealthy that way, inside of a corporate structure. But you can get wealthy inside of a very entrepreneurial structure, but then you just have to learn how money works. So as I've gone through and encountered more people of wealth, one of the--this one's just amazing, I mean the first thing I, I've know this one for a while, but it's just amazing when the first time I realized that most wealthy people get so because they never used any of their money. It's all leveraging. Whoa, well how do I leverage? How much risk can I tolerate, whose going to fund that, who may actually want to buy my risk, who, you know, who wants to invest that way? There are actually people who actually wanna lose money for tax benefits and all sorts of reasons; there some people who want to lose money. How do I find them, how do I write a business plan, how do I do these things? And I think that those are all very interesting avenues for young people to explore as well, but the leveraging of money is just a fantastic kind of thing. Because you can get very far on very little money or very little of your own money, people do it all the time, people do it everyday. But you know when you're sort of, a person of color and you grow up kind of poor, you never think about it that way at all. Speaker 2: No, there's no example--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: There's no example. Speaker 2: You're right. Speaker 1: And, and actually in one of the more, kind of engaging--I have by this time, you know, lots of colleagues and friends. And we just have these interesting debates that are just topics to talk about, nothing to do, but you know in many ways in the early-stage black entrepreneurial class, the rules of the game was, were to grow your company and hold on and make it a legacy company. And I don't know, in today's marketplace, I think you build them and flip them, and then you go build another one and then you flip it. Because if you're into wealth creation you gotta keep flipping. Speaker 2: Yeah, there's been a lot of criticism of people like--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Robert Johnson [Robert Louis Johnson] for instance, with BET [Black Entertainment Television]--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Or [HM] Edward Lewis recently with Essence and you know I'll go on record, Ed Lewis, and I know him, he did exactly the right thing. He was supposed to flip it, I hope he goes and builds something else, and I hope he flips that as well. Speaker 2: But people say that, the general public says he's taken our--this treasured thing that should be a legacy for the rest of the black community and he, he's given it to a white man, you know. Speaker 1: Well, I would frame it as what he did was classic leveraging because if you really want to do wealth creation, you have to leverage. I think the public, everyone who is a reader and subscriber of Essence, should figure out exactly who they want to write to, to make sure that the editorial mission of that publication stays true to what it was. So you can exert a different kind of incentive or pressure to make sure that that magazine stays exactly relevant to that community. And then we all need to clap and applaud and encourage Ed to go off and buy something else, so he can flip something else, so he can create more jobs and do leveraging. So I am clearly in the leverage camp versus the legacy camp, but that's how it's done. It's, I mean, true wealth creation is through flipping and leveraging, it's not through legacy. Story_ID: 186302 Speaker 1: Do you suppose there'd be more people in the leverage camp if they understood what, you know, this, because this is a--what you're explaining other people we've interviewed have explained the same thing-(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I don't think our community really understands, I mean, some of our most serious political figures don't understand this. Speaker 2: Yeah, the thing is, and not to get too philosophical, which is another sort of discipline I've could've gone into, but really doesn't pay much as I can tell, is that it's all a matter of whether you have the point of view of scarcity, whether you believe resources are sort of scarce, so you have to hold on to exactly what you have and don't let it go--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Well that's what we all believe in, basically. Speaker 2: We tend to believe in scarcity, whereas, the leveraging line said, says that there's abundance out there. And there's more than enough, if you're willing to take risk and you know where to go get it. And it's interesting, you know I do all sorts of seminars and things like that, and I was with a session leader, oh, sometime late last year. And we were talking about the issue of risk, and, and risk can be boiled down to a formula that says it's all about the probability versus the consequence. And if you can figure out what the probability, so if you invest X amount of money in a business, what's the probability that it will fail? You can go you know from 10 percent to 100 percent, and what are the consequences, I mean it could be from very little to very great. And you can work out a mathematical formula that tells you what to do with risk. And so I think one of the things is that we have to get comfortable walking away from a philosophy of scarcity into one that says that says there is enough. And that with measured risk that we as a community can create wealth, and when I look at some of the newer immigrant populations coming into the United States, they're not operating out of scarcity. They're operating out of risk and risk management, and in fact there's a guy at the gym I work out with, he's what I call a money man, so. I forget what it is that he trades, 'cause another guy actually trades euro [currency] futures, but I think this guy is just sort of a regular trader broker. And he said, the key to wealth accumulation is not yield management, in fact there's a quote, he told me this quote. And I think it's by a gentleman named Graham, but the key to wealth accumulation is not yield management, it's risk management. And so the trick is perhaps not to figure out how you're gonna get 3, 4, 5 percent, but it's how you make sure your portfolio has the least amount of risk on it. The different ways of thinking about it, so back to where I am, that businesses in America grow because people take risk all the time. And I think we as a community should think about how we take risk, especially in the area of economic risk. Story_ID: 186303 Speaker 1: That leads us to one of our standard questions that we wrap up with, which is what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My, jeez, wish I'd known, I could give you a more cogent answer and I hate to start, I hate to start with fears or concerns but-- Speaker 1: Hopes and concerns actually. Speaker 2: Well my hopes, that is a good way, I like the affirmative. My hope is that we will continue to capitalize on the knowledge and gains that many have made in corporate America. And that whatever we have learned, be passed on for the benefit of the community. So it is perfectly fine with me if people view this tape and say I'm gonna go out and start my own business selling X product, as opposed to I'm gonna follow in her footsteps and go into advertising. I'm agnostic about whatever that outcome is, but I am hopeful that people will see that you can come from a modest background. That if you expand the boundaries of your world, if you're willing to cross through or go through some of those boundaries that, that you can find success or learning or additional knowledge, or something else for you to pass on once you've gotten, once you've gotten through. I would hope that people would not be put off by the difficulties, so I'm not gonna tell anybody that this is easy. There are just days when this can be incredibly difficult, but it can be beneficial and I think these are the things we need to learn. So I am I am hopeful that people will continue to walk the difficult road so that doorways and opportunities are open to us. I also hope that people will take not only my interview, but hopefully the body of the interviews as permission to go create whatever they want to create. And so there are all these structures that exist today and there's how it works, and you know what, you can just go create something different. And while I am not, I am not a great listener of hip hop, I mean I know what it is and I know some of the artists or whatever, it's just not my musical taste. I'm far more of a Luther Vandross girl or, or you know Vanessa Rubin, I mean, but I think that that's fascinating. They have created their own economy out of the fruits of their labor and talent, and while there are parts of it that we all wish would change, and there's language issues, putting that aside, they have created, and so for that I'm very supportive of the fact that we are willing to create and create new and different things. And maybe because of the efforts of a [HM] Russell Simmons and others you have far more African American youths thinking they are gonna grow up to be a C.E.O., and the C.E.O. of their own company, and that's absolutely wonderful. I have an intense hope that through my efforts I'm going to create more opportunities specifically for my children. That I have a daughter who's fifteen and a son who is now thirteen and that they will be able to benefit from my knowledge. And that I will actually have created enough wealth, don't need a whole lot. That if I can give them the initial seed money where they can go, invest in something and create it and move it along and then flip it and do it again, I think that would be just great. Story_ID: 186304 Speaker 1: So do you see your future as more entrepreneurial activity to, in a sense to--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, not necessarily, I don't know, I think at the right time, I may go off into the not-for-profit sector. 'Cause I think there's a lot of good work that, that has to be done, but my husband is an entrepreneur, so I get a taste of that. So right now I get a taste of entrepreneurial and corporate and so I understand that. And eventually in my own career set, I might get the, the for-profit and the not-for-profit of it, so I'll get a total view. But my hope is that because of what I've learned and what I've been able to accumulate in terms of knowledge or even resources that I'll be able to facilitate my kids participating in sort of the economic life or the world. That they can go out and become creators themselves, and whether they wanna be entrepreneurs or they wanna create in some other kind of space, that they have the freedom to do that. That my work, what I've learned is beneficial to them. Speaker 1: What, what kind of not-for-profit activity do you see yourself-- Speaker 2: I'm not quite sure. Speaker 1: Involved in? Speaker 2: I'm not quite sure there. On some days, I'm intensely pulled to those organizations that are trying to help you know the younger generation move into corporate America. So I think I have an awful lot of empathy and knowledge for that condition, but you know, I don't know where it will--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Take me but I think at some point I'll do something different than I do today. Story_ID: 186305 Speaker 1: What's your assessment of the assets that you bring to the corporate world that if, you know, equals the succ-you know, have added up to the success? Speaker 2: I am, well, believe it or not I get asked this question kind of frequently. I am a divergent thinker and I think all corporations need those, so I am willing to entertain different ideas from different entry points and absorb that. So the, the counterpoint is converging, convergent thinking where you just sort of accept what's known. So I sort of throw the shutter wide open and say what's out there, what are the different solutions or possibilities? I'm frequently asking what if, and I think it's sort of divergent thinking and what if thinking that allows you to innovate and create more. I'm known as a straight, sort of a straight problem solution person, so what's the problem what are the solutions? What's the, what are the options or the potential risk probabilities, consequences that go with any of the potential solutions? And I think I'm pretty good at that, I definitely moved into--I'm thinking about leadership, which is how do you transfer knowledge and skills and empower those people who are, you know, coming up through the ranks, to be able to contribute productively in the environment. For some I'm known as pretty direct, sort of say what I mean and mean what I say, which believe it or not is kind of rare sometimes in the corporate environment. Sometimes there's not a lot of incentive to being direct (chuckling) you do a lot of Kabuki dances, if you will. And so you have to be artful at that, I'm known for being diplomatic, is, I like to say I have some very engaging ways to tell people their babies are ugly. But so diplomacy is one of my skills and, and you know, I don't know. I think all-around decent person, that, that helps; that'll get you some places. But I think it's the first four that really get you...