 Story_ID: 91252 Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Ernest McBride, Jr. and Carl McBride. And, sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Ernest Samuel McBride. E-R-N-E-S-T, Ernest, S-A-M-U-E-L, Samuel, and capital M-C-capital B-R-I-D-E, McBride. Speaker 1: All right, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was Carrollton, C-A-R-R-O-L-L-T-O-N, Carrollton, Mississippi, November the 12th in 1909. And I'm already served my 91st birthday. Speaker 1: All right, you just had a birthday, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This last week. Speaker 2: My 90--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You're 93. Speaker 2: Ninety-three [93]. Now, my 93rd birthday, I meant. I forget sometimes how old I am. Birthdays come so fast. Speaker 1: Now, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is Civil Rights organizer, I would say, because I never had a job since I was grown that paid me as much as a hundred dollars a week. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, but I knew how to--as my daddy [Grandville "Grant" McBride] always said, "If you could use your brain and use your hands, you can make a living in America." You don't have to worry. So that's one thing I never worried about, was making a living. Speaker 1: And I understand that you can do several different things (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of things. Speaker 1: You're trained as an electrician-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a carpenter, a bricklayer. Speaker 2: And, that's right. Speaker 1: You had a shoeshine shop at one time. And-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) store, and I can a little of all of it. Speaker 1: And you can build a house too. You built houses-- Speaker 2: Yes, we built two houses. When I was fourteen, before I finished school, before I got twenty. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: We built two houses in Arkansas, and repairing and did that for years in Long Beach, I did. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'd like to ask you what is today's date? Speaker 2: Beg your pardon? Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is, you mean the date? Speaker 1: Today, yeah. Speaker 2: Today, oh, Thursday, [sic, Wednesday] November the 20th, yeah, November the 20th, 19--2002. Speaker 1: Yes, sir, okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the home of Ernest McBride, 1461 Lemon Avenue in Long Beach [California], 90813. Story_ID: 91253 Speaker 1: Okay, now before we get into depth, there are five "People Magazine" type questions that I'm compelled to ask you, and the first one is--and they just require a short answer. The first question is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Food? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, it's hard to tell what my favorite food is because I like everything. If it taste well, I'll eat it. If it doesn't taste well, I don't eat it. I don't smell it by the smell, I eat it by the taste. And I have nothing that I say that I don't like. I don't like it if it doesn't taste right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I don't eat it if it doesn't taste right. So. Speaker 1: And, sir, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Beg your pardon? Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Teller? Speaker 1: Color? Speaker 2: Color, oh, then well, I got more adjusted to favorites in color when I met my wife. She liked pink, and I got to the place I liked pink. Pink was my favorite color, and she liked (unclear), and I, of course, developed a like for it too also. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, I live through 24 hours a day (laughter), and 365 days of the year. I was never choice about it. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I never--vacation wasn't ever part of my life, vacation, because I was never on a job which gave me a vacation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never, never worked on a job where I got a vacation. And, of course, that's why I never had vacations. It wasn't a part of my home life. Speaker 1: And now, the fifth question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A what now? Speaker 1: A favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Saying. Well, I probably have so many of 'em, like, "If you use your hands and head, you can make a living" and that, may say, "If you treat everybody right, you'll live right, you'll have a happy life," and that "all men are born and created equal". I believe that all of 'em came at the mercy of a woman slapping him out of life. Yet, he become dominant over the woman, so I just figured that life is a wonderful thing when you look at it. I have a lot of respect for life and human beings. And I've always thought of it as a great part of life and it should be respected and-- by all men. And-- Story_ID: 91254 Speaker 1: All right, Mr. McBride, we're rolling again, and I was asking you before we had that interruption about your family history. And what do you know about your family history right now? Speaker 2: Well, my knowledge of it is only what I had experience of being raised in Mississippi and the family--what I learned from the family, most of it. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Yeah, did they tell-- Speaker 2: I never went to school. I was ten years old before I went to school. I had four sisters and brothers that had never been to school. And my mother [Julia Porter McBride] taught 'em to read and write. Speaker 1: Excuse me. I wanted to find out if you knew something about the history of your family before you came around, like what your--where did you grandparents come from or where did they, you know, were they always in Mississippi or did they come from some other place or what kind of jobs they had in the 19th Century, you know, before--that's what I need to ask you about. Speaker 2: Well, my, my grandmother, she was what you call "house slave." They worked as she did, you cook and you cleaning all up at the house. Speaker 1: Was this your mother's grandmother or, I mean your mother's mother or your--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My mother's mama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother's, not my mother, my mother's mama. Story_ID: 91255 Speaker 1: And, well, and my dad [Grandville "Grant" McBride], he worked on a farm. He was a farmer. He was quite a farmer too because he helped, kept all his horse harnessed, plows and things like that. He repaired 'em and he was a blacksmith and even I was large enough to pump the bellow that blows the air onto the coals that heat hide. And he was, wasn't a good farmer at all, but he, he was a good upkeep of equipment, wagon wheels and everything. He would have to, sometimes he kept old wheels and things for emergencies of wagon, that got so dry he had to put 'em in water and make 'em swell where that would, even the rim would stay on the wheel. And so he, he did all--well, my dad actually, I'd seen him pull as much as four teeth. People at night would come in for him to pull their teeth, have a terrific headache, toothache. And he would pull the teeth. Speaker 2: So you're saying the blacksmith actually was pulling teeth? Speaker 1: That's what he did. He shoed horses, and he pulled teeth (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) He had the tongs and stuff--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and this man come for him to shoe a horse, and he'd make a horseshoe and, and fit it on that horse's foot. And later on (unclear) it was like he would, a shoe, put a sole on a shoe. And he soled our shoes, and put heels on 'em, made fly points, and he made wagon wheels and he was quite a all-around man. And, of course, he always had the theory to us that "If you use your head and your hands in America, you can make a living," said, "don't ever worry about making a living. And he said, before you starve to death, you can go out behind the house and get--they throw away enough food to feed you. So don't worry about eating. There's more in your future besides making bread and meal. And he never lost confidence that he was in a tough spot. Speaker 2: Now, sir, what was your father's name? Can you tell us his name and spell it for us and tell us when he was born and where he was born? Speaker 1: Well, he was, as far as I know, he was born right in North Carrollton, Mississippi, about seventeen miles North of Greenwood. And Greenwood is, of course, the first big city you get to before you go into the Delta, in Mississippi. We moved from Greenwood to Osceola [Mississippi] where we spent 1917, '18' [1918] and '19' [1919], in that Mississippi during the World War [World War I]. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 91256 Speaker 1: Well, sir, what was your father's name? And how do you spell his name? Speaker 2: Grandville McBride, Grandville. They called Grant, but his name was Grandville, Grandville McBride. Speaker 1: G-R-A-N-V-I-- Speaker 2: G-R-A-N-T-V-double-L-L-E. [sic, G-R-A-N-D-V-double-L-L-E] Speaker 1: Oh, Grantville [sic, Grandville]. Speaker 2: Grandville, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And they called him "Grant" McBride. And my dad was never a sharecropper. When he began, he began with--the family that mother [Julia Porter McBride], my grandmother worked for, he, he was--she had worked for him so long, when dad married my grandmother [sic, mother], why her, the old man that she worked for, the old, that she cooked for and cleaned up the house, they gave him a little mule and a wagon, the old man did. And so it started him to farming on his own. He never worked as a sharecropper. He always worked as a farmer and eventually had my sister, got grown and married. Well, she lived with the family land, and he would always rent enough land that you would have at least an extra house on the land. He would try to rent as much as sixty acres, and he would farm it by he, my sisters and brothers and mother. She was a great farmworker too, and he had one family that moved along with us. Reed was their name, the Reed family, and they sharecropped with us. And my dad finally had two mules and two horses. And he had--we had a, where we would move the family from land-to-land, we'd move them in the surrey we had. It's a buggy with four seats. It's equivalent to a Cadillac now (laughter), this buggy was, had two lights on the side of it. And it had a--you could button it up in case of rain where you could put flaps all around it and we would use that to haul their family in. And my mother would usually drive that, and I had a brother [Grant McBride]. He was a, well, he was four years older than I was. Story_ID: 91257 Speaker 1: And I remember he would drive--when we moved from Carrollton, Mississippi to Osceola, Mississippi, it was about thirty miles, but it taken us all day and all night to go there because the horses walked along. And so we all, the family, kids all got in the buggy and this was this two-seat buggy, you know, with flaps all around it, you know, my mother would drive it with the two horses. And the two mules would be driving the wagon with all our furniture in it. And we would, and that's the way we would move from farm to farm. Of course, we moved from there to the Kate Allen [ph.] farm in Osceola, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Can you say that again for us? The what farm? Speaker 1: Beg your pardon? Speaker 2: What was the name of that farm? The-- Speaker 1: Osceola? Speaker 2: No, you said Cane Isle, something-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: What was it? Speaker 1: The Kate Allen. Yeah, that was the old, the old-- Speaker 2: Kate Island, you said. Speaker 1: Kate, Kate Allen. Speaker 2: Kate, K-A-P-- Speaker 1: K-A-T-E, Kate Allen. Speaker 2: Allen? Speaker 1: Yeah, and so he was the old fellow that run the Mississippi boat and, on the Mississippi River and down through there. As a matter of fact, they say that the old Kate Allen home that we lived in was the one that was originally built by a Kate Allen family, that ran this steamboat down the Mississippi. And when we moved there, we could see where the water settled along about the size of that mantel piece up on the wall. All around it was a water circle where they had had a flood in that land, and it was three (unclear) beams in the ceiling was very well-built house. We lived there two years. First year, our farm was nothing but peanuts and, and corn, I think, we raised. And we had three, two, three-bedroom houses on the lot. And, of course, we moved into our house, my wife--I mean my sister and her husband, one year. The first year, he was in the [U.S.] Army, World War I. So we moved in there, and raised nothing but peanuts and corn. We ate the corn. The cows ate the shucks off it, the bush, and the, and the hogs eat the peanuts and we raised peanuts. We had three houses on the, on the rental spot that he rented. And these three houses was full of nothing but peanuts. We fed the hogs that year. The tops on the peanuts were fed to the cows. And we used fishing and hunting for our food, other than going, having meal and flour, buying flour in town. And we lived there all during the winter [1917 to 1918] which was the worse winter we had, right during the war. Story_ID: 91258 Speaker 1: And we had the flu that year when we was there. And it was nine of us in the family, seven kids, mother [Julia Porter McBride] and father [Grandville "Grant" McBride]. And eight of us are in the bed with the flu. And I had one brother that one of the things we noted about him was different from the other. When he was big enough to pick up a cigarette, he was smoking. And he never had the flu in 1918. And he had to go to town and get the doctor, and the doctor couldn't drive no further than the outskirts of town. And he stopped his car and would get on the horse behind my brother and they would ride the horse into our town, into our city. And the doctor stayed three days at our house. And so, of course, I didn't know much about it because one of the things I was, I guess I was six or seven years old. And I-- Speaker 2: Eighteen [1918], yeah, you would have been--yeah, nine, I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah, about nine. And I was, I went to sleep and slept fifty-six hours before I woke up. The doctor stayed at our home, and he said, "Well, long as he sleep, and I can put medicine down his throat," he said, "let him sleep." And I got up, when I woke up, I was only in the bed long enough to know I was awake, and got out. And I never, I was never bothered again. But it was one of the worse winters we had ever had. Story_ID: 91259 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, let me backtrack just a little bit, and then we'll pick back up. But I wanted to ask you, now, you gave me your father's name [Grandville "Grant" McBride]. Do you know when your father was born? Do you have a date? Speaker 2: No, I've forgotten that because--of course, that would be easy to find somebody at the graveyard. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Seventy-seven-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Eighteen seventy-seven [1877]. Speaker 2: Yeah, around there, around there. Speaker 1: Eighteen seventy-seven [1877]. Speaker 2: --seven, [1877]. Yeah, he was born--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): In the 1880 census, we found him on there, and he was three years old. But I don't know what month or his birthday. Speaker 2: That's good. That puts us in the ballpark. And then your mother, I didn't find out her name. What was your mother's name? Speaker 1: Julia, J-U-L-I-A, Julia McBride. Speaker 2: And what was her maiden name? Speaker 1: Maiden name was Porter. Now, and-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Wasn't she a Jackson before--her actual maiden name? Speaker 1: Naw, her mother was--and that was, the family name was Jackson. Speaker 2: Now, her mother's name was Jackson? Speaker 1: Nah, her grandparents was the Jacksons. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And your-- Speaker 1: --she was a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you said her mother was a house servant? Speaker 1: Yeah, Julia Porter was her name. And, and she was--her mother was a cook at the family house. And, and my older sister [Helen McBride] was--his father was the old man that run the place, my older sister. Story_ID: 91260 Speaker 1: Now, you couldn't tell her--she [his sister, Eddie McBride] had a lot--we had a lot of fun when we got to Long Beach [California] here because they hired her in two or three jobs and found out she was a Negro, and they fired her (laughter). And she had several, just about fights over it. And here because the women fired her, and she was very close--I'll tell you how near white she looked. When we came out here, drove out here from Little Rock, Arkansas, North Little Rock, Arkansas to Wilmington [Los Angeles, California], we couldn't get a sandwich on the road. Way we would do would stop before we get to the place. She would get out of the car and go up and buy a sandwich and bring back to us because they wouldn't sell us a sandwich-- Speaker 2: Un, un-un. Speaker 1: --in Arizona. That's how it was going out there. And, of course, they--she got out here and many places, they hired her, thought maybe she was a Mexican or she'd go--'cause they had the different people, you know, in the Long Beach then. And they would hire her. And she was at the, she was a short-order cook for Greenspan, naw, it's Goldstein, Goldstein, big cafe. Goldstein's was right on Broadway and Pacific. And during the War [World War Two?], two boys came in there, Negroes, and the girls told 'em, the waiters told 'em to go around to the back and they'd serve you. So she went around there. My sister was, asked them why were they coming out? They said, well, they wouldn't serve us around in front, told us to come around here. And she pulled off her (unclear) the apron she had and said, come on, caught 'em both by the arm. She went down there and she raised so much hell in that cafe, they called the police. And the police come and then the police couldn't help but denounce the fact, the fact that they were in uniform and in the [U.S.] Navy and couldn't get nothing to eat in Long Beach. So they, she apologized and her and my sister had quite a tussle before she apologized. She pushed her up against the wall and threatened to choke her to death, if she, if she didn't feed the boys. And, of course, she denied ever doing this. But she had several occasions like that. But one morning she was working on Pacific Avenue in a little hotel there, and she was cleaning up, you know, cleaning up these hotels. And my brother taken her to work. And the woman looked out and asked, said "Eddie, said that--who was that fellow brought you to work?" Eddie said, "That's my brother." She said, "Ah, Eddie I never knew that you were a Negro." She said, "Well, yes, I am and I'm not denying it" (laughter). So she said, "Well, I'm sorry, I can't, I can't work you, I can't employ you." She said, "Well, pay me my money." The woman said, "Well, you have to come back." She said, "I ain't coming back. I'm--this is the last time I'm a leave here and you gon' pay me before I leave here." And so, naw, the woman, she was gon'--wasn't gon' pay her. So she grabbed the woman, and pushed her up against the wall and the woman was hollering, asking her to stop. And so she--the other people called the police, and she told 'em, say, "I'm not leaving outta here till you pay me." And said, "You got to pay me first." So the police came, and the police told her, said, "Well, lady, yeah, you have to pay her if you're firing her, say, you got to pay her." So she had to borrow money from the rest of the people, some of the tenants in there in order to pay her to leave. Then she walked out. But that's the way we found Long Beach when we came here. Story_ID: 91261 Speaker 1: Now, let me go back. Now I wanna go back to your childhood, and I wanted to ask about your mother [Julia Porter McBride]. Now, what kind of person was your mother and what did she do? Speaker 2: What mother--mother was a cook beyond cooking. She, she was a real cook. Now, and all that she did for this family was plan meals and cook. That's all she did. And so, even when she--that's what her mother did. And even when she got here [Long Beach, California], and I had the--back in the early days, I worked with a couple of fellows at Ralphs Grocery Company. And one of the men got married, and she planned his wedding and wedding reception and everything and served at his house up on, just off of Atlantic, just East of Atlantic on Willow is where the fellow lived and where he had the wedding. Speaker 1: So she had the skills of a caterer also? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, she did. Not only that, she had menus of her own that she would make things that a lot of people never heard of before. Story_ID: 90165 Speaker 1: That's right. Not only that, she made all our clothes practically, and my dad [Grandville "Grant" McBride] would hardly let a show go 'cause he would resole it. He put a sole on it or if it was ripped, he'd sew it up. And so we, he would repair what we got rather than to buy new stuff a lot of times. And my mother and my sister [Helen McBride] was a seamstress. Matter of fact, my sister went to college in North Little Rock, Arkansas, went to Shorter College, and when she went in there, she knew more about seamstry than the teacher did. And consequently, she spent three years of doing nothing but lining these silk linings in a women's coat--they'd wear a heavy coat. And a lot of 'em had silk linings. Well, that was one of the most difficult things to sew is silk because it slips so. So when my sister went there--and she finished about three and a half, nearly four years of college doing nothing but making these and lining these coats and things that the teacher would take in. And she would do 'em, and the teacher was getting paid for making 'em (laughter). And so, and she eventually at home would have the little stores downtown, they'd send her whole bolts of goods and would send her a pattern to make so many by this pattern, so many by that pattern till she would make, use up the whole bolt of goods that they sent her. And that's the way she, we did that. I think the last I remember of her making those things--of course, it was pretty late in school--I probably left for-- Arkansas before then, a guy broke in our house. And what he did, he was one of the fellows that would, had stole a bolt of goods and sold it to her. And she had made a bunch of dresses and stuff for the family. And he broke in the house one night and stole all of 'em (laughter). This guy, evidently he did it. We know because that's all he taken was these dresses. And he knew this material that he had sold my mother and them. So that was the last she ever bought of any, any goods that they bought. But I remember when I first got married here, my wife's [Lillian M. McBride], her mother, my wife's mother--my mother, at least, was--and my wife's mother, my wife bought presents for 'em for Christmas. And she went and bought these big Chinese pajamas and my wife's mother really enjoyed the pajamas, but my mother thought they was throwing away money to give her such a thing as that. So she taken the pajamas and why, the daughter, the older daughter, she had a sister, had a little baby just about a little bit older than Barbara. So my wife taken those pajamas and made each one of 'em-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Your sister Speaker 1: --a little (unclear), made my daughters each one of 'em a little skirt, it's a jumper (unclear) dress (unclear) flaps like on 'em. And, and she was really concerned about, she knew that they were big enough to make both of 'em dresses, and to, made cute little thing, you know, but my wife was so scared that her mother was gon' get insulted because her mother admired 'em. But my wife thought it as foolish to give a person her old--her age, something like that. She wasn't interested in nothing like that. Story_ID: 90166 Speaker 1: Now, let me go back to when you were ten. How many brothers and sisters do you have now and which--and where do you fall in the--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, at that time, it was, it was four boys and three girls of us. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: --and you were the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was a twin boy and girl. Speaker 1: And you were number what? Seven? Speaker 2: I was about one, two, three, about the fourth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: About the fourth. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) remember, it was Aunt Eddie [McBride], Clifton [McBride], Helen [McBride] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Uncle [Grant] Webb [McBride]. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You and Sally [McBride] twins and George [McBride]. Speaker 1: Yeah, and George. That's my, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Story_ID: 90167 Speaker 1: Now, one more question about your mother [Julia Porter McBride] and father [Grandville "Grant" McBride] here, just specifically. Did they have a story about how they met? Did they ever tell you how they met? Speaker 2: How they did what? Speaker 1: How they met? Speaker 2: Met, the mother and father? Speaker 1: Yeah, your mother and father? Speaker 2: Naw, I never remembered because when I remember they were both, we were kids, we was going to church and places like that. Naw, I never heard her--my dad, one of the things about him, we found very little about our--they found more about their grandparents than I did because my dad, you could always tell him, you could ask him, and say, "Well, dad, say what kind of mother did you look like, was your mother? "Ah, she was the little, bity, tight, black woman about this tall (laughter), and would exaggerate the thing, you know, and turn it everything into a laugh. And you could tell very little about his people. And his dad, say, well, "What kind of looking dad you--", well, he's an old throwed-away peckerwood, he called him, "white", says he's a old, throwed-away peckerwood. And he said that he had one leg (laughter). And I said, "Well, how'd he lose his leg?" "I don't know. It might have been a possum bit his leg off or something." (Laughter) He'd give you some kind of story like that, you know. And all, all his talk about his people was ridiculous, you know, things he'd say, you know, that just make you laugh. And nothing, anything serious. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was hard to tell anything about his family 'cause he would always have something else to say and said, "Well, what'd your mama, what did your mama look like?" "Ah, she's a little bity old, tight black woman, right black. She's right tight." (Laughter) And everybody go to laughing. And that'll be about the last he'd ever say about her, you know. And so it was all fun like to him, you know. So he was, pretty hard to tell anything much about my dad. Story_ID: 90168 Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in, then? Speaker 2: Well, one of the sights and things was, with what my dad [Grandville "Grant" McBride] could do 'cause he did practically everything from build houses to--and he'd even barbeque hogs, kill a hog and barbeque him, you know. And they killed all the--we raised all our food practically. And he, he was an expert in all of it. We, at one time, ran a truck farm that year. And we had equivalent to a pick-up truck. We would have it full right to the top of cans that we canned. We would can 144 cans of Number 2 can at one canning. That's how we would, we would save. We would can stuff and ship it. And we'd have to have so many cans for, you know, for a sample, and so many cans for shipping. And that's what we did that year. But we only did it for one year because it was quite expensive buying the cans and waxing, you know, soldering the cans together. We had a very few spoilage in the whole bunch, so, and we taken three or four carloads of--we would have string beans, corn, peas and okra and tomatoes. We'd can all those things. We'd can 'em in Number 2 cans, and I seen us take, a pick-up bed about this high, two or three stacked deep of corn, just level with that and all the way across and sell it, take it to the, and ship it. And we didn't put no labels on the cans. Speaker 1: Sir, what kind of things did you do when you were a little boy for fun? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, I was--in the wintertime, see, we had to--or even the summer, where (unclear) tie the cow out and take--when I was big enough to take this cow out and (unclear). We only had about one cow. And she would furnish us, Jersey-maid cow, and we had--she would furnish the milk for the family. And mother [Julia Porter McBride] would milk her. I would have to take her out and (unclear). Of course, I got a pair of work shoes and a pair of Sunday shoes. And I was the only somebody in family got it 'cause I had to take this cow out and find a grass spot and feed her every day and bring her back in after noon. So I got a little exception for that. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Tell him about stealing your mother's chicken. Speaker 2: Doing what? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Stealing the chicken in the funeral (unclear) and all that, when your mom and dad was gone? Speaker 2: Oh, when, yeah, we had--mother had lots of chickens. So they would go to town on Saturday to have the corn made, the cornmeal ground, and would have, and buy such things, you know, that we didn't have or had to buy at the store. And every time, my mother would leave, we, as kids, would have a big party when mother and them go into town. And we had a sister would cook, and we'd kill a chicken and get to eat all we could, and then bury him, his feathers (laughter) under the house. And houses usually were made about this high. We'd go underneath that house and bury the chicken's feathers and things. Last, one Saturday--the last one I remember, my mother and dad went to town that time, so we decided we was gon' get some chicken. And we'd be glad they'd go to down. We'd kill a chicken. And then all of--we would eat the chicken, you know (laughter) and didn't leave no sign. We had a system would leave no sign that mother and them could tell we had cooked and eat that chicken. But mother would count hers. So it got so, it got so what we'd do, we'd go over, the neighbors had some, and they didn't keep 'em up very well. And so we'd throw some stuff out there. The neighbor's chicken come, nobody at home over there. So we'd take a stick and throw and knock that chicken out and run out there and grab him and cut his head off. And we'd have a ball then, all of us would eat the chicken (laughter). And we would do that every Saturday and would wait for the idea or, mother- Story_ID: 90169 Speaker 1: Another thing we would do, if anybody had a stray cat would come over to our house, we'd watch him all the week. Well, my brother, he'd wait till that Saturday, and if he caught that old cat, I would take a broomstick and knock him down. We'd kill him, kill the cat and then have a big funeral over him and bury him. My brother would (laughter), hang him up on the clothesline after we killed the cat, hang him up there. And my brother would preach his funeral, and we would have a mockery of the church, all us would, we'd--boys would be the deacons, and women, they'd be shouting. And, "Oh, preach, brother, preach" (laughter), and he would, he would just a preaching, preaching his funeral [for the cat]. So one day a black cat come to our house, and my mother [Julia Porter McBride], he run in--we'd say, yeah, yeah, let's kill him. Mother said, leave that cat alone, black cat's, good luck. The cat run down the hall and run in the bedroom. Well, mother always kept two or three muted chickens, you know, she'd nurse 'em back to raise 'em. So she had some little chickens in there. And mother made us leave the cat alone, and he run in there, and he grabbed one of mother's little chickens. And he was eating that chicken. We said, "Mother, he got your chicken." Mother said, "Well, wait a minute, don't go in there and get him. Let me get that gun" and she went and got a double-barrel shotgun. And the old hallway was straight down here, with a room here and a room there, and a room there (unclear), steps go off the back. So mother got back at the door and said, "Bring him out of there". And here come the cat running out with the little chicken in his mouth. And down that hallway he went. He got right to that place, where you go off the step. My mother turned him upside down, (laughter) shot him with that shotgun. She'd kill any animal that would eat chickens. He didn't eat her chickens. If he did, she'd kill him. And so she killed that cat, and I think we had one of the biggest anniversaries we ever had, we had had (unclear), that cat--the Saturday when we buried the cat and had church with the cat (laughter), preaching, my brother preached his funeral. He was a big devil as you ever seen, brother was (laughter). He was the hard headed boy you ever seen. And I seen daddy [Grandville "Grant" McBride] --mother had stopped from beating on him to try to make him do something. If he decided he wouldn't do it, he wouldn't do it. And dad would get so bad till mother would have to stop him. She'd always stop him to keep him from hurting the kid 'cause he'd get so mad, my brother would just get mad and wouldn't do what he'd tell him to do. And-- Story_ID: 90170 Speaker 1: Now, let me-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Well, I didn't wanna cut you off, but I wanna--I know we have to move on, but tell me now, you started school when you were ten years old, is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what school did you go to and how did you avoid school all that time? People today don't understand why somebody wouldn't be in school. But tell me what happened? Speaker 2: Well, we lived, we didn't come to Little Rock [Arkansas], to where it was schools. We lived in Osceola [Mississippi] and it was no schools, no black schools at all. It's only about three or four black settlements of people there. And they was either sharecroppers or they was a family renting from my dad [Grandville "Grant" McBride]. And when we left there, it was no schools. I had four sisters and brothers and my mother [Julia Porter McBride] had taught to read and write. That's all she taught 'em, to read and write. And she had vowed that--we had made a good crop in 1918, and '19' [1919] during the War [World War I] (excuse me). And she had made a good crop, and he vowed--my mother vowed that she was going to send her younger kids to school. And that was--she had four younger ones. Let me see, naw. My brother- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You and Sally and George. Speaker 2: George, yeah. And so she had vowed she'd send them to school if she made a good crop. So my dad, so happen he was gon'--he'd come there to North Little Rock [Arkansas] and (unclear) specific shop there, and he was gonna try to get a job in this shop, which he did. And we moved from there, and I was ten years old then. And I went to, I enrolled in school, and from 10 to 12, I went to school, me and my younger sister and other brother. Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Scipio A. Jones [High School]. When we first moved there, it was Hickery Street High School, but then one of our famous lawyers came to Little Rock there, Scipio A. Jones. And we named the school after him. He was a black lawyer. He was actually one of the Arkansas Representatives when they gave Hoover the 33rd Degree Masons. He represented Arkansas as a 33rd Degree Mason and--which was a Shriner, made him a Shriner. And, and he was--they named our school, Hickery Street High School, they named it after Scipio Jones. And that's the one that I have, got my diploma from. Story_ID: 90171 Speaker 1: And, of course, I finished that school, and today I have a certificate, was given certificate for correcting the author in a book there. And the school board, yeah, I'm--they, we had a author, it was a book in algebra, extract the square root or "y" to the fourth power, minus "x" to the fourth power. And it looks like a little thing, but it takes a board as big as this to put it on there. And so I worked it, and worked it, and I couldn't get the answer that the author got. So I got to school that morning, and they--these two girls particularly was in the class was real sharp. And so they met me, "Ernie, Ernie." I said, "What?" She said, "Did you work that problem?" I said, "Yeah, I worked it." She said, "Well, let me see it." I said, "Naw, I ain't gon' let you see. I won't let you see it." But I didn't work it, and I wondered why when I said, and it come into my mind, and I said, well, this author is wrong, his book. I said, well, I hope the call on one of these girls who was very aggressive in school, you know. And so he got there that morning, and this author said, "Mr. McBride, would you put this problem on the board?" I said, "Well, Professor, I had difficulty with it." He said, "Well, put it on the board, and we'll see where you are and where you, what your difficulty was." And I went to the board and put it on there. When I got to the right answer, both these girls yelled out, "that's incorrect, it's uncorrect". Then he said, well, wait a minute, let Mr. McBride explain to, the problem. So I explained it, and when I got through, I turned to the teacher. I said, "Teacher, I'll declare this morning that I am correct, and the author is wrong." He said, "Well, wait a minute, Mr. McBride, said, you've said a big thing." I say, "I'll say it again." I say, "I'll say it again. Now, I'm correct and the author is wrong." He said, well, wait a minute. And so everything go quiet, and he told one of the girls that had yelled "incorrect". He said, would you copy that problem exactly like it is, and then give it to Mr. McBride and see if he says it's copied correct. So she did it, and he went on with the class. So the next morning, he came back with a certificate the school got for me correcting the author. And what we did then, they jumped up and they--the girls raised a lot of Cain, so he said, "Well, wait a minute. What we gon' do, we gon' have a test, and who's the best." Well, he had declared me the best mathematician in school, mathematician. So they said that he's not the best. He's not. So, he said, "Well, wait a minute. We're gon' have an exam, said everybody clear the desk. Everybody clear the desk," and he said, "Now, who gon' be first." They insisted I be first. So I stood up first, and he said, now, I'm gon' have a test here this morning. And the person that wins this win, they gon' be the best mathematician in the school. So he got up, and he got everything cleared off the desk. He said, first man got to stand up, so they insists on me, so I stood up. He said, all right, see, all right, "Count from 20 backwards, and I'm gon' time you and the person get the best time, is the best mathematician." He started, so I started, 20, 19, 18, 17, 16, 15, 14, 13, 12 and just went on around like that, see. And so, I got through, and he said, who gon' be next? And she began to rub--I said, look a here. She's rubbing it out. She's wrote it down on the desk. (Laughter) She's rubbing it out on the desk. And the professor came over and looked, and that broke up the thing then. That broke it up 'cause everybody, you know, they got in (unclear). And so he say, well, "I'll declare Mr. McBride's the best." Now that certificate went to the school. And they were--in those days, they didn't give it to the individual. So I never got anything for it, but the school--it's supposed to be hanging in the arts tower of the school today, if it was still there. Well, the school is there. I helped build the school. I worked as a water boy when they built it, but, but it's the high school that I went to and finished twelfth grade of it. I didn't go any further because of the, hard luck hit the family. And I left home. Story_ID: 90172 Speaker 1: So that is my, (unclear) what I think of the thing, other than the big hunting during the years that we lived off of the--not planting cotton. We lived practically that year off animals we'd hunt at night, rabbits, raccoons and possum at night, and rabbits and squirrels in the day and chickens and things like that. We raised all that, but, and very little stuff we bought. We raised other than go to town and buy meal or flour. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): The time you and your dad [Grandville "Grant" McBride] got lost on that hunting trip. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, we (laughter) we was out hunting one kind. We had two dogs, and the fellow down from us, he had about eleven dogs. And they was all hunting. But you can take a--dog can fight if he meet out there in the street. But if they hunting, they all got their mind on that smell they got, and they'll hunt together. But as soon as they end hunting, they may begin fighting (laughter). And so, well, we were on the way from Saturday night at the, Friday night thing coming from town. And we heard the dogs all running. Well, this man that had 8 or 10 dogs from us, he had a bunch of dogs. Dad always told him, you can't train all of them dogs. You just have to train one or two. So we had a well-trained dog that my grandfather, my mother's father had trained him. And you could hunt either rabbits or possums, raccoons, or wildcats. You could, he could, you could put him on any of those, and he'd run 'em. But it was a birddog and a bulldog mix. And, of course, he couldn't smell. If a animal passed here this morning, he couldn't smell it tonight. But we had a hound dog that could smell that track the day after tomorrow, two days later. She could smell that track if they been there. And, and I seen 'em one night, we was on the way from town that time. We heard 'em running, hunting. And he said, you know, I saw "Old Jim", my older brother. He said, that's he and this man hunting, say, I can tell the dog. And he said, I, I can hear "Old Spot's" voice in there running. And said, let's go to him. And so we stopped, and he listened. He said, yeah, that's him. So we cut out across--my dad and I--I was riding on the back of the wagon. And we went across the, where this, we heard this dog. And they were there, up the tree, and the dog would occasionally get into a fight with each other, would, you know. So we got there, and they was trying to call our dog off. And dad said, I hear "Old Spot" running, and he's saying, he's after the coon, and said, them dogs is after a ghost. I said, yeah, he told me. I was about eight or nine years old. And so we went out--he got there, and they was there, and they were trying to call off our dog. And dad said, "Don't call him off," said, "Say, he's after the coon; say, you got a ghost up this tree." And saying, "You guys go and get this ghost down," and say, "I'll--give me your gun-" my older brother said, "Give me your gun", and say, we'll follow this dog." And we went on off, he and I, following our dog. And we run that dog till, boy, I'm telling you, we would go through places where we couldn't see nothing but straight up in the air and straight on the ground. It was so densely populated. We got to a place and the horse wanted to--dad tried to take across. We could hear the dog on the other side, so he said, "Let's cross over here." And he turned and tried to cross, that dog--he let the--when you get to water, just let the, loosen the reins on the horse, and let him smell the water. And if he smell it, if it's too deep, he's gon' go to trotting away from it. And so if you turn him back and he don't go, it's too deep to go in. So you go on up. We went on up, for I guess, I don't know how long we walked. And every so, 15 or 20 feet, my dad would pull the horse over, and he wouldn't go. He said, "Well, this water is too deep for him to go on. He won't go in it if you're on his back." And so we went on, and so finally my dad pulls over, and he went across. And the horse didn't wanna go. So daddy went on, and we followed and followed, and dad said, he began to get disgusted. It's way in the morning. So he said that, what if we find a, this raccoon went up the tree, say, it must be an old coon 'cause he going home. And I said, "Well, I can climb the tree dad and get 'em." And he said, (laughter) oh, no, you couldn't do that. So we went on. Finally, we come to a great, big opening, and we could see the moon shining bright and we didn't know it was hardly a moon shining, we was under such a dense fog--woods. So, and the dog, everywhere they was, he had stopped. And the dog was sitting down, just sitting, barking at him, you know. And so dad said, it may be a wildcat-- Story_ID: 90173 Speaker 1: Okay, we're ready to go, but we've gotta finish this other story about the hunting trip,-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --the tree and the dog is sitting there looking. Speaker 2: Yeah. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: Well, the dog is sitting there looking at the tree-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you all get there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and what happened next? Speaker 2: Well, he was, he really had caught the raccoon and when he caught him, he wouldn't attack unless my dad [Grandville "Grant" McBride] was there, the dog wouldn't. He was just baying and sat there and bark at him, and the coon is sitting there growling at him. So my dad jumped off and ran out there, and he, we had to stay a distance 'cause if the dog ever recognized we were there, he would attack. But if he, if it's a wildcat, the cat would probably kill the dog, see. But a raccoon, he wouldn't. So my dad, he'd run out and he'd look at close as he could, easing along. So he didn't see, and he'd come back and he'd report to me what he saw (laughter). And I was about eight or nine. And so I said, "Don't shoot Spot, don't shoot spot." Cause the dog was named Spot. So he'd go out and he'd look. He come back. He said, "Well, said, I'll have to take my gun, he said, and I'm gon'--if it's a cat, I'll have to shoot him, if I get a chance, said, but if it's a raccoon, I can stab him." So he went out there, and he said, and so he got up close enough. He said, "Sic him". And so (unclear), on that raccoon he went. And he said, "Well, it's a coon, it's a coon." And he grabbed his knife then. He had a little knife. He grabbed the knife and went and stabbed the coon. And we put him in the sack, hung him on the back of the horse and started home. And that's when the fun began because my dad knew the way home. And he started off. I said, "Dad, ain't you going the wrong way." He had called the dog off, and the dog was behind us. And so dad said, "Naw, I know. I can look at the moon and tell which way to go." He didn't want me to know he's lost (laughter). So we tried and tried to cross, we crossed here, I think before. I said, "Dad, that don't look much like it." He said, yes, it was. So we, I guess for two hours we marched. And we didn't never--the horse would never cross. So finally dad gave up, and he said--they say when you get lost on a horse, stop him, turn--throw the reins on his head and tell him to get up. And when he did, the horse turned right around and went on back (laughter) the way dad had come. And dad said, "We didn't come this way." I said, we about--it looks kind of like it, dad. So we kept riding and every once in a while, he would pull the horse over. And the horse smell the yard, and he'd the yard and he'd back off. My dad pulled him over again. He'd back off. And so he let him go on. So finally, he throwed the reins on his hand [head], and he walked up, and when he got to this place, he walked right across--I said, dad this is--dad, this ain't the way we come, say this horse (unclear) gon' muddy (unclear). I said, let him go, dad. So we went on, and we rolled up in the front of our yard, in our back. I said, this is our horse here, dad. Dad said this ain't no--we ain't never lived here. Said, yes, it looked like he had never lived there before (unclear). And I said, yes, it is, dad. I jumped off the back of the horse and run around to open the gate and the horse went on in. Dad said it must have been (unclear). But he was so wise till dad (unclear), well, this don't look like our house. He had got completely turned around. And a man, if he gets lost, once he--everything will look different. No, it looks different, nothing that he had ever seen. So we got there that morning and the man down next door and them, and they was there and they had the little coon. Dad said, this coon we had, I know we could--my dad had problems putting him up on the horse 'cause he was so big. And we had the coon out on the porch, and say, "What did you catch, Mack?" The man asked my dad. Dad said, "Nothing. What did you catch?" Said, "I know you was after a ghost. I tried to tell you, it was gonna stop." And dad pulled that coon out and, boy, that guy was shocked. Story_ID: 90174 Speaker 1: We got $7.50 for his hide when we cleaned him and shipped it. And that was in, before--'16' [1916] and '17' [1917]. Boy, and-- Speaker 2: And that money was really worth something then-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Seven dollars and something. Speaker 1: Yeah, we got it, and that's all we did that year. We, we cleaned raccoon hides, mostly raccoons is what we sold. But we did squirrels and we didn't do possums 'cause we'd eat the skin of a possum. Mother wouldn't cook a skinned possum. She wouldn't cook him. She'd cook him whole. So we wouldn't, wouldn't eat a-- Speaker 2: Now, people in those days were wearing raccoon coats a lot,-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --it was a big popular thing, to have a raccoon coat--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's what they, it was, it was one of the most-- Speaker 2: --in the '20's [1920s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, fur that you could spend--you could sell, was that raccoon fur. And I used to skin all the, all the animals. I'd skin 'em all, including the squirrels which, you couldn't cut his hide nowhere. When you cut him, you cut him right around the mouth, the squirrel, and then you pull his head--skin back over his head and turn him inside out, put a shoot-like down inside his hide and then dry it out and send it. That's the way the, (unclear) coon [sic, squirrel]. But a raccoon hide, you cut him from here around through here and then would, you could stretch his hide. It's tough enough, you could stretch it to a square position just about, out this a way, stretch his arms out square like this, and then dry it. And we'd always put it on top of the shed somewhere the dog couldn't get to it (laughter) 'cause sometimes they--we've had 'em to come a loose up there and the wind blow 'em off. And we go out there, and the dog fighting with that hide, think it's a raccoon, tear up a hide that cost some good money. And so we'd have, have that kind of luck. Story_ID: 90175 Speaker 1: Sir, now, I wanna talk about how you wound up in Long Beach [California]. And I think, after high school [Scipio A. Jones High School in North Little Rock, Arkansas], you said you had to, I mean what did you do after high school [1930] and what were your-- Speaker 2: Well, after high school, for one summer, we went to, from Little Rock to Pine Bluff [Arkansas] and the Memphis Red Sox and pro football in the Negro League. Speaker 1: Baseball or football? Speaker 2: Baseball. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And four of us finished high school was the backfield in football, and we also played baseball. And we gave, got a scholarship for Arkansas State College [University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff] which was a black, in Pine Bluff. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so we got a scholarship there, and when we finished, four of us left there, a pitcher, a catcher and two outfielders. I was a centerfielder and Pete McQueen was a, was a leftfielder. And we went down to practice with 'em. So we toured the state there a while with 'em, but we--wasn't no money in it. And when we would go to these places, we may have a full field of people. But we wouldn't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Full crowd? Speaker 2: Full crowd, yeah, but we wouldn't get much and we're freshman players, you know. Speaker 1: So you played with the Memphis Red Sox of the Negro Leagues? Speaker 2: Memphis Red Sox, yeah. Speaker 1: And what year was this? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What year are we talking about? Speaker 2: That was 19--summer of 1930. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The summer. And so, in the winter of 1930, we came to, came here to Wilmington [California] and went to the compress Warehouse. Story_ID: 90176 Speaker 1: Now, let me just set this up. From what you told me before, they--somebody in Arkansas and, I guess, it was, spread the word that they were looking for people, for black people that knew how to deal with cotton? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: And you knew how to deal with it, and a lot of other people and black people in Arkansas knew how to deal with it. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And you were told--because your father [Grandville "Grant" McBride] at one time was very, very good at dealing with cotton. Speaker 2: He's doing cotton, yeah. Speaker 1: And he taught you. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And so they were looking for 125 black people--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was 120 they wanted, yeah. Speaker 1: --to hire here at compress in Wilmington, California? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, San Pedro-- Speaker 1: San Pedro [California]. Speaker 2: --Wilmington, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And see they had, they had sent back East, the fellow from Wilmington had. He knew of a guy was in Greenville, Arkansas--Greenville, Texas. And he would, that was right close to the Arkansas border. So he sent a word to that man that if they could get 120 blacks, they could put 120 to work in San Pedro. And so he had sent word to North Little Rock [Arkansas], who had a compress there, and one to Greenville, Texas. And they got the word out, they want cotton compress workers in San Pedro, California. And as many could come, they'd hire 'em. Speaker 1: Sir, now what is a cotton compress? Speaker 2: Well, now, a bail of cotton leaves the field and go to the gin [cotton gin]. They pulls the seeds out it and puts it in a ba--, a ba--,a bag about this wide and about five foot high. And they, you, then you--when they get ready to ship it or sell it, they'll compress it and that bail, from being that high, would come to be about this, see, press it together and then tie it. And they can get twice as much on the ship loading it as they could if it's in a big cotton. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: So they would compress. And so that's what this was in San Pedro, near the water edge (unclear). And Fresno [California] and Bakersfield [California], El Paso, Texas and all of Texas, they would ship the cotton out here. Before they could ship it, they had to compress it, where they could get twice as many bails on the ship. And so that's what this compress is for. And what they were doing, we found out when we got there, they were shipping cotton from Bakersfield on a truck, down to San Pedro and loading it. That was your ship loading and charging the guy, transportation from El Paso, from Texas to California. That's what the Japanese would pay for transportation. And we had to bring it here to San Pedro, cut it open from where it was bailed, take any kind of tag that's in there, where it's bailed, take it out and put the San Pedro tag on it (laughter). And so, I mean the Texas tag, where it come from Texas. And the Japanese were paying shipping from Texas to California and then from California from Japan and so-- Speaker 1: A racket--(laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a racket of doing it. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): So all the Bakersfield tags would come out-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and if we didn't get a bail with where it was bailed in Bakersfield, we didn't send that bail. You just tore that bail, reversed it for another cull (unclear). But they had, they had to change. We had to cut it open, re-bail it and everything and bring it bring it from about this big down to about this big, compress it and then load it on the ship. And that's what we were, this first year was doing. Well, they pay, we found out what happened. When they was paying the Mexicans, they had 120 Mexicans working there, and they was paying 'em $50.00 an hour. And so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Fifty cents an hour--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And they hired-- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Fifty cents? Speaker 2: Fifty cents. Did I say-- Speaker 1: You said $50.00. Speaker 2: Fifty dollars, fifty cents an hour. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Get that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, they rehired 20 blacks for .40 cents, .45 cents an hour, paid us a nickel less. So, and they hired 120, and that was enough to do what the hundred--I mean they hired 70, 70 blacks, and was doing what 120 Mexicans was doing. And so we worked that summer, and then they reduced it to .40 cents an hour. They was paying us .45 and paid the Mexicans .50 [cents]. [cell phone ringing]. Well, they paid us .45 and then we, we then--they wouldn't work over there for .45. They required too much because they said after we left, we had a hundred--I mean 70 Negroes working there. They only worked 60, was doing the same thing for .35 cent an hour. They had reduced it down to .35 and they had only 60 Negroes doing it. And they didn't hire but 60. They were cutting 'em every year, paying 'em less money and taking advantage of the--so I didn't go back after I went there. And I wouldn't--for .35 cent an hour, I wouldn't--naw, .40 cents an hour, might have been .40, but they went down a nickel every year. And so then I quit and went to Long Beach [California]. Story_ID: 90177 Speaker 1: And that's where I got into the--in fact, when I went into Long Beach [California], they had a sign sitting as you come in their, river across into Long Beach here, they had a cafe sitting there, "We don't serve Colored" was right on the, in the window. And they'd meet you at the door and tell you, say, "We don't serve Colored in here." And when the War [World War II] was going on, it got to be a lot of people here, we used to have the thing. We'd walk in his--he didn't serve Colored. We'd say, "Naw, and we don't eat 'em either." (Laughter) And so, and, and we'd go right on in and sit down. And he'd find out, if he didn't serve us, they would--they had a law. You could sue him for refusing you service. So that soon stopped that. Speaker 2: Now, sir, what was the--did you notice any difference between Long Beach and Arkansas? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. One thing about Arkansas, common labor work, when we left Arkansas, was only done by Negroes. You never saw a white man on a common labor job. Long Beach, you didn't see a black man in Long Beach on a common labor job. You didn't see a black man on it, all white, and it was, and the city workers, the trash pickers and everything. We had to threaten the picket line, to put a picket line around the Sanitation Department because they wouldn't hire blacks. And when they hired 'em, they wouldn't, the blacks had to work--when we did get 'em to hire 'em, which I was planning on after I got through with the schools and the churches-- Speaker 2: Well, let's not get too far-- Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: --from the story. Go ahead. Speaker 1: And that's what happened--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) the difference in--I just, I wanna set up the next part 'cause you, you said that black people here couldn't get common labor jobs-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You said there was nothing they would let black people do except shine shoes. Speaker 1: Shine shoes. That was the only thing. With the, of course, with the Signal Hill [California] oil wells that run at top speed, they, you could make money. A white person getting a shoeshine in Long Beach, even though the shines was .10 cent a shine, he would give you .50 cent or a dollar to shine his shoes. So that's why you didn't never--you couldn't hardly get a man to get on your stand that would just pay you .10 cent to shine his shoes because you do a good job, it's good work, and the average person would pay you, a tip. Speaker 2: And that's a lot better than working at the cotton compress because you're getting .40 cents there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, sure. That's right. Speaker 2: --and here a man would pay you a dollar to shine his shoes. Speaker 1: Yeah, and so, and what I was doing, I had a shoeshine stand over on 428 West Broadway, right where the city jail is now. And so I would, I had it right in the vestibule when you come in the, the barbershop, they had a stand from, a shoeshine stand, all of 'em. Well, those shoeshine stands paid the rent of that barbershop and everything. They'd pay the rent. He'd charge you five or $6.00 a week to have that stand there. Well, and then you would have to clean up his barbershop. And I'd clean up, go in the morning and clean up his barbershop and things and would hustle shines off his shoes when the men come in to work, to get a cut. And some fellows had two and three people, kids working at these shops. And he would, when a man get off the stand, swish the man down and get a tip from the barber. It was a lot of ways of making a little extra money, see. So- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And it was good then 'cause this was a military town, Navy town-- Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of sailors. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): --a lot of sailors. (Unclear) made money like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, they did. And they would have to keep them Navy shoes looking good. And if he come in there and see you were a good shoe shiner, he'd want you to keep his shoes up, see, come in. So it was money made by the blacks in Long Beach. But they wouldn't, wouldn't hire 'em as laborers. And all Arkansas had, labor, was black. Story_ID: 90178 Speaker 1: Now, sir, now how did you get involved with, in fighting against the employment discrimination here in Long Beach [California] and how did you get involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Are there two--I know you were involved with labor first, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Labor organization first, and then NAACP. So tell us about how you first got involved in it? Did somebody recruit you or did you go to a meeting or what happened? Speaker 2: No, when I left Arkansas [1930], I got a good lesson in discrimination. I had a fellow tell me about a shoe shine stand was in, downtown in North Little Rock [Arkansas]. So I went by there and I told him, I walked in the barbershop. And I said, I heard that you needed--it was three barbers sitting up on their chair with their legs propped. And, and I said, I heard that you needed a shoe shine man here. And said, he said, "Listen, nigger, you get back out of that door and take your hat off before you come in this barbershop." And I just turned, didn't take off my hat, turned and walked right out the door, and when I got another job was in Wilmington [California]. So I left Arkansas. I was through with Arkansas there. I got to (unclear). And so, because I was mad enough to, to--if I'd a met one of those barbers in Wilmington, I'd of killed him. I was that mad at their, at this--see, I had just got out of school [Scipio A. Jones High School]. And I hadn't been exposed completely to what happens in Arkansas. And that was really a shock. I never asked for another job in Arkansas. I made it my sense to leave there. Then I went to- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What about the lynching around that time? Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): The guy from the church, the (unclear) son, when they drug the guy behind the car? Speaker 2: Oh, I was, that was before I came. I saw 'em do a lynching. Speaker 1: What, yeah, tell us about that? Speaker 2: That was 1927. That was two years before I left Arkansas. Story_ID: 90179 Speaker 1: They, it was a black guy and all the churches, big, white churches was, had black janitors. And because the white man didn't do a janitor in Arkansas then. And so this man had been working for that before he even married, and he had a grown wife, daughter and son, sixteen-year old son. And he was cleaning up this church. So he smelled a terrific odor in the church, and he called the fire department and the city and told them about, told the preacher. And they got a crew in there to look and looked into the attic like in the church and they found a thirteen-year old girl, had been in there, and you had smell her, had been there for years. Somebody had raped and killed her. So-- Speaker 2: A white girl? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: It was a white girl? Speaker 1: Is white, yeah, and it's a white church. So, the first thing happened, the police run down and arrested the man, had been working for 16 or 17 years. He had been cleaning up that church. And they come down and arrested him, and the paper come out that they was charging him with murdering that girl, raping her. And the boy, had a 16-year old boy, Lonnie [ph.] was his name, Lonnie--I'll think of his name. But anyway, they arrested his dad, and they ran a big paper about his dad arrested for raping the 13-year old girl, headline in the "Arkansas Gazette". Well, the first thing the boy did before his family could even talk to him during the--run down to the police station and told 'em, "I did it. Let my dad loose." And they let his dad out and arrested him. And his dad could do nothing about it 'cause he had went down there, and dad knew nothing. So when his dad, they let him, let him out, and arrested the boy. Story_ID: 90180 Speaker 1: And, of course, they was so upset in the state till some Negro was out near a railroad crossing, and the saying was, it was a woman come by, a white woman and her daughter in a little buggy, a horse to it. Well, the fellows that was there watching it said that they--what happened, he saw the horse was kinda, you know, excited with that noise, that (unclear) to keep--the guy let off his thing [whishing sound], and the horse jerked around. And he's--this woman fell out the thing. And some of 'em, Negro run out to help 'em. They jumped on him and arrested him, and they lynched him because this boy that they had picked his dad up, the chief of police, they referred to him always as half white. He had straight hair, black hair and he was real light. So, and he said that he was half, he was half Negro and half white, said, but long as he was chief of police, they'd never lynch anybody with white blood in 'em. And so they figured this boy had white blood. So what happened, the lynch mob, they opened the jail wide open to the lynch mob that night. And he taken the boy, later we heard, taken him to Pine Bluff, Arkansas, and, 'cause he had said, "As long as a man has white blood in him, he'd never be lynched in Arkansas." That was old James A. Pittcock was his name, the chief that was there. So, they didn't lynch, they electrocuted the boy, but they didn't lynch him. And they lynched another Negro. Speaker 2: The poor guy that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --with the carriage. Speaker 1: --that they, yeah. And they lynched him. And I looked at 'em one night, stood in the window just like that place there. My brother--I was racking pool at a pool hall, and we worked two shifts, night and day 'cause they would shoot pool half of the night anyway. So anyway, I was waiting on my brother who was a short-order cook in a Greek cafe, about a block and a half from where I worked. I had went across there waiting for he and I go to catch the bus to go across the river where we lived. And this lynch mob was coming down there, a bunch of people crowding out in the front, you know. So the man owned the place, he went to see what was in the front, and he heard some of 'em say, "There, they lynching a Negro, I heard." And he shut his doors and locked 'em, turned out all his lights, and we all come out the kitchen place to look out there, and we saw this 20-something [1920-something] Ford Roadster, with a rope about fifty foot long dragging this body behind the rope. And they drove it on up to 9th Street, and they went up 9th and Gaines. And it was a great big church like this one over here on the corner, a Baptist church, black church. And they piled (unclear) they stopped the body out there, and they went in that church and got all the pews and rugs and mats and things out of the church, broke the door down, got the door, piled it out there in the, in the middle of the street and poured gasoline on it and set it on fire and burned it. And so, and that was my last experience in Arkansas. You know, it wasn't my last experience. Now, that was in '27' [1927], and I didn't finish till '30' [1930]. Speaker 2: So I guess you figured it was time to leave? Speaker 1: Time to leave. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: I never did, I did a job running an elevator for the crane company there, and I worked there one summer. And the last summer, I went to school, so I didn't work there no more. Story_ID: 89725 Speaker 1: Okay, so in--well, how did you get started with the union movement and with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, when I came here [Long Beach, California], I was working at the compress [cotton compress in Wilmington, California], and I got, I got associated with a lot of especially blacks, was the Marine Cooks and Stewards Union come in. And I found out they had an organizing committee to organize the CIO [Congress of Industrial Organizations] union. Well, and I got associated with the Marine Cooks and Stewards who was in that organization and the longshoremen. So they were all fighting for the same purpose I was fighting. And we knew, they had the same thing, their program was, what we were fighting, equal opportunity for the workers, higher working wage conditions. So I got to know a bunch of guys out of the Marine Cooks and Stewards Union, black guys. And I started to working on them to become union members. They would make more money and get--well, a lot of 'em didn't understand. If--we can't strike because the white man would run the union, would run the ship anyway, and we tried to convince 'em there would be no ships if it wasn't any Marine Cooks and Stewards. A lot of 'em couldn't see that, but we got enough of 'em to quit to walk on picket lines that they couldn't run the ship. And it was only thirty days we had out before they all got organized. And then we went out into various ages of the community to work. Story_ID: 89726 Speaker 1: Well, I came to Long Beach [California], and I got here, I found out the first thing that the chief fundraisers for the school and the churches was minstrel shows. Speaker 2: Now, can you explain that? Now, what--does that mean the white schools here in Long Beach would have minstrel shows to raise money? Speaker 1: Yeah, they would have white people would dress up as Negro, paint his face black, neck was red and his eyes white, and he'd get on the time and mock Negroes, what he figure Negroes. Well, it was fun to them. But it was ridiculing us. It just--I left Arkansas last year of school, one of our biggest fundraisers was minstrel shows. We had a big minstrel show, and boy, we always, was--they even had it in Hot Springs [Arkansas]. We went from North Little Rock and gave it there, downtown, after they gave it at the school, and then gave it at Hot Springs. Of course, we wasn't a very success in Hot Springs because the parents, the old preacher--the old teachers at school got together with the parents and wouldn't let the girls go down there, that was on the program. We had a couple of girls that sing blues songs. And they didn't sing the blues at the church. They'd sing church hymns at the minstrel when we gave at the schools. But when they gave it at the theater, they sung the blues. And, boy, it was a big hit (laughter). So they stopped us from--the old teachers all got together, wouldn't let the girls go down to the show. So we couldn't have our minstrel show there. But out here, it was just a mockery. And, and the Human Relation Commission, County Human Relation Commission, had set up a good leaflet in opposition to minstrel shows to show where they was a mockery of the Negro people, rather than fun. The white people would laugh off it. But it was, just seen as old joke (unclear). We'd heard that old joke before with our people. So I went to the schools, principals of the schools, Poly High [Long Beach Polytechnic High School] over here, went there. "Oh, naw, that was minstrel--minstrel shows are nice." And I went to the churches. They said it, so I went to the minster of the (unclear). One of 'em told me to go there, and I went there, and at that time, this was as late as--they was giving them shows as late as when Jackie Robinson went into the big Leagues. Speaker 2: That's 1948. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, it was that late before we really got 'em stopped here in Long Beach. Speaker 2: Now, when you were working on this issue, were you in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 1: Yeah, I had organized NAACP in 1940. And this was '48' [1948]. Story_ID: 89727 Speaker 1: Well, tell us how, how did you come to organize an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter? Speaker 2: Any time I got out on the streets and talked about what was happening, I had plenty blacks agreed with me. And so I said, well, what we should do, we should organize. And I organized 'em. And I didn't go very far with the NAACP other than fighting rape cases. I appealed a rape case here in Long Beach in 1943. And I raised, in Long Beach myself--I was secretary of the NAACP, I raised $1,600 to appeal the case they had down there against, rape. Well, every black picked up in Long Beach, they would charge 'em with rape. And if there should be a rape in town, he'd be charged with it. Speaker 1: Now, sir, now what lawyers worked with you? Were there black lawyers here that worked with you on these cases? Speaker 2: No, wasn't no black lawyers here. It was white. And they had--wasn't but one lawyer, and they had to--I've had calls from when the [U.S.] Navy was in here, whether they went to City Manager, Ramsey, who was City Manager then and asked him to prosecute. They wouldn't serve him, and this black, and Ramsey would tell him, you either go to Ernie McBride with NAACP or you--because we don't, California law don't say we got to prosecute, say you have to prosecute yourself. And so we--I can't do nothing about it. So he would always refer 'em to me. And they would come to me, and they'd give 'em my telephone and everything. They would come to me. But most of 'em didn't never fight the case. I had lawyers here to fight 'em, one lawyer was George Shibley was. Here. He died, but he was a lawyer--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Can you spell his name? What was his name? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Can you spell his name for us, the lawyer? Speaker 2: Shibley, S-H-I-B-B-L-E-Y [sic, S-H-I-B-L-E-Y], Shibley, George Shibley. And he lived in the Negro district here. He ran for City Council here. And I was his campaign, one of his campaign workers and tried to get him on the council. Speaker 1: Did he win? Speaker 2: But he lost, naw. And he lived in the Negro area. It was really--we never got one here until we got this black councilman here. Story_ID: 89728 Speaker 1: So, but anyway, and then the schools, the little--I went to Bret Harte [Elementary] School. Well, that was around the '50's [1950s], in the '50's [1950s] evidently because these kids here, I taken--couldn't get a black because a lot of blacks, I had been able to start 'em working in the Sanitation Department of the city, but none was working in the City Hall downtown. So I, when I started to working on the schools, well, then I, what Negroes I had got jobs, they were intimidated so by the police department and the little city workers, little city heads, little managers of the city departments, until they, they could intimidate the Negroes so. So I would never go back to one that had got one of these jobs that I had sought for him and, because he was scared to talk to me anyway. And so, I knew how it was. Of course, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I used to send meetings, notice to the meetings, the third Sunday of each month to the NAACP. Well, and Cabrillo Homes [Century Villages at Cabrillo], when they got some housing projects, a lot of Negroes joined. And they, when I would send the memberships--I had to send 'em all at once down there, they would have the, they would record 'em upstairs in the Post Office to try to find out who was the members of the NAACP 'cause I was sending out--I had a little machine I could--it cost me one cent to send the cards out. And I was sending out 800 cards, and I only had about 75 or 100 members. But I had the membership list from the Marine Cooks and Stewards and from the Longshore and from the Retail Clerks, all the unions. They would send me--of course, helped organize Retail Clerks union here, and so when I sent out all them letters, they sent a big stack of cards like that to the Post Office, he would send 'em upstairs, and the guy had to record the names off. So then-- Speaker 2: They thought they were all members of the NAACP? Speaker 1: Yeah, they thought they're members. I would send 'em because I had the membership list. I would send 'em, invite 'em to the NAACP meeting. And we had just about as many white as black. But they intimidated the blacks from coming so until--and I couldn't avoid that because I saw that they had to do that, to take care of their job 'cause many of 'em would go downtown and talk to a white man and five minutes later, the white man called me and telling me what he said, did I know him, and did he say this? And I'd meet him on the street, and he was as good a friend of mine ever been, but I said, that's--he's doing a good thing. He's fooling 'em (laughter). They thought he was my enemy, but he wasn't. And so I knew he had to do that to subsist. I bet you there wasn't a city worker had went on Long Beach as much as ten years ago, that's worked there, that hadn't been questioned about me because--and he would tell 'em everything reverse that he could. I had, the guys would talk about him and twenty minutes later be right back with me talking. I said, yeah, that's right, good buddy, you're right (laughter). But I let him protect his job, and we had to do that to subsist, see. You got to--I wouldn't fight for a man to get a job and then fight him if I hear tell he said something about me 'cause in the first place, I always respected the fact, he might not have said it, he might not a said it. It's to what advantage did it do the fellow that's talking, that's telling that. That's not fair. Story_ID: 89729 Speaker 1: But anyway, I went to the school [Bret Harte Elementary School] and the school was gonna give a minstrel show, and they did give it anyway. I had went and launched a protest for 'em giving it to the principal. "Oh, naw, it was nice. They enjoyed it." So that night, I couldn't get no blacks to go on the picket line so I got three of four whites went, was from the union members. And then the longshoreman, he'd always, guy Chief Hadly [ph.] (unclear), the longshoreman would always, "How many men you want and how many women?" He could get as many as I want. But I didn't wanna overload it with white when it's a black project (laughter). What I did, I got my kid, this boy here [Ernest McBride, Jr.], and the girl's [Barbara Ann McBride Williams] older--they were about eight and nine years old. And I got them and got 'em some little candles, little candles and lit these candles and they walked the picket line passing out this leaflet from the minstrel shows that the Human Relations Commission put out. And that's, and then the next Monday morning, the bulletin went out, "No more minstrel shows at the school". And, of course, they had had one, a demonstration. They--what they wanted to do at Poly, Poly High School [Long Beach Polytechnic High School], that the black kids that, they wanted them to pretend they're picking cotton and the white kids whipping 'em with straps. And, and so this was a part of Negro history they gave in which I got out of Poly pretty soon, the same book. And so when they went to--this fellow over here at Second Baptist Church, went to him, a little preacher, he thought it was a good idea. So I went over and I talked to him. I told him, I said, "I think they'll have a riot if they put on such show out there, said, it's a lot of kids going to Poly now. "Well, I say--this is the black preacher--"That's history, and you can't keep history from being told." I said, well, that's reverse history. I said, it's showing superiority to the whites, inferiority to the blacks. Speaker 2: So there wasn't any--there was no revolt in the story--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And the slaves didn't rise up against the white people, so--(laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And so, so he said, well, I don't care. (Unclear) they got (unclear). So they gave that ballgame out there. I forget who won the game, but I think Poly always beat Wilson. But anyway, the game recessed about 2:00 or 2:30, and it was 6:00 o'clock that evening before they finished the game because they rioted and they sixteen black kids, was barred from the school for rioting. And I went to this preacher, and I told him, I said, let's go to--the Board of Education meets Monday. They met down on Seventh and Locust. And I said, "We ought to be down there," and these are--well, the preacher, he said, "Well, they should a suspend them all." I said, "You think so?" "Yeah, they should a suspended every one of 'em. They got--that's history, and they got to respect history." I said, well, all right. So I said, now, what can I do? I got to get some blacks down there. So--and I'm not gon' get any blacks that got a pretty good job here in Long Beach down there. And they're the only ones that's in (unclear) to see what's going on, the ones got a job. So I called the Longshoreman. I knew the--Young was the head of it, Young, I called him. And he said, well, how many women down there do you want and how many men? And he said, I'll send as many as you--I said, well, only five or six will be enough. I said, don't send a lot because I don't think we have a real problem. So anyway, we met down there, and they discussed it on the agenda and replaced--put every kid back to school with no prejudice against him or not relation--or strikes against him, put 'em back in school. So then that ended that. Story_ID: 89730 Speaker 1: And then my next project was to get a Negro History taught in school. My wife [Lillian M. McBride] finished Poly [Long Beach Polytechnic High School], the boys' mother, and they--when she marched for--she was the secretary of the Student Body. And when she got her diploma, out of a hundred or more kids that graduated from Poly, wouldn't nobody march with her. She was the only black in the class and wouldn't nobody march with her. So finally a Chinese boy, they went to him, and he marched with her. Other than that, she'd a had to pick up a bar by herself. Speaker 2: So the white kids refused to-- Speaker 1: They refused. They had over a hundred in the class, and not a single white girl would march with her. And she secretary of the-- Speaker 2: Of the class. Speaker 1: --of the student body, yeah. And so, and then when the teacher read in the class, got to this Negro History, she had read the book, and when she would read it, she would look (unclear) and would cry, make her cry. So, it's so brutal, see. So she was coming up the next day of this history, and she wouldn't read and the teacher referred back to this paragraph for her to read it. And she wouldn't read it. And so he gave her a bad mark for school, but she still didn't read the article. But, and that's the way that they did at the school. Story_ID: 89731 Speaker 1: Yet, you couldn't, you wouldn't get no Negro, could--they was in a position, they couldn't. You had to go. And I yielded everything I could to 'em, and then eventually, I had to--went to 'em and hire 'em and for labor movement, and girls at Long Beach City College [California] was given a clerk-- Speaker 2: Typist position? Speaker 1: Typing contest, see. They were giving the classes, and the black girls were going in there taking these classes. And they would go out to get a job, and none of the merchants would let 'em, would hire 'em, because, "Naw, if she finish that school, I'd rather hire my own. I won't hire one of them." And so, well, I got to going to the, the guys, and a big market on--the guy had three supermarkets [Cole's Market Grocery]. And he had one over on Santa Fe and Pacific Coast Highway, one out here in Carmelita's Housing Project, and another one out on East Fourth Street near the senior citizen housing. And so I went to him to hire blacks, and naw, he wouldn't hire one, said, and furthermore, if he'd put a black through there, at a desk, wouldn't a white person come in that store. So I couldn't, I tried to argue the point. He said, "Naw," said, "I work with Negroes with my dad when I was fourteen years," and said, "and I never known 'em to do anything but shoe horses and wash floors." I said, "Well, they know how to do that, and I know"--grease wagon wheels he said. And so he said, "Well, one will never handle my money long as they're-"-I said, well, I would disagree with you. And on the committee that I had, I had organized a committee to go talk with him about, see if we can negotiate (unclear). It was Dr. Crane from the Unitarian Church, Dr. Hershel from an A.M.E. Methodist-C.M.E. Methodist Church on the West side, white, both of 'em, and then a Negro preacher down there, and another Negro man, and myself. And he told us, said "You get your Communist bunch out of here. I don't wanna talk to you no more." So Dr. Crane says, "No use of us talking to him." He said, "I know Negroes that won't do nothing but steal, and, and said--and grease wagon wheels and steal." I said, "Well, I imagine we can do both of that (laughter)." I said, "the way we have to live in America," and I said, and so he wouldn't let Dr. Crane talk at all. He's a white minister, and Dr. Hershel, neither one. So they finally said, well, Gentlemen, it's useless for us to talk to this man 'cause he told 'em, you and your Communist friends, get out of here, get out of my office. And so he drove us out. And I put the, put a picket line around him. And I picketed him for nine months. He had lost the lease on his store, three months behind in his, paying his employees, and he had to give up. And so, and then I hired seven clerks at market, just for going there asking 'em to let me have a, see if we can't work out a way, and you hire, and they're all hired. Story_ID: 89732 Speaker 1: So I went to--one time, I went, and I was wondering why they were hiding. So I was on Alameda, yeah, Alameda and San Antonio Drive was a big (unclear) pork chop market there. So I called one time to see if he had somebody working. So he told me, "Yeah, he'd like to meet with me." So I couldn't get nobody to go with me, so my wife [Lillian M. McBride], I told her she had to go. So she and I went out there, and so we got there, and it's a guy was sitting there, was union man. And they had a clause in the union, if there's an apprentice that's working towards, apprentice working toward journeymanship, that they had to hire him from the union. They couldn't hire him from the street. So, and unless a union didn't have no apprentice. So I went out there, and he had the union man there. Well, I had already prepared for the union 'cause I know a lot of 'em is in there to protect the store. So I had the union thing in my pocket, and my wife was there. So she often said, well, I was wondering how was you gon' answer that. Well, what he said, he told me about, as long as there's a journeyman for advancement, they couldn't hire outside. So I said, "Well, that's fine. That's a good philosophy you got." So my wife said, "Well, then I wanna see how you gon' get out of that." I said, "That's easy to get out of" (laughter). So, but she saw how I did it. So the man, he (unclear), well, I wanted to let you know when you (unclear), "This is a union man here," said, "this is a union man. So we got, this store got a contract with his union." I said, "Well, that's fine. I'm glad to see it." I said, "One of the things in the notes, you're getting a fair salary if you're union." So he said, yeah. And so I pulled this letter out. I said, "You read this and see if that's from your union." I had wrote his union and asked them what was their, their philosophy on discrimination. Union didn't discriminate against nobody. They're fair. So I said--he read it and said, "Oh, yeah, that's my union." I said, well, "That's fine." I put it back in my pocket. I said, now, "You have a union." I said, "and you have a store." I say, "I have an employee that wants to get in your store. Now, you--I'm gonna put a boycott around your market unless you hire a black clerk." He said, "Now, you and him, that's your problem. It ain't mine." I said, "It's yours 'cause I'm dealing with a man with a store, not with a man with a union." I said, "you haven't got no job to give to me." Said, "you won't let me in the union because I haven't got a job." I said, now, you find out--I said, I don't know how you guys gon' do it. I said, but I'm gon' tell you now. "If you don't have a black clerk here by tomorrow," I say, "I'm gonna have a picket line around your--a boycott around your store." I wouldn't use the picket line. I'm gon' boycott your store. And he said, "Well, wait a minute. I interviewed a girl up here in Compton, said she was smart as a whip. And he said, she wouldn't, wouldn't take her three weeks before she could do every, run every cash register in the place." I said, yeah. He said, "Now, what would you think I ought to do?" I said, "Well, I'm not gon' tell you how to run a store." I said, "I won't tell you who to hire." I said, "If he's black," I said, "that's all I care. He gotta be black," but I said, "and that's the only way you gon' satisfy me." And so he said, well, "She couldn't work but about a month before she'd be good as any, anyone we got." I said, well, one of the things I will say, you couldn't lose over a month's salary. I said, and rather than lose my store, I think I'd lose the whole thing 'cause, (laughter), 'cause I know what the picket line gon' do. And he said, well, give me till tomorrow night, give me till tomorrow morning. I'll call her tonight, having her working in the morning. I said, well, I'll visit you here. We'd like to see her here. (Laughter) And so, so that's the way I did. I let 'em figure their self. I hired seven clerks after that picket was over, right here in Long Beach, yes, sir, seven was hired. All I'd do is to call them, and they'd--most of 'em would always have a way. Well, I'll tell you what I had. I had my wife, my son and my little (unclear) 'cause he said that--and, of course, I retired my wife. And I hired a black instead. I said, well, that's more like doing business (laughter). So, so that's the way I got, got 'em broke there (unclear). Story_ID: 91262 Speaker 1: Yeah, tell me about your relationship with the National NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and people like Walter White and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --Roy Wilkins and people like that? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I was, I'm--you had to get fifty members in NAACP and send in to get a charter. Well, that's what I did in 1943 because of the discrimination went on in Long Beach [California] here. And so when I got fifty members, I always, yeah, we stayed close to that, and we, each year send membership, so much of the dues go to the National office and so much kept here and a good record. I was secretary of that branch, this chapter until 1948. I believe it was along, about '45' [1945]. And anyway when we--we organized a branch here, we kept (unclear). But we had, see, one of the things, we had the, Long Beach we had (unclear), it's white or black can join the NAACP. We (unclear). Well, we had about as many white members as we did blacks. And they was, attended by longshoremen, the progressive whites that were here was attending. They attended the NAACP meeting and was members of NAACP. Story_ID: 91263 Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of the names of some of the members that were (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Old members? Speaker 1: Yeah, some of the prominent people, or the people that you think are important for this? Speaker 2: Oh, I forget individual names. I know a lot of 'em--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ms. White? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. White. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Who had the presidential Republican club-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. White. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And then we had, well- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): For (unclear), I mean and Mr. Watkins 'cause you and him was the ones always going to the police department and challenging everything. Speaker 2: Well, we, we put out a leaflet on the police department, and police brutality. And we went to the printer with the leaflet, and the printer wouldn't print it because they afraid the police would sue him. So then we come back then and went to George Shibley, our lawyer, who he was a Arab fellow or they thought he was Jewish, but he was Arab. And he was a progressive lawyer, and we went to him. He looked over it, and he just, one or two words, he said, "per se" behind 'em. And he sent it back, said go and print this out. He said, you gon' get a lot of repercussions, said, print it. So went to the, went back to the printer, told him the lawyer had okayed it. He said, fine. So he printed it. We put it out. A couple of mornings later, the police met the president of the bank and told him, the police, the chief of police want to see him right away. And so-- Speaker 1: Who was the president then? Speaker 2: A fellow by the name of Charles Watkins, Watkin--Watkins, W-A-T-K-I-N-S. Speaker 1: K-I-N-S? Speaker 2: Yes, Watkins. And he called me that morning and told me, said, "McBride, he said you can't go to work today." I said, "Why?" He said, "We got to go at 9:00 o'clock in the morning to the chief of police office." He say "and you got to go with me." I said, "All right." So I went with him down there the next day, and low and behold, they discussed this case that I, we had appealed to the Appellate Court on discrimination. And he, and that was what they wanna know, why did we find two black boys that was in the [U.S.] Navy we didn't know nothing about, and why we spent that much money defending 'em. And so when Watkins got through giving 'em a lesson in history (laughter), they didn't say much more. But anyway- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Moore (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the Moore and Daniel case, the Moore and Daniel. They were, they were the most discriminated--even that night after the public defender--see, I couldn't get my executive board in NAACP to let me hire a lawyer because they was scared I'd hire George Shibley and it would be (unclear). So I had to hire who they suggested. And some of 'em was black Masons that knew white Mason lawyers. So we got a lawyer they knew who didn't do nothing but try to beg the case off, wouldn't fight it. Story_ID: 91264 Speaker 1: And so, but George [Shibley] had fought a case down here in the, in the, in Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton in California], a black Marine. And they tried him down there, and George cleared him. And the judge give him a year in prison, federal prison for contempt of court because he said that George taken secret information from the, from this sergeant and presented it in court. And the judge give him a year in prison, and he spent a year in prison and didn't even lose his license. It was such a raw case. The stuff they had printed against him was what they got out of the press telegram, newspaper, was the stuff that they, the judge convicted him on. And so, but he got out and still studied law. And I was honored in speaking at his funeral when he died. And so he, he got two sons, but they both real estate lawyers and things. They went out for the money age of it and not for criminal process. And he fought his case, but he didn't give up on a case. He didn't bear no brunt, and he didn't worry about no money. Now, the case that we appealed, of these kids [Moore and Daniel], was, he appealed the case. But I couldn't get him as a lawyer. So they found out later that he was the best lawyer on appeal in Long Beach [California]. And that's all he did was appeal cases. But they, they sent him to jail anyway. And from then on, though, we had a, a priority on daring Long Beach to get a rape case on a person if they wasn't clear. And we never had another case of rape in Long Beach since then when we appealed that case. And so it was too much publicity for Long Beach, what they were getting away with. Story_ID: 91265 Speaker 1: And then the recent bunch that happened a couple of months ago--I know you heard about the shooting of the black woman. They intimidated-- Speaker 2: What happened (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It was a black woman , as the police said, went in and loaded a bunch of stuff in the grocery store and walked out with it, rolled out. Well, might not have been nobody's thing. I don't--we don't know what the, caused her to walk out with the stuff. But anyway, the boys in the grocery store, the son. So two fellows out of the grocery store went out and took the groceries away from her, and brought it back into the store. So that time, the store had called the police that she was shoplifting, and they, the police had come. Well, when they come, they asked where they was, and they said, "There, she's walking down the street." They had went out and taken the grocery and brought it back in the store. She was walking on down the street. And the police came and went out there and she supposedly have got an eight-inch knife and threatened to throw it at the police, and they--I think the paper said, I'm not sure, that each police shot her five times. And she was an old woman cripple and a mental case. And they--a black woman, and they shot her five times. And each one of the policemen shot her right--and furthermore, shooting--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: How many times was she shot totally? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: How many total shots did she sustain? I mean-- Speaker 1: They, they didn't say or might have said it-- Speaker 2: How many police officers were involved? Speaker 1: Two, two officers, yeah, two police, young police officers on the force come out there. Well, even they had later on, they had where a guy back in East somewhere, was, had a shield and sword. And they had to get the, went and got the fire department, put a step ladder down. It went down, and that step ladder, you couldn't defend against it with that sword (laughter). And they overpowered him and taken his sword and everything, without killing him. And this woman, she's seventy-some years old, she had drawed the knife back and they were--it was a threatening their life, this eight-inch knife she drawed back. Speaker 2: So a white man with a sword, they were able to-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in a studio, they were able to get it from him without hurting him or-- Speaker 1: Right, without hurting him. Speaker 2: --without hurting anybody. Speaker 1: A week later, they put it in the paper. Speaker 2: But a black woman with an eight-inch knife, they had to shoot her 10 times. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and so, but see- Story_ID: 91266 Speaker 1: Long Beach [California] is--I had got too old to fool with my people in, and they let the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] slip right out into money, trying to make money. And they didn't say a word about it. They had a little girl with the NAACP, but, see, she never knew how we operated when things. Of course, I didn't operate with NAACP. I used the 300 people that was for the, was put in here to help the War industry. They were workers, the majority of 'em workers and things. The government put--it was a--a government project with--it was the only project in America that was segregated, only government project in America was segregated was this one out here. It was 300--299 living, families living in the area and one old woman was a real old garbage collector and stuff. She stayed there and wouldn't lease her building to the government. And so 399 black families lived in Cabrillo 3 [Century Villages at Cabrillo] and, and Cabrillo 1 and 2 was all white. And it was the only federal project in the United States was segregated was this one here. Speaker 2: And this was in what year? Speaker 1: In--that was all during the War [World War II]. Speaker 2: Forties [1940s]. Speaker 1: They put 'em in here and during the '40's [1940s]. And when they first built the shipyard and began to transfer workers from out of the South. They went in the South and would get so many black workers out of there and bring 'em out here to Long Beach. Well, I had to start a program of going to the City Council demanding them get rid of a segregated project. And so I had to visit them, and they started the--well, the City Council did, was glad to try to get it out of Long Beach. So the Council appealed to the government to eliminate Cabrillo 3. So they started to send 'em into Compton [California], didn't want 'em in Long Beach. So they got out, they got about eight or ten families in there. And George Thomas, a friend I knew, he had eleven kids. And he was living in the projects. So they wanted him to move into Compton. Well, they couldn't find a place big enough for him in Compton, and he didn't wanna move out of Long Beach 'cause his kids is all in school here. So I went to the City Council with him, and the Council was telling, well, they had to do it. So finally, our City Council, a white fellow in this area finally did say, well, well, listen Councilmen, said, we urged the government to set up this project. And he said, and why can't we protect the people we got in there; says if this man don't wanna leave Long Beach, why do we--he have to leave Long Beach to get a place to live. So he said, well, I don't believe he's got a order to move, one Councilman said he didn't believe he had a order to move. And so he said, well, we'll get him up here and see what he got, and while this man comes up. So they recessed and me and George come back after the meeting. And, and so George had his, his eviction notice. He had five days to move, and, or they'd put him out. So we, I--we brought that back to him. And so our Councilman said, well, wait a minute. We, we were the ones that asked him to move, this council. He says, now, why we can't be the one to ask them to give the people a place to live? So they agreed to that, so they moved 'em out here in Carmelitos Housing. Story_ID: 91267 Speaker 1: And that is when, when he went out there to Carmelitos and the FBI was so interested in questioning people, they sent him a subpoena, this fellow that they made move, they sent him a subpoena to appear before the [House] Un-American Activity Committee. So he got this subpoena, and he's out working in construction out in North Long Beach. So his, they served it to him, the FBI. I don't why they do it, but they serving on the, on your job where you're working. And that was a type of intimidation when they do it, see. Well, they served him this subpoena, and he went to his boss and showed his subpoena to him. And the boss didn't know what it was, and he didn't either. So the boss told him, that you go and go to my lawyer, and say, and have him to see what this is about. So he went up and got dressed and went to the lawyer. And the lawyer was in court. So he went back home, and he called me and told me, said that "I got a peanie (ph.) here." I said, "What?" "peanie." He didn't know what it was. I said, "What?" He said "From the Un-American Committee." I said, yeah, I said, well, wait a minute. I'll be out there in a few minutes (laughter). And I went out there and picked him up right quick. And I come back home, and I knew the lawyers for the Hollywood Ten, that [Charles] Katz and Mongola [ph.]. [sic, Ben Margolis] Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) Ben Mongola? Speaker 1: Yes, Katz and Mongola, was one of the lawyers that fought the case. So I said, now, I know somebody, I ought to know somebody that knows, that know Mongolas now. Speaker 2: Can you spell Mongolis? Is it Mongolis? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Mon--M-O-N-G-- Speaker 1: --O- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): --O-L-I-S, something. Speaker 1: Yeah, O-L-O-N, Mongolon or something (unclear), Mongolon, he was on this Hollywood Ten. Him and Katz defended the Hollywood 10. Speaker 2: Katz is K-A-T-Z? Speaker 1: He was--Katz, K-A-T-Z. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Katz, and so, anyway, I called him. He said, "Well, Mack, bring him up here quick as you can get him," said, "hang up now and go get him and bring him up here. I wanna see him 'cause the FBI gon' ride him." So I went up there and picked him up. And we went up to Mongolis' office. And when we, and anyway, we got up there. He went in there, and he showed him. He said, uh-huh, what it is. Story_ID: 91268 Speaker 1: So I had told the fellow, [George] Thomas, out there, I said, you let us fight the Anti-Discrimination Committee, what I had set up. And it was the one did the picketing because I could have never got many people out of the NAACP. But we had plenty come in to build a home, new people, that wasn't afraid, come out of the South. So I, I take him up there. So after we left, we come back home, and I got here at the house. He called me, said that while we left, the FBI come by here twice, looking for me. I said, well, did you--I said, Mongolis [sic, Ben Margolis] told you what to say, didn't he? He said, yeah, I know what to say. If they come back and say something to me, I'll cuss 'em out (laughter). I said, we got to--I said, well, George, you be careful. Don't do nothing. Now, we'll take care of you. He was the kind of person that felt that the Lord told him what to say, that he don't say one word unless the Lord first tell him what to say. So they, they had come that morning and tried to cancel his subpoena. So I called George that evening and told him, George said bring him back up here tonight. He said, bring him up. So I picked him up at work, take him back up there that night. And the FBI had come and tried to cancel his subpoena, and he wouldn't let 'em cancel it, said, they told him, said, well, why they want it cancelled. He said, well, they made a mistake. He said, the--the government don't make no mistakes, said, I'm not gon' cancel it. So we went back up there (laughter), and Ben told him, say, this is an accident. I would rather, if we could cancel this, would rather. Say if it was you on the stand, I wouldn't have you--I would insist on you. He said, but George is gon' answer three questions when they ask before I can stop him to answer one. And he said, we gotta, we have to be careful. I said, all right then. I said, cancel it. So they had left George a note to call the FBI in Fullerton if he wanted to cancel it before 10:00 o'clock in the morning and said they would cancel it. So he called, had called him back. Ben called him that night and then put George on the phone. And George told 'em, said, "How about canceling that subpeanie" (ph.). So they told him, said, well, all right, we'll cancel it in the morning at 10:00 o'clock, before 10:00 o'clock we will have a answer. So they sent him a telegram canceling it. And Ben told him, said if it was you on the stand, I would go through with it, say 'cause we could really embarrass the [House] Un-American Activity Committee. But then George is not gon' let me tell him nothing. He gon' look for the Lord to tell him (laughter), and he said that, and it's hard to handle a fellow like that. So that's the way we got out of not--and they canceled it. So-- Story_ID: 91269 Speaker 1: Just let me ask you, I was asking you about like some of the national figures in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And I think that at one time, you had scheduled Paul Robeson to come here to speak, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was through the--I never did do it through the NAACP 'cause at that time--it wasn't through the NAACP. Well, when I (unclear), I just asked for one of the churches to have a mass meeting, and anti-discrimination (unclear) set up for me. And actually, the NAACP was not involved in it at all. Speaker 1: And you called the group an Anti-Discrimination what? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What did you say it was set up under the Anti-Discrimination-- Speaker 2: Committee. Speaker 1: Committee, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when I organized this committee. They were all members of the NAACP there, people from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: They operated outside of the NAACP. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they was also members of the Anti-Discrimination Committee which was set up, when--see, I was secretary of the NAACP. And I was a member of the Anti-Discrimination Committee which was organized--which I helped organize in Cabrillo Homes [Century Villages at Cabrillo]. And so they was the one I did the picketing. The NAACP didn't have a member on there that was a, other than he's just a member, but he didn't attend. And so, but I worked with that committee because I couldn't use the people that applied for the jobs when I, I had a job. When they, when I opened up jobs, 'cause the guy would say, "take a application". I'd send people there. They would, they would get those jobs, and if they'd get those jobs, they was afraid they would jeopardize 'em. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: In other words, the main thing was to keep people working or keep 'em here. And if they didn't work, they couldn't stay, that you didn't know nothing to do, see. Speaker 1: So what happened when you brought--did you bring Paul Robeson here? Did you--(unclear), (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. He had, I--we had a full house everywhere Paul sang. He gave a concert singing down at 8th and Pine. Well, that afternoon, one of the things we did, we had a reception for him. I got a woman up on 12th Street, Ms. Howard and them, she knew how famous Robeson was, and I had a reception for him up there. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (unclear) was like a concert pianist. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I mean Ms. Homan's [ph.] son, (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, well, when we had that reception that afternoon, I happened to go down and meet a guy that was getting ready for the afternoon concert. And they had moved the piano from upstairs, downstairs. And I knew Robeson would not sing on a, before a piano if it wasn't tuned, if that piano wasn't tuned. So it was after 3:00 o'clock that afternoon when his reception was over, and they got me the word that they had moved the piano. I said, "Oh, God, what they gon' do about the piano?" A guy said, "What about--we moved it down there." I said, "Man, piano. Robeson ain't gon' sing unless you--it's tuned." And there we was at 3:00 o'clock in the afternoon to get somebody to tune that piano. And here was a guy, we had some--he said, well, I know a piano tuner right there in the project, over there. I said, you do? He said, yeah, I know him. And he said, I'll get him. And he went and got this Negro, and this Negro went down there, was in Cabrillo Homes, press telegram would headline how bad it was. It's a delinquent crowds out there, shooting dice and going on. And this Negro come down there and tuned that piano and Robeson come there and sung on it that night. They liked everything. And he's right there in Cabrillo Homes. And that's why I knew a lot of professional people come out there, but they was--well, they was subject to go to the Army in the Service if they didn't go in the defense industry. That was one way of getting out of going to the Service. So we, we had a Negro out of Cabrillo Homes was out there working with (unclear), was a piano tuner and Robeson tuned that piano and he sung that night. And, and it was really a glory to find out--and I found out a lot of Negroes were professional people out there, but they was just doing it. Story_ID: 91270 Speaker 1: So I had one thing, one of the most disgusting things I ever had in my life. And I'll only--I won't call no names (unclear), but the idea of how it done. I had a black kid, that was 10 and 12 year old kids was playing. They had moved a service station right as you come over the bridge coming in Long Beach [California] from Wilmington [California]. They had moved that station up there, and temporarily set it on studs. And what had happened, the kids got to playing on it at night--day, and one of them big shoulders fell right across a kid's chest and killed the kid. And he was twelve years old. So I went over there and looked at it, and so I called George Shibley, this lawyer I was thinking about and told George what happened. And George said, well, I'll tell you what happened, said the least they can get from that, the law required, is an income from that kid while he's 12 years old till he was 21, the approximate income to the family. And he said, if they didn't have proper protection from the public, and he said that I want you to get a camera and go around and take a picture of the whole thing. And he said, bring it down to me and bring the people down here. He said, and I'll file a case for nothing against them, won't cost them a dime. I said, well, that's good. And I went around and got a photographer to do it. And got, taken pictures all around it, how it was and went to the family. The man wasn't there that evening. The woman was, and I told her I'll pick you up in the morning and all you have to do is go down and sign. And this contractor, or even the state pays so much if you don't. And she said, all right. And I called George and told him I'd be down the next morning at 5:00. And I went back the next morning, the woman say, "Naw, said our pastor told us you're just gon' get us into trouble, that you--if we keep fooling with you, they gon' put us in jail." I said, what? I said, well, put you in jail for us. Well, you can't fool with these white folks out here. They, my pastor said, they'll put you in jail if you fool (laughter). Story_ID: 89427 Speaker 1: Okay, sir, tell me, when you look back at your career with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and with the Committee, the Anti-Racism Committee [sic, Anti-Discrimination Committee], tell me, what do you see as your legacy? What are the highlights of the things that you left behind? Speaker 2: Well, NAACP, the highlight was the, really with the NAACP is when we fought is there every black person come to Long Beach [California] was arrested here. He was questioned and caught and brought and marched before--whether this is a guy that raped a woman. Speaker 1: Put in a lineup, something? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was put in a lineup when he come through here, going even to San Diego [California]. When he get--Don Jackson was a case of it, Don Jackson, his case. Did you ever hear of the Don Jackson case? Speaker 1: No, sir. Speaker 2: Well, he came here [in 1989], and he told Long Beach that if you go down one of the main streets in Long Beach, a black person or two black males, young males, they would be stopped by the police and would be taken downtown, fingerprinted and photo, photograph taken and put--usually put before a rape charge for raping a woman. And this was one of the things, when we went to court with these three sailors which I told, that slowed Long Beach down. We had to stop it, and it got to the place where it wasn't a real problem with guys coming through here stopping. Well, Don Jackson come through here, and he hit Pacific Coast Highway and he come straight down Pacific Coast. And he told the NBC News that--no, CBS, I believe it was, he told 'em that black, young black gon' drive through Long Beach, cruising like, that they would stop him and would search him, and would usually photograph him and fingerprint him. Speaker 1: Racial profiling, they call it now. Speaker 2: Well, yeah. So they denied it. Well, Don Jackson came from Los Angeles [California] and he came on Pacific Coast Highway. And he was driving--now, he and--two of 'em, driving down. And when he got to, near up here near Martin Luther King [Jr. Avenue], the police pulled him over. And they pulled him over, and he went, they went to search him, and he turned his arms around behind him. And he pushed him up against a big plate window. And he, and Don evidently turned around (unclear) a side turn, and he shoved his head into the, and busted that window out, a great big window. It cut the policeman's hand 'cause he had his hand on the back of his head, and he had on an old cap, and it cut the policeman's hand. And the policeman cussed him and he did everything he did to keep him--and Don was an ex-police officer. And he knew how to handle it. And he got (unclear) of maybe shooting him or killing him before he would, you know, relent. So anyway, when--and that Don Jackson case come through, that kind of cooled Long Beach off. They stopped going profiling as bad as they used to. But anyway, we--that was one of the things that we had, tried to stop. Story_ID: 89428 Speaker 1: And another things that stopped, taking Negroes downtown, profiling--not profiling but arrests them. And my wife [Lillian M. McBride] had a sister was older than she was. And this sister, they put a black cafe on up here on Martin Luther King [Jr. Avenue]. And this fellow that put it up was a black guy, but they thought he was white (laughter). So, and he had a black wife, but they never seen his black wife. She was black as my shoe. And she, my wife's sister, she put on a little black cafe up there, and my wife's sister was a waiter in there. And so the police come out one morning and got her, picked her up, taken her down to jail and said that she had picked the pockets on a man that was sitting on Broadway and Locust, just one block from Pine over downtown [Long Beach, California], say, she picked his pocketbook. And so, had her in jail, and when the old man that owned the cafe come, Old Man Barlon [ph.], he was white, he was a black, Negro--he was Negro, (laughter) but they thought he's white. And he come and he got so mad. He went downtown and cussed out every police down there, and they was three weeks apologizing for doing that and brought her back. And she went on back to, in the cafe. But that's how they had such things as picking up Negroes and getting 'em for rape, raping some woman. So, that was one of the biggest things. Story_ID: 89429 Speaker 1: And then again, just like I started to tell you about this kid that got killed and which opposition was against me in the black community, see. It was plenty opposition by these guys that was in here scared to death. So when this woman told me that, that morning that her pastor had been there--and I won't tell his name because some of his children may be living yet. So many pastors died, it's hard to tell which one it was. I've lived so long. But anyway, when I went back the next morning and asked that couple to go, the man was there. He said, no. You can't fool me. I know what you do. You're, these white folks will come out here and kill us. I said, man, you in California. But they was so scared. And the preacher come back the next morning and told 'em the same thing, said, McBride will get you in jail. You'll never get out. And they were, had gotten, raised good money and was fixing to go back down in Louisiana somewhere, where they come from. But I couldn't get 'em to go and they wouldn't go. But that hurt me more than anything I'd ever known, to see such a pitiful people as they was. But they was so intimidated. Story_ID: 89430 Speaker 1: Sir, were you--do you remember the case in Los Angeles [California] where the Black Muslims took up the case of a man that was shot and killed by--where they killed the Black Muslim man, I think, in Los Angeles when Malcolm X came here in '63' [1963], I think it was. Do you remember that case? Speaker 2: I must remembered it--I know that, Eula Love, it wasn't her that the police killed. Speaker 1: No, it was a man that was killed. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a man. This was a woman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They come to cut off her gas or something. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And they, the two police officers, one of them was a black officer that killed her. They shot her and killed her, just like they did this woman in Long Beach. Story_ID: 89431 Speaker 1: Well, sir, can you give us--well, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Today? Speaker 1: In 2002? Speaker 2: Well, it's great hopes I got for it. But now, one of the difficult things about it, when I fought this fight, I had to first stabilize my family life. And then when I go out here and ask a guy, how come you don't hire a person here, the guy said, well, I'll give--we have to have examinations or take up application. I got to prepare my kids which they losing so much of my experience, and I have to prepare my kids to take this job that I'm demanding them have. If they can't--and I can't sit around here. I got to teach 'em to where they can pass the exam. And that's the difficulty I had. If I could tell 'em go to the telephone company, told 'em say, yeah, we'd like for you to hire some black girls; said, well, we have our application opened. Have 'em to take application. Well, they required so much typing and so much (unclear). And we got--we'll give 'em an application. I said, all right, I'll send some down here. I go to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and announce they want girls there, to go down there and work. And, and I got to keep mine 'cause my older girl here, the only way that we busted the telephone company [General Telephone Company], we had girls going down there. And I would--I went down there, and he was such nice about having them taking applications. And every week, three or four would go down and take applications. None of 'em passed. So, I finally got my daughter at home. She was working at, in South Gate [California] up here for the [U.S.] Army as a clerk. And I finally got her. I asked her one night, I said, can you pass that exam? She said, yeah, said, but it's something wrong, some of these girls don't pass. And, and she said, what girl taken it today? So I had checked with the man. She called the girl's name. I told my daughter, I said--she said, ah, dad, said, she couldn't pass it. I know 'cause she spend most of her time in the hallway. I said, well, uh-huh, I said, well, can you pass it? She said, yes, I can pass it. I said, go down and take it. So she went down and taken it, and she passed, and the man told her she could come to work. And she come home and told me, said, but I don't want the job, dad, say I'm making $35.00 a week up there. They only pay me 30--25 [$25.00], say Long Beach only pay $25.00 a week. And she said that, she said and I carry two girls for $5.00 a week backwards and forth. I said, well, I says, it may be a problem for you. I said, but I would suggest that you quit that job up there and take this one. Said, but dad, I'll leave 10, I'll lose $10.00 a week, plus $10.00 taking--I said, well, listen. I said, every week I got to service or do something for this car for you to carry 'em up there. I said, and if you can't take this job for a month till they hire some more girls, I said if you take the job, they'll hire more then. And I said, and soon as they hire a couple more girls, you can quit. Well, that's what she did. And in two weeks, they had hired two more girls when she got there. So, and then I said, then, what I got to do, I got to prepare my kids, which I'm leaving so much of history behind 'em, black history, is left 'cause I don't have the time to tell 'em what's happening. Story_ID: 89432 Speaker 1: And today what's happening, kids have predetermined the fact that I'm free. And a black kid is never free under American white rule. He's never free. And so he can only think he's started his freedom, started it. I had a situation the other night. My great grand kid, both of 'em attended Long Beach State [California State University, Long Beach], said, "Daddy, I wanna take you to work, I mean take, Grand, I wanna take you to lunch tonight." I said, "Okay, come out." They came out there to take me to lunch, but their friend decided to come with 'em, went to Long Beach State too. He's a Chinese boy, and he, when he got to their house, they decided to let him drive. And so, the Chinese boy drives. So he drove on out and picked me up, and he had a little bity car, and he put me in the front 'cause it was difficult to get in anywhere else. I had my walking stick with me too, and put them two in the back. It was three blacks riding with a Chinese, white, driving. And I said, "What would happen if the Long Beach police picked us, stopped up us?" And that afternoon, two blacks had killed thirteen people. They arrested 'em for (unclear). I said, "That show you, you're not free." And the kids, I said, "Well, what would have happened had they stopped us?" I said, "no doubt we would only have to prove who we were when we got in court." I said, "but how long would we have been down to City Hall, probably not able to communicate for anybody for hours." I said, "and what are we creating something like this if we know the problem." I said, now, "We don't need to put ourself in that position." We think we're free, and those kids, why they couldn't, they had no reason to stop us. I said, they don't have to have a reason. They stopped the election of a president in spite of the Constitution and elected one. Why should they then respect us? Why do you think they would? I said, you're determined in your freedom too quick. You don't know what freedom is. You don't know when you got freedom. Story_ID: 89433 Speaker 1: Sir, now, what did your--did your father [Grandville "Grant" McBride] and mother [Julia Porter McBride] --what did they think of your activities when you got to Long Beach [California]? Did they know about the-- Speaker 2: No, no, when I got to Long Beach, my mother lived till I got out here, till 1940, I think it was. She died in 1940 [sic, 1943]. My father died in 1930 when I left home, so they didn't think nothing of it. But I'm afraid that, I'm afraid the United States has taken a completely U-turn with the administration we got now [President George W. Bush] and with what the future of it's going. See, they're not letting us know what 9/11 [September 11, 2001] meant. But 9/11 meant that our economy has changed definitely, indefinitely, and would never change again, to better no more. It's going to be weak from here out. When we lined up as many airplanes as we got out there in the desert and the transportation when the--you was getting thousands of people flying across the country, and all that money going in the economy, and they tell us now, "Our economy is strong". What could strengthen it? What could strengthen our economy? It sure can't be the mayor of the airplane industry and what we lost in it. So we got the--then again, how many people are figuring that we're looking for people over in Europe or Australia and African and catching 'em over there, bandits. We couldn't catch the people, but one man [Timothy McVeigh] that bombed the Oklahoma center [Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building]. Why? Because he's white. We only caught one, one white man paid for 6,800 lives [sic, 168 people were killed in the bombing], one white man paid for it. But today, they'll be arresting minorities throughout the world and telling us, it's--they arrested 'em for 9/11. What kind of 9/11 is arresting them for? It's profiling and the major object of it is gonna be determined. We had in school, we had black history. We had black--I remember the downfall of systems, and our downfall would have been monopoly taking over capitalism. And the FBI was organized back in them days, it was organized to stop monopoly because men then knew money, the minute monopolies start, we'll end. That's the end of our democracy. And it's starting when they got--the presidents now, I'm going to run, going to be Gates, Forbes, and, and Perot [Ross Perot], they're all multi-millionaires. And the (unclear) gon' take even the salary of a president. Well, what does that mean? What does that mean to the nation, that you're gonna get men running like that? If you get hungry, here's a dollar. Eat. If you have no place to live, here, buy you a blanket and sleep. Speaker 1: So you think the rich are taking over-- Speaker 2: That's right. That's the way a monopoly gon' do. Speaker 1: --more than ever. Speaker 2: That's right. Their money is worth more than human value, and it is today. Money value is worth more than human value. It isn't a man hardly in the United States that can't pay him enough to get him killed. So then where are we? Where is the ultimate end gon' come to this thing? Where is it gon' come? It's bound to come to an end. And I only feel for the youngsters have to come up under what they're gon' today. And they figure--even as Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and as far freedom as they thought they, here's two policemen taking a gun and kill a 70-year old woman with a knife this long. Story_ID: 89434 Speaker 1: Sir, I know you're still active on some level, even though you said you're getting a little tired, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Only for what I do for others, only what I did for others. What I did, people got to recognize what I did. Now, I think that's why I got the rewards, award 'cause see, I've got many of these. When they gave me an award there to make my house a historical event, Dr. [Thomas] Clark, who was mayor [of Long Beach, California] at that time, he told me, "It wasn't the people that made the history or made the house. It was the people that lives there." It wasn't the house, I mean. It was the people that lived there, said that's the people they give it on. Well, I so happened to be, that I knew more--the white population of Long Beach knew more than the black did. And I don't think they knew more, but the black wouldn't admit what they knew because of the handicapped they were under. Well, I forgave 'em for all of that. I never once blamed one for saying something about me downtown. I had one of the preachers go down there and see the assistant city manager. He walked in the office, and one of our leading, black ministers asked him, said, well, tell me, say, Reverend, is that fellow, McBride, a communist or not? And this preacher told him, say, well, everybody thinks he's a communist, but I don't know whether he is or not (laughter). And he, if he met you today, in hell, he'd tell you I was his best friend. He never had a single anniversary that I didn't send him $5.00 or more. I had mass meetings at his church, and he would meet me and hug me and all kind of things, but this is what he did. And so, but if I meet him in hell, I'm gon' greet him as a man, and-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --but that's all. That's all he is. And I don't worry about, about dying or when death comes. No man knows when he dies. You got to realize, you don't know when you die. You become unconscious, no feeling, no thinking or nothing. I've been too--unconscious too many times (laughter), for days--not for days, but night, I've been unconscious. And I'm not afraid of dying. It's not the, it's not even on my mind whether I'll die or when I'll die. I know it's inevitable. My dad [Grandville "Grant" McBride] told me, and I had sense to look at, around me and know that death is inevitable and need not worry about. You're gonna get it, and it's no use of spending any part of your life. Now, yes, I lived in Long Beach and living now, I think the rest of my life--couldn't be too long. But I can live here, and I won't be hungry. Speaker 1: I hope it's a long time. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Well-- Speaker 1: And I know you will be remembered. Speaker 2: --it doesn't matter with me (laughter). Yeah, I'm (unclear) I accomplished all I can accomplish. I know I'm not able to do any more. But I think I've done my share. And I hope that my family would do the same, will do the same thing in life. But I warn 'em, don't think your daddy has got your freedom. You haven't got freedom in America by a long shot. We got a long ways to go. We got a long time to do it if we just stay at it and stay busy, doing what we got to do. And I hope that I've contributed something that would help the nation and help the community. I wasn't trying to help the whole nation. I just tried to help my community, and if you did that, I think I made a contribution to it. They've told me I had, by giving these awards, and I tell you, it's--people, I don't know of any enemy I got. I know a lot of friends, I am to, I'm to a lot of friends, but no enemy. Speaker 1: Thank you, sir. Speaker 2: I don't know any. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: I don't know any. Speaker 1: Thank you for this interview. Speaker 2: Thank you for the interview, and I appreciate you fellows having that much interests in me. Story_ID: 89435 Speaker 1: That's me, my wife [Lillian M. McBride] and I don't know who this is. I can't understand--oh, yeah, and the photograph (unclear) my family. That's a daughter, that's granddaughter. This is her daughter and this is a grand kid. This is a daughter-in-law, older son's wife. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and where was this taken? Speaker 1: This- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Where was this? Speaker 1: Are those flowers in there? Speaker 2: This is a mural that depicts you and your wife. Is that true? It's a mural that depicts you and your wife, but where is it at? Do you know? Can you tell us where it is? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): The six, under the Sixth Street Bridge in Long Beach [California]. Speaker 2: Okay, that's the (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next, please. Speaker 2: Now, this was an award that I was given by the "Citizens Involved". That is the political organization that ran the [Alan] Lowenthal, who's now in Congress. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And who's this woman on the right holding the certificate? Do you know who that is? Speaker 2: Who is that woman? She got on glasses. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Or do you know who this man is? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Ernestine, I can't remember her last name, Ernestine-- Speaker 2: Naw. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): 'Cause wasn't that Felix's wife? Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Felix and Ernestine. Speaker 1: Oh, no. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Wasn't that Ernestine? Speaker 2: Naw. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Do you remember when this was? Speaker 2: Well, that was probably, the first of the '50's [1950s] probably. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great, next one. What about this one? Speaker 2: That's myself, my wife and who is this? It's some guy dedicated from the organization to present me with an award. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I presented the award to many guys myself, being members of the organizations. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Someone said that's Senator [Ralph] Dills? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Is that a senator? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): D-I-L-L-S. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Senator Dills, D-I-L-L-S? Is that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Dills. That's who it is, yeah. Speaker 2: All right, great, next. Speaker 1: That's State Senator Dills. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How about this one? Speaker 1: He presented me a lot of awards, Dill did. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Is that you? Speaker 1: That's me, yeah. Now, this-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Where and when? Speaker 1: Now, this was at an- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Fundraiser for that kid that you were trying to (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they had a black kids that was for the governor to extradite him for serving a life sentence in Georgia, I believe it was, and the only crime he ever committed, he rode a bicycle like from here to Santa Ana [California], and they picked him up, and found out he stole the bicycle from a place like Long Beach. They put him in jail. They kept him in there about ten years without a trial even, and he got to be a, walk out, you know. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Trustee. Speaker 1: And he left. They picked him up-- Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Probably in the '50's [1950s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, probably first of the '50's [1950s]. And he-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, what about this one? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): For escape, they wanted to give him life. Speaker 1: Now, this was an award. I was, had conducted a freedom fund banquet for the NAACP. This is my wife, my neighbor- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Annabelle Cohen. Speaker 1: Annabelle Cohen. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): And Ernestine-- Speaker 1: Ernestine Cheatham. And this is my wife-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): In the white with the white hat is your wife? Speaker 1: Yes, that's my wife. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How do you spell Cheatham? Ernestine-- Speaker 1: C-H-E-A-T-H-A-M. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and then this other woman, between you and your wife is- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Cohen--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Annabelle Cohen. She lives over there on Orange. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And how does Ms. Cohen spell her last name? Speaker 2: She was just a member of the committee. They worked--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): C-O-H-N. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): C-O-H-N. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, she worked on these committees. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What year do you suppose this would have been? Speaker 1: Oh, that would have been- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Probably in the '50's [1950s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, about the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Maybe '60's [1960s] from the dress? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Fifties [1950s], '51' [1951] or--between '47' [1947] and '50' [1950]. Story_ID: 89436 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, now, this says November 12, 1999, and here's a photo here. Let's--this is--is this you? Speaker 2: Yeah, that looks like me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Out in front of your house? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, that's the big window, and this is right on the front porch. Speaker 1: That's your 90th birthday, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, my 90th birthday. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead, next. Speaker 2: In 1998. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that must be you. Speaker 2: That is when I finished high school [Scipio A. Jones High School in North Little Rock, Arkansas] in 1930. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: January, 1930, these pictures were taken. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great, and down from up here, let's see what this is. Speaker 2: Now, what is that? Speaker 1: That's your mother [Julia Jackson Porter McBride]. Speaker 2: That's my mother, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): It says, Carrollton, Mississippi, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Mr. McBride's mother, Julia Jackson Porter. This was taken in Little Rock, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, yeah. Yeah, that was mother. (Unclear). She passed in 1940 or '41' [1941] [sic, 1943]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Well, that's my, that's my picture and that's my sister's [Sally McBride] picture. Speaker 1: Your twin sister? Speaker 2: We was twins, my twin sister, yeah. And she has a, her boy lives in Las Vegas. And he's the one that made that picture for me up there, yeah, the boy. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next, Larry. Speaker 2: This is your father. Speaker 1: That's my dad [Grandville "Grant" McBride]. Now, my dad never taken a picture that he wasn't--he had been off sick, and he passed by it out of town and take one of these little, where the guys was taking your picture on the street. He would always wear that cap, and he was always deep eyed. He had been, had chill, and usually he'd have chills for--if you one three days, you have 'em three days in a row. If he had a chill three days, well, then he would lay off from work and have a picture made. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Now, this is our, my class when I--what happened, our class was cut up into batches because we had had so many units until we would have been finishing when we was incorporated in the Southwest district of the education, why our class was in the 11th grade, and we had 17-1/2 units. And it only required 16 to finish. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is after I finished high school and come to California. I--this was the uniform I practiced in with the Memphis Red Sox and come to California, I had this uniform on. My sister lived here, and she taken this--that's the way we looked when we played ball in 1930, in the summer of 1930. Speaker 2: And this is the team I played on in Ralphs, Ralphs Grocery Company. There and there--I've forgot some of the names. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): So you're the front row and, well, obviously the only Colored player at (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Well, I--now, when I played with this team, this team had, had the catcher here. I don't think he was here. Naw, this guy- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Which one was Billy Jean King's father? Speaker 2: Billy Jean King's father, I believe this is him. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): The one on the front row there? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): No, he's pointing at the back row. Speaker 2: Naw, this is (unclear). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo. Speaker 2: This is the year I was head of the [NAACP] Freedom Fund Committee banquet, and these are the people that work with me, to have our Freedom Fund. Now, the branches, they celebrated the 60th or something 50-something, Freedom Fund. And this was when we had the Freedom Fund banquet at the California Recreation Center. And I, at that time, these are the little-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Actually, we shot the caption so we've got that. Go ahead, next. Speaker 2: This is an award I got from the "Citizens Involved". Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Naw, remember that's the one that--that was here, related to that fundraiser about the kids. They were trying to extradite 'cause you had his badge on. That's the newspaper reporter, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's the same one about extraditing the kid who stole the bicycle? Speaker 2: Oh, that's right. Speaker 1: No, that's not that, 'cause this is much later. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): Yeah, this is kind of, the same week (unclear), raising funds for several weeks. Speaker 1: That's right. And there's [California Governor George] Deukmejian, when I got an award for State, for saving those kids. And that was quite a--I didn't think it was really what it was until the Captain of the--(unclear) (children sounds in backgrounds)--of the fire department went there. He said that he got the message when he got the call, I run around the house and picked up the hose, and he got the call, said in three minutes after he got the call, I had all three of those kids out of there [in 1965]. Speaker 2: Oh, you rescued some kids? I didn't even know about that. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How about this one, Mr. McBride? Your family? Speaker 2: Family, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: This might have been at some kind of celebration we had. I don't know. Speaker 1: Next. We got the caption on that one. Speaker 2: Now, what is that? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Monday, November 12, 2001. Speaker 2: Oh, that was some birthday party. I had so many birthdays, yes (laughter). I don't know where that was. Speaker 1: That's a piece out of the "First Telegram", newspaper. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): That's your birthday party. Speaker 2: This is the last one. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 3): And that's the FBI file. Speaker 2: That was forty-two years of investigation. They found out I had never been arrested. I had never been in jail. And even when I helped set up the Police Complaint Commission here in Long Beach, and they gave us a invitation to go into the jail, I refused to look in a jail that they had prepared for me to see. And I did not go. I didn't go-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Larry. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, got any more? No, that's it...