 Story_ID: 21013 Speaker 1: Alright. My name is Larry Crowe and I'm interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, Floyd, F-L-O-Y-D. My middle name is Joseph, and my last name is Malveaux, M-A-L-V-E-A-U-X. Speaker 1: Alright. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 11, 1940. And I was born in Opelousas, Louisiana, O-P-E-L-O-U-S-A-S, a little town in southwest Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a physician by training. I'm a physician executive at the present time. I don't practice medicine. My title at the present time is Executive Vice President and Executive Director of the Merck, M-E-R-C-K, Childhood Asthma Network. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is June 27, 2012. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] Story_ID: 21014 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of warm-up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Sure. Creole gumbo. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I tend to favor blue, green--blue, probably. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Wow. Well of the places I've been, I think I probably have two. One is Cape Town, South Africa, and I like Paris. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't know if it's a favorite. I guess I sometimes will frequently say, "That's cool" or something like that. Story_ID: 21015 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. Then we'll ask about them separately, so we don't get them mixed up. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Then we'll try to put them together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother's name is Inez, I-N-E-Z, Lamelle, L-A-M-E-L-L-E, Malveaux, M-A-L-V-E-A-U-X. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was her maiden name-- Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Lamelle. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was born September 20, 1915. Speaker 1: Okay. And where? Speaker 2: In Opelousas, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Alright. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: I can trace her family back to about the middle 1700's, middle of the 19th century. And my mother's family came from France and from Italy. On my maternal grandfather's side, my mother's father, was a Lamelle, of course, and his family actually originated from France in about the middle of the 1700's and came to Louisiana. They stopped in New Orleans, migrated to New Orleans, and then during that period of time, of course, there was slavery. And, so the gentleman who came over not only had a white wife, but also took on a mulatto woman and had a family with a mulatto woman during that period of time. She was a free black woman, and they had children, of course, and gave rise to the Lamelle's side of the family. On my maternal grandmother's side, her family were Donatto's, D-O-N-A-T-T-O, and they originated from Italy, from Naples, from the Naples area. Again, about the same period of time, they came to Louisiana, stopped in New Orleans, and both of these families, by the way, migrated toward the Opelousas area after some time. And pretty much the same type of relationship occurred there. And they had children, and one of the descendants, actually who was born in the late 1700's--and he died right after the, right before the civil war, was a man named Martin Donatto. He became a very prosperous black man in Louisiana. They had moved to Opelousas by that time. He became quite prosperous and actually became one of the most wealthy free black men in the country at that time. Unfortunately, he had slaves himself and had lots of land and so on. And so, because they were in the Opelousas area which was a relatively small community, relatively few free people of color at that time, there was a lot of intermarriage, actually, among those two families, the Lamelle's and the Donatto's and so on. And as it turns out, my mother's mother and father had siblings that also married as well. So there were two or three brothers that married two or three sisters during that period of time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now these are siblings of the Donatto's and the-- Speaker 2: And the Lamelle's. Speaker 1: So multiple relationships, with that family, between the families. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 21016 Speaker 1: Alright, so now tell us, now we've interviewed people--now, would your family be considered Creole? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. And what's the position of the Creole in that part of Louisiana? Speaker 2: Well, you know, historically, of course, Creoles were people who were actually natives of Louisiana. They were born in Louisiana. And probably if you ask a number of people, you'll get different definitions, but for the most part they were natives, and these are individuals who had backgrounds who were French, Spanish and usually American Indian as well. Many of the Creoles were free people of color. They got their, they bought their freedom relatively early, or were given their freedom over time. And they were allowed to own land to engage in business transactions, had certain legal protections that people who were not free--slaves--did not have at that point in time. So, there were different strata, so to speak, of society at that time. There was, of course, the white society that was totally free and owned slaves and so on. There were Creoles that were somewhere between slaves and the free whites at that time, in terms of their social status and what they were allowed to do, and their freedoms and so on. Speaker 1: Okay. So, is it true that you can be a slave and be a Creole, too? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Yes, well, there, you know, there were people of color, of course, that were slaves and they were given their freedom. And yes, they did have French backgrounds. They had African backgrounds, or Spanish, and American Indian. And I failed to mention, of course, the African descent is an integral part of the Creole culture as well. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so when, so when your mother was growing up, was there like a real defined distinction between a Creole neighborhood or Creole society and the regular African-American community? Speaker 2: There was, actually, yeah, and that existed in Louisiana during that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it existed before the Civil War. And the line of demarcation was blurred more after the Civil War, of course, but some of those customs actually continued, you know, for generations following that. Story_ID: 21017 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now are there stories from that side that come down? Speaker 2: Well, I mean there are, there are interesting stories, of course, in terms of what people were able to do and, for example, Martin Donatto, who I alluded to, I said was a very prosperous individual. Martin actually served as a banker, a private banker, so to speak, for whites as well as people of color during that period of time. So, he had a great deal of freedom, so to speak, as a free individual of color. Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay. So, he served as a banker for those who needed to have their money discretely held somewhere, or-- Speaker 2: Not necessarily discretely, but I mean if they needed money, for example, to buy seed for crops or whatever they needed money for, he would loan them money to do these types of things. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he would always be like a venture capitalist, or something (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --select who wants to loan the money to... Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: ...based on what he thinks their performance is going to be. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and I'm sure you know when they paid him back, there was some interest involved there as well. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And him being rich-- okay. Any other stories about that side, your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: You know, they were very interested in, and emphasized the value of education. They really strove to get an education. I think they felt that was really the way in which they could, they could really exercise their freedoms at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Is this something that happened back in the 19th century or were they-- Speaker 2: It was more in the 20th century, but in the 19th century, that's true as well, because they learned to read and write, because during slavery of course, you were not permitted to learn to read or write. But for them it was very important that they learned those skills. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The food is very traditional, of course. I mean, that's, they tell wonderful stories in terms of preparation of food. People were relatively poor at that time, and didn't have access to perhaps good meats and vegetables. Well, they grew their own vegetables of course, so they ate fresh vegetables. The meats, they slaughtered the animals themselves. I recall as a young child, actually my grandfather, my mother's father, who had a farm, would slaughter pigs and I recall actually seeing that process and how they did it. And they used everything. They made cracklings, you know, from the skin and fat and so on. They made cheese from the different parts of the head, and so they, I guess the saying is that they used everything but the grunt of the pig. And so those were very fond memories, and I recall that. And there were animals on the farm of course, horses and cows. And my grandfather also was big into sugar cane. And I recall actually riding on a wagon drawn by horses taking cane to the refinery. So those are, they were hardworking people, and lived on the earth, so to speak, and really developed some interesting foods and dishes as a result of that. Gumbo is a result of that, actually. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Joseph Bartholomew Lamelle. Story_ID: 21018 Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother, did she have some stories about growing up, about the things she encountered growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, sure. My mother was the oldest. And she had five siblings. She--because she had five siblings, they lived on a farm as I indicated. She was given responsibility for some of the younger siblings as they came along, and so she learned to sew and make clothes for her siblings. She helped them with their homework and so on. My mother was a teacher, and she was really, probably within that family, one of the strongest proponents for education. She believed very strongly in terms of the value of an education. And my grandfather really wanted her to stop school, during high school, because he felt that she really needed to contribute more toward helping in the home with my grandmother and so on. And my mother, she fought that, actually. And they were Catholic, and so she was going to a Catholic school, and so she actually asked the priest to assist her and come and talk to my grandfather to encourage him so she could continue and finish high school. And they did that. And she finished high school as a result. They lived, as I said, on the farm in a rural area. They had to walk into Opelousas in order to get to school. There was one Catholic school in Opelousas at the time. Holy Ghost was the name of that school. And so they walked essentially to school everyday, and that had to be about three miles or so each way. As a result she finished high school, and during that time you could get a teaching certificate after finishing high school. And she started teaching. And she furthered her education by going to college in the summer and whenever she could, and she finished after she was married, actually, in about 1945 from a little college north of Baton Rouge [Louisiana], Leland College. And Leland is, no longer exists, but she was able to finish her education. And I recall actually being at her graduation. I was about five years old at the time. I remember it was a very hot day, and I recall fainting. And that's one of the first vivid memories for me, actually, because they gave me Pepsi, I'm sorry, Dr. Pepper to drink at that time, and that was my introduction to Dr. Pepper, (laughter) and I always recall that incident, and I was at her graduation. So, she was really a very strong proponent of education and probably the reason that I pursued education as a result. Speaker 1: Okay. Leland College, you're right, it doesn't exist anymore. That's the school that Gardner Taylor graduated from. Speaker 2: Is that right? Yeah. Speaker 1: Leland College down near Baton Rouge. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21019 Speaker 1: So let me go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. His first name is Delton, D-E-L-T-O-N, Joseph Malveaux. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born July 9, 1914. Speaker 1: Okay. In Opelousas? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, he was born in Saint Martinville, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Is that nearby? Speaker 2: That is about fifty miles south of Opelousas. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: About the same time, probably about the mid-1700's-- an individual named Jean Baptiste Malvot--and they spelled Malveaux, M-A-L-V-O-T at that time. He came to Opelousas from France, had children with a free black woman. I think her name was Catherine, and they had two sons, one was Laurent, L-A-U-R-E-N-T, Malvot. In fact, he came to this country about 1780 or so, and after coming to this country he changed the name, the spelling of the name to Malveaux, from M-A-L-V-O-T to M-A-L-V-E-A-U-X. Speaker 1: Is there a story as to why? Speaker 2: I don't know why that was done. We do know it was done about ten or fifteen years actually after coming into this country. Speaker 1: Yeah, we had a discussion coming in about Matthew Hickey, our videographer, was mentioning that Malveaux, the 'x' is plural in French. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and when I do the, you know, when I've done the searches, I mean I've found various deviations of the spelling Malvot. Some did not use the 'x' when they changed it to Malveaux. Some left off the 'x' and so on. So, there have been different variations in the spelling. Speaker 1: Does the name have a particular meaning? Is there an object or a place, or-- Speaker 2: No, not that I'm aware of. And I--I mean it originated in France, so I'm not aware of where that is from. And there's also some, we also had some German ancestors, and I think in terms of Catherine, with whom he had children, I think had German ancestors, actually. So on that side there's more German and French. And actually, Catherine was a slave of Jean Baptiste. And it was not clear if it was Jean Baptiste or it was one of the, one of the male slaves with whom she had children. That is not very clear and we can't really seem to find the records you know, to clear that up. But in any case, Laurent is the son from whom I can trace my ancestry. Speaker 1: They all took the name Malveaux? Speaker 2: They all took the name Malveaux, yes, at that point in time. Some of them actually carried Malvot. I can see that in some of the records as well. Speaker 1: So, Laurent--now what happened to Laurent Malveaux? Speaker 2: They were on a, they were on a farm. They eventually moved from the Opelousas area to Saint Martinville. And Laurent had a son who was, I think his name was Laurent as well. And then at some point there was a Jean Baptiste Malveaux again in Saint Martinville. My grandfather, my father's father, came from that line, of course, and he was the eighth of ten boys. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Let me go back a minute. So, then, Laurent and then Laurent's son, then-- Speaker 2: And then there was a Jean Baptiste. Speaker 1: John Baptiste, okay. Speaker 2: Now we know that Jean Baptiste was definitely in Saint Martinville. At some point they moved to Saint Martinville around the time of John Baptiste. Speaker 1: Yeah, his name seems to indicate that there is a connection to John Baptiste, the original, you know, keeping the name in the family, you know. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, it's like a cultural evidence, if not-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right. And as I look at the names during that period of time, that was a rather common name, actually. Speaker 1: In John the Baptist? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: So, my great-grandfather, John Baptiste who lived in Saint Martinville, actually had a large farm. He was a farmer, married a free woman of color, Emily Cretien, C-R-E-T-I-E-N, and was very well known in that community, apparently very well respected, considered a man of distinction, would ride a horse in the area, and people were, respected him a great deal. He had ten sons. My grandfather was the eighth in line of those ten sons. Story_ID: 21020 Speaker 1: And your grandfather's name was? Speaker 2: His name was Lawrence Malveaux. Speaker 1: L-A-W or L-A-U? Speaker 2: He spelled it L-A-W. And I don't have his birth certificate. I don't know if it was L-A-U on the birth certificate or not, but whenever I saw him actually sign his name, he signed it L-A-W. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. And he married a woman named Ellen Fories, F-O-R-I-E-S, and she had German ancestry. Speaker 1: So her ancestry was German and African? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. My grandfather was probably-and of course, the boys were raised on the farm in Saint Martinville. My grandfather was the last one to leave the farm. The boys really didn't want to stay on a farm, so they left and went to different places. Some went to California, to Texas, some went slightly north to Lafayette, Louisiana. My grandfather went to Opelousas. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Alright, so it was like the family returning to Opelousas on some level, right? Speaker 2: Yes, right, exactly, exactly. Opelousas was a military post at that time. And it was probably the third oldest settlement in Louisiana, New Orleans being the oldest. I think Natchitoches may have been-Natchitoches, Louisiana may have been the second, and Opelousas I think was the third military outpost. The interesting thing about my great-grandfather, there is, there are records that he actually served in the military in the U.S., what was that-the U.S. Colored Troop, I think it was, and actually fought for the Union in the Civil War. Speaker 1: Okay. Did anybody in your family serve in the Louisiana Native Guards? Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, no. Story_ID: 21021 Speaker 1: Alright. Tell us about the origin of Donatto on your mother's side. Speaker 2: It is interesting, because during the time of slavery when masters took on cohabitation with free women, women of color, not necessarily free, but women of color, they did not necessarily, many times they didn't give them their last names. And they would take the first name. So, the individual who came from Italy on my mother's side from Naples and settled in New Orleans and actually had children with, she was a free woman of color. His name was Donatto Bello. Bello was his last name, actually, and his first name was Donatto. And his children, his son, Martin Donatto who I spoke about earlier, took on the name Donatto as his last name. So he was named Martin Donatto Bello, but he dropped the Bello and became Martin Donatto. And so many families down there actually took on the first name of the master, so to speak. So that's, that's how many of those names actually did originate. Now, Lamelle actually was the last name of the individual who came from France on my father's side, so that was carried through. Speaker 1: Yeah, when we interviewed Dr. Joyce Ladner after she was President of Howard-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Joyce well. Speaker 1: Yeah, she said that Ladner was a switching around of Lanier-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the whites in the neighborhood there in Mississippi where she was born were Laniers, and the blacks were Ladners. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And like there might be black favors with whites on the farms you know. (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So, it's, it's interesting the different ways these relationships are shown. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21022 Speaker 1: So, we were talking about your grandfather serving in the United States-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. So, my, right--my, this is my great-grandfather who actually served in the military on the Union side in the Civil War. And I think it was the U.S. Color Troops was the unit in which he served, I'm not absolutely certain. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, yeah, it could have been the United States Colored Troops. Well, do you know the name, I mean, the number of the unit? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't, I don't. It's something that I'm actually researching. Story_ID: 21023 Speaker 1: Okay. So now your father is Delton Joseph Malveaux, and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, what stories did he tell in growing up? What were his aspirations, what was he trying to do? Speaker 2: Well, you know, my father was sort of the opposite of my mother, in that he did not pursue education. While education was important, and he actually encouraged me to pursue education--and it may have been because of his lack of education--my father, when he married my mother actually did not have a high school education. He had not graduated from high school. My grandfather, Lawrence Malveaux was, he was a very intelligent individual. And actually he became a self-made practitioner of medicine. So, he was, so to speak, the first doctor of the family. He never went to medical school--self-taught--and in fact, I have his journals where he actually traveled to see patients. He lived in Opelousas in Louisiana, but traveled as far as places in Houston, Texas and so on to see patients. And he would go off for a while and see patients, and throughout Louisiana and Opelousas he would actually make home visits to go and see patients. My father used to travel with him, actually, quite a bit. And I never knew the reason for that. And because of that, my father never really pursued education. So, he traveled with his father. But my father was probably a sickly individual. He had a history of asthma, and relatively severe asthma, and I think that he was probably being protected, so to speak, and treated by his own father, and travel with him as a result. Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your grandfather, was he, I guess it's different, you know, just to be--for the sake of history, physicians prior to 1840 really didn't have degrees anyway. But then people started getting medical degrees during the mid to latter part of the 19th century. So, he would have been in the latter part of the 19th century, right, or the turn of the century? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, right, right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was born at the, I think it was 1887, about that time, right. And died when I was about ten years old so, about around 1950 or so. Speaker 1: So was it uncommon, was it still, I don't know if you would know, but I just wonder if you did. Was it uncommon during that period of time for physicians to be physicians by acclaim, you know, by reputation rather than having an education? Speaker 2: It was not uncommon. It certainly wasn't uncommon in the south. We had a lot of folk doctors and those types of individuals. My grandfather, I suspect, was a little different in that he actually used herbs. He used chemicals and mixed chemicals and actually treated people that way. He really seemed to have a talent for using natural types of things to manage certain diseases. He apparently was well-respected. He went, you know, as I said, as far as Houston, Texas, which was quite far at that time, 250 miles or so away in a horse and buggy to actually see patients. And I have his logs where he actually saw them and what he charged them. And some of them actually gave him chickens and different animals as a result, and sometimes vegetables, because they didn't have money to actually pay for their care. And he kept good records in terms of when the family actually moved to Saint Martinville, and when the children were born, and when his mother and father died and those types of things. So, those are really the best records that I have in terms of knowing that side of my family. Speaker 1: Now, this is an interesting period of time, and sometimes I wonder about it. And one of our--I know I've read of people who received their law degrees through a correspondence school of law, or their dental degree through a correspondence course. I think the famous movie with Jimmy Cagney at the turn of the century gives his--he becomes a dentist through a mail order system. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But, you know, so this era of time, you know, professionalism as we define it today, was not, you know, nothing was concrete. You didn't have the same checks and balances on who could be a doctor or a lawyer and that sort of thing as we do now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 21024 Speaker 1: Do you know if he was a part of any association or any-- Speaker 2: I'm not aware that he was a part of any association, and, as you know, for African-Americans at that period of time there were very few medical schools that they could actually go to. Howard was probably one of the first ones that opened its doors after the Civil War. And well, Freedman's Hospital actually here in Washington, D.C. opened after, right after the Civil War in order to treat the freed slaves and people who were coming into the Washington, D.C. area, and the medical school started about a year or so after that. So, actually, there were very, very few opportunities for African-Americans to get a degree in medicine. And none of my family, until my mother, actually went to college, got a college degree. So, it's her generation who were the first ones to actually finish college, and that's true on both sides of the family. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now, did, oh--then one more question about your grandfather. You know, one of the figures out of Louisiana history, and then celebrated as Dr. John, of whom the musician got the name--but I think that Dr. John, a Creole--Dr. John is maybe just the one name that kind of typifies a kind of hoo-doo doctor, in that sort of, that sense. Speaker 2: Uh huh, right. Speaker 1: With the herbs and things--I guess there are different versions of that, but would you describe your grandfather as being, having that kind of reputation on any level? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, but I also think he had the reputation of being very effective in terms of what he did. And again, I've--in his journals, I can see, you know, that he took certain chemicals and mixed them together, things I'm sure that you could get at a pharmacy or so, and put them together, castor oil being a part of it, and so on. So, I think he, it wasn't witchcraft so to speak, it wasn't voo-doo, I mean. I think there was, there was some signs to that. He used certain things that worked, didn't know why they worked and didn't know what the active ingredient was, of course, in those things, but it worked. And I think he built his reputation on that. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 21025 Speaker 1: So, but your father he, so he had asthma really bad, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, so he stayed as a farmer, or did he-- Speaker 2: My father actually began working in a bakery. So he worked as a baker along with two of his brothers. His older brother, who was about two or three years older than he was, was a baker and remained a baker throughout his entire life. My father worked with him, they worked together. However, my father could not really remain in the bakery because of, I guess things that he was exposed to like flour and so on, would irritate his respiratory tract and he would have asthma attacks and so on. So he had to leave the bakery and took on other types of miscellaneous jobs. He worked in a brick factory for a while, for example, down in Louisiana. He worked as a store clerk for a while, for many years, of course, and when he died those were the types of things that he was doing. He eventually got his high school diploma, got a GED, but never really went any further than that in terms of his education. Story_ID: 21026 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Well, they're in Louisiana, in Opelousas, a very small town. My dad was, he was a handsome fellow, and quite the ladies' man as I understand, as I have met a couple of other ladies who were interested in him at the time. But I don't know exactly how they met. And they fell madly in love and got married. My mother was teaching at the time. She had finished high school, as I indicated, and gotten a teacher's certificate to teach. You could do that at that time. And they got married. They lived in Opelousas, in the town, so to speak, which was a very small town, probably no more than about, at that time, I would say 12,000 to 15,000 people. My grandfather still lived on the farm. And when I was born they both worked, so my grandparents were my babysitters, so to speak. And so I would go during the week and live with my grandparents on the farm and then my mother or my father would pick me up on weekends and I'd spend the weekend actually with the family, with my mother and father. They did that for a number of years, actually. So my very early years I remember the farm very well. I remember walking in the woods with my grandfather, and my grandfather was quite a hunter as well, and of course, he would kill game for food, small game--rabbits, squirrels, those types of things. He taught me how to shoot a gun, a rifle, and so on. So, he taught me how to milk a cow (laughter) and ride a horse, all of those wonderful things, actually. He picked eggs--chickens, he had chickens and ducks and so on. So, it was great. I enjoyed it very much. And then, eventually, of course, I went to school at a relatively early age because my mother was teaching. She actually took me with her to the school and I started. We didn't have kindergarten at that time, so I started first grade when I was five years old. Story_ID: 21027 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I want to go back a little bit to your mother and father. Well, I just ask--when you think about their talents and their personalities and their dispositions, their looks even, habits--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My mother to a great extent, yeah. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Well I think I have both of their looks in that regard. But more in terms of personality, temperament, ambition, value of education, that's all my mother for the most part, a strong willed woman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 21028 Speaker 1: Okay, now, how many brothers and sisters do you have, and where do you--can you list them in order? Speaker 2: Sure. I had an infant brother who was older than I and he lived for only a couple of days. He was two years older. I have a sister. I have only one sibling, one living sister. My sister, she is fifteen years younger than I am. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's it? Speaker 2: That's it. We're the two. Speaker 1: So, just you and your sister, basically. But she was fifteen years younger, so you kind of grew up as a-- Speaker 2: We grew up as only children, so to speak. I grew up as, I actually left home to go to the seminary when I was, I guess I was twelve years old at the time. And my sister was born, well maybe I was thirteen, and then she was born two years later, while I was away. And when I came back home--I left the seminary after three years--I spent one year at home with my sister, graduated from high school and then I went away to college and never really went back to live in Opelousas. So, we've only lived together one year. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 21029 Speaker 1: So, you were telling us a little while ago--one question we always ask is do you have an earliest childhood memory, and you sort of gave us one. Speaker 2: Well, my earliest childhood memories are on the farm with my grandparents. I remember walking through the fields with my grandfather. I remember he had corn and sugar cane and he had this horse-drawn, I don't know what you would call it--a horse would draw it, you stand on it and you sort of ride--we call it a slide or something like that. And, so I remember those days. And he would let me take the horse and actually guide the horse myself. Those are vivid memories. As I said, walking into the woods with him, being around the animals on the farm, those are quite vivid memories. I remember when they got indoor plumbing (laughter). We had to go outdoors to the outhouse and-- Speaker 1: How old were you, now? You were born in 1940. Speaker 2: I was born in 1940, yeah. Speaker 1: So, when did they get indoor plumbing? Speaker 2: I was probably, oh, I had to be three, four, years old at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. 1952, or '53' [1953]? Speaker 2: Oh, that was '40' [1940], in the forties. Speaker 1: Oh, in the forties, oh forties, that's right. Speaker 2: '42' [1942], '43' [1943]. Yeah, I went to school in '45' [1945]. Speaker 1: I don't know why I jumped ten years ahead. Speaker 2: (laughter). And I talked about the early memory of my mother graduating from college in about 1945, from Leland College. So, those are some of the early memories. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father talk, did your grandfather talk about medicine? Speaker 2: I didn't know my grandfather on my father's side very well. Speaker 1: So this is your mother's father? Speaker 2: That's right. That was my mother's father that--and her mother that I lived with while I was growing up. I didn't--so, because I didn't really see them a lot, my father's parents, I didn't see them--and they lived across the street from us, by the way. It was a neighborhood where there were a number of relatives. My dad's, two of my dad's brothers were in the neighborhood. Two sisters, no, three of the sisters lived in the neighborhood. So it was a very close knit family. I could go from house to house, of course, and I remember Christmases when it was a great pleasure going from house to house, because I knew I would get something when I went to each one's home. They'd have a little gift, and so it was, that was always a nice memory. Very protective, of course. And so it was only after I really started to go to school and lived in Opelousas, in town so to speak, with my parents that I got to know the other members of my dad's family very well, and especially his father. I didn't really get a chance to sit and talk to him about medicine and so on, because he had, he had a stroke. He had several strokes actually, before he died, so he wasn't practicing medicine for the most part when I knew him. Story_ID: 21030 Speaker 1: Okay. We always ask this question. Now you grew up all the way except for when you went away, in Opelousas, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, basically in the same neighborhood, I guess? Speaker 2: The same neighborhood, absolutely, yeah. Speaker 1: What would you call that neighborhood? Did it have a name there? Speaker 2: It didn't have a specific name, you know. At that time, I mean when you lived on a street, people knew, you know, the street. There were different parts of the town that were known, like Greenwood and some parts called the Hill and so on. That area really did not have a specific name. But I grew up on Belleview Street, and as I said, my father's parents lived across the street. My uncle, two uncles, one lived on one side of our home, the other lived on the other side, a couple houses away. I had two aunts who lived, one next door, the one right next to her, and another one actually a street away, a block away. So, really an opportunity to interact with family a great deal, a very protective type of environment, actually. Story_ID: 21031 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, we always ask this question in this way. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: In terms of the smells, I lived near a, what we called a cotton gin, where they took cotton and extracted oil and so on from cotton. So, I remember those smells from this cotton gin. Sounds--lots of kids in the neighborhood. I had a number of cousins that--and so we were always out playing, laughing, and talking, so there was quite a bit of chatter going on. The street wasn't very busy, but there were cars that would come by. We started off with a street that was dirt. I remember when they put gravel on the street. That was a major improvement for us at the time, and God, I was old when they actually did put black top on the streets (laughter), so I remember all of those things. I remember we had the ice man who would deliver ice to us, would come through in a wagon and actually leave ice for us. And we didn't have refrigeration, a refrigerator at the time. We had an icebox. So, you actually took the ice and put it in there to keep food cold and so on. So, that's some of the things that I recall about the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. You were mentioning some of the food. Well, was music a big part of growing up down there? Speaker 2: Music was, yes, yep. Music--and my grandparents would always have people there visiting and so on, and so there was a lot of music there in that home for the most part. Not a lot in my own home where we lived across the street. Not a lot there, but certainly at my grandparents. That was sort of a central meeting place for individuals. So, cousins and so on would always go there. And we would meet there. There would be music in the background, so that's-- Speaker 1: So, the music would pretty much be the radio-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah, yeah. It was the radio, yeah. Speaker 1: Record player, maybe? Speaker 2: Record players came a little later, actually. It was more the radio. I recall, of course, that some of the heavyweight fights, you know, everyone would gather around the radio at that time to listen to the heavyweight fights. Joe Louis and people like that were fighting. Speaker 1: Yeah, now Joe Louis, I suppose there was a lot of excitement about him I guess when you were a little kid? Speaker 2: Yep, absolutely. Jackie Robinson--I remember getting around the radio to listen to the Brooklyn Dodgers, so when I grew up, Brooklyn Dodgers was my favorite baseball team. And I remember actually going to New York. I think I was thirteen years old, in fact, you know, about '53' [1953] or so, and visited Ebbets Field. That was one of the highlights of my teens, was to visit Ebbets Field and to see Jackie Robinson actually play ball. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had a, well, you spent a lot of time with your grandparents out on the farm, and when you were with your parents, you were the only child. So, you had a lot of time alone with a lot of adults, I guess. Speaker 2: I did, yeah. Oh yeah, you know, I did. I had cousins in the neighborhood, lots of cousins, of course. And so I would always go out and play with them, but at home, no. I was the only child and did have a lot of time to--and spent a lot of time actually engaging in play, you know, that you do alone. Sometimes reading--I wasn't an avid reader, so to speak. I also had childhood asthma, so sometimes I had to stay in because of my asthma and so on. Asthma and allergies were very prominent on both sides of our families. Both my mother and my father actually had a history of asthma. My paternal grandmother had very severe allergic rhinitis, hay fever, very severe hay fever types of symptoms. My mother's side, my maternal grandmother, had a history of asthma and allergies. So, it was very strong. Both my sister and I, of course, have a history of asthma and allergies as well. Story_ID: 21032 Speaker 1: Okay, now this will be important and we'll take note of as we get into your career, I guess, but that's... Did you then think about, you know, why some people have asthma and some people don't and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, I mean I often wondered why, you know, and I often resented it because as a young child it meant I couldn't go out and do certain things. I couldn't go out and play anytime I wanted. I loved to go out and play. I loved baseball. Baseball and basketball were my favorite sports at that time. And I wasn't a real bookworm, so to speak, really. I just loved being outdoors and doing things and playing. And as an only child I recall, in terms of baseball, I would take the ball and throw it against the house and I would practice catching ground balls and those types of things. I would take a broomstick and practice hitting rocks from the street when they put gravel on our street (laughter). It provided me a source of mini-baseball, so to speak, and I practiced hitting, those types of things. My dad put up a basketball court in the backyard and I would spend hours, actually, shooting the basketball, all alone, and I enjoyed it. I didn't necessarily miss having, you know, other kids playing with me at the time. I truly enjoyed what I was doing. Story_ID: 21033 Speaker 1: Okay, now where did you start school? What was your first school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I started school, as I indicated, with my mother. She took me to the school where she was teaching first grade. I started first grade when I was five years old. It was in a place right outside of Louisiana, right outside of Opelousas, called Prarie Laurent Elementary School. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: I think it's Prarie, P-R-A-R-I-E, Laurent, L-A-U-R-E-N-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I started there with my mother because I couldn't go the Catholic School, to Holy Ghost, until I was six years old. So, they would not admit me when I was five. And my mother felt that I was ready to go to school. And so she took me with her and I had a great first grade teacher, Ms. Lucille. Everybody I think remembers the name of their first grade teacher. And I started with her, and then in second grade I transferred to Holy Ghost. So, they would take me as a transfer, but wouldn't start me at five years old. Speaker 1: Okay. The Holy Ghost Catholic School. Speaker 2: Holy Ghost Catholic School in Opelousas. Speaker 1: Now, is this a segregated Catholic school? Speaker 2: Yes, yep. All of the schools were segregated at that time. We had segregated public schools in Opelousas, well, throughout Louisiana, and we had segregated Catholic schools in Louisiana at that time. Holy Ghost was the only Catholic school, and my parents felt that they wanted me to go to a Catholic school, and we did. Southwest Louisiana is predominantly Catholic. And so there's a strong belief, you know, that you have to go to Catholic schools and those types of things. So, I ended up going to Holy Ghost, starting in second grade through eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your parents have to pay? Speaker 2: Yes, there was tuition that they had to pay. And a number of kids in Opelousas really could not afford the tuition at Holy Ghost. Not that it was so expensive, but it was expensive for them. I was fortunate my parents were both working. My mother was a teacher, so her salary was considered a fairly good salary at that time, and they could afford to send me. I was an only child, so they could afford to send me to the Catholic school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I went to Holy Ghost through eighth grade. Story_ID: 21034 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have a favorite subject in grade school, or what did you excel in? Speaker 2: Yeah, I excelled in math, science and English, actually. Speaker 1: So you were a pretty good all around student? Speaker 2: I was a good student. I was pretty much at the top of the class most of the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Did work come easy for you, did you-- Speaker 2: It came easy. Not that I studied so much (laughter). I loved, you know, playing sports and I wasn't that great a student in terms of really studying and being so studious. Certain things just came relatively easy. Math came very easy to me, and English did. I recall, actually, in English, actually there was one teacher there. We were taught by nuns, the Sisters of the Holy Family. That was an order of African-American nuns in Louisiana. Their mother house was in New Orleans. And they had, they were spread throughout the state of Louisiana, in Texas as well, and taught. And so I was taught by the Sisters of the Holy Family. My seventh grade teacher, Sister Angelica Marie, was no doubt the best teacher I had. She taught me, she taught me English grammar that--and I can say she taught me things that I probably--that were so basic that I use them today and remember some of the things that she taught me. She started me to learn to write. So, she taught me how to write and those types of things. So, and I remember her quite well, and she did an excellent job. I left Holy Ghost school after eighth grade. I thought I would have, I had an interest in the priesthood, and I guess I had a good Catholic indoctrination, so I thought I had a vocation to be a priest. And I decided that I would go to a seminary after eighth grade. At that time they were taking youngsters after they finished eighth grade. And I had a cousin who was a priest, Father Chachere, C-H-A-C-H-E-R-E. And when I spoke to him about it, he, because most of us, most of the young men who were going to seminary at that time, went to a seminary in Mississippi, in Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, because again, even the orders of priests was segregated. And so, many of the African-Americans went to Bay St. Louis to be part of an order, the Society of the Divine Word. So, they were accepting a number of African-Americans at that time. Another order that was accepting African-Americans with open arms was the Josephite Fathers. So, in any case, most of the kids from my, or the young men from my area, were going to Bay St. Louis. It was relatively, it wasn't very far away--close. And they were accepting of African-Americans. So, I spoke to my cousin who was a priest and he advised me, he said, "If you really want to do this," he said, "What I'd advise you to do is let's integrate one of the seminaries in Louisiana, and why don't you go to the seminary in Lafayette, Louisiana", which was twenty five miles away from Opelousas. So I decided to actually do that, and I applied and I actually had an interview by the Bishop of the Diocese of Lafayette for admission to the seminary at that time. To my knowledge, seminarians didn't have to have interviews with the Bishop in order to be admitted to the seminary. Speaker 1: Well, how did the interview go? Speaker 2: The interview went well. I don't recall all of the details. I think I was very positive coming out of it. I was admitted to the seminary. I was the only African-American in that seminary during that first year, and had some difficult times from time to time. Even in the seminary, sometimes there are derogatory terms being used. Speaker 1: Now, by the students or by the-- Speaker 2: By the students. The priests were great, the priests were great. The teachers, we were taught by priests. They were, they belonged to the Marist order, M-A-R-I-S-T. They were well-educated, quite liberal in their thinking, and accepting of me. And most of, virtually all of the students were from Louisiana because it was a diocesan seminary, training individuals to be priests within that diocese of Lafayette. Story_ID: 21035 Speaker 1: What was the name of the seminary? Speaker 2: Immaculata, I-M-M-A-C-U-L-A-T-A. Immaculata Minor Seminary, M-I-N-O-R Seminary. Speaker 1: Okay. And this is the Marinas Fathers? Speaker 2: The Marist, M-A-R-I-S-T. Speaker 1: Okay, Marist. Speaker 2: Fathers actually taught there, but the priests who were--or, the students who were being trained there were being trained to be priests within that diocese of Lafayette, although the Marists came from different parts of the country. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had excellent teachers during that time, great education, and I really learned a lot. I took Latin, which I would not have had otherwise, had I stayed at Holy Ghost and gone to high school at Holy Ghost. And I learned to write well, good math instruction, not too strong in the sciences. And then after my third year there, my junior year in high school, I decided that that's not what I wanted to do, I didn't want to be a priest. And I left the priesthood and went back to Holy Ghost to finish my high school education my last year. Story_ID: 21036 Speaker 1: Now what, what influenced you to not become a priest after all? Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't want to live that lifestyle. I could not accept, I think, all of the vows that, you know, that a priest would have to take. I like females (laughter), and I didn't want to live that type of life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I left after the third year, after three years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I went back to Holy Ghost to finish my last year of high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did well at Holy Ghost, you know, that last year. Well, at the seminary I also, I did quite well. I also participated in sports. I made the basketball team and baseball team. Things came relatively easy to me, I was pretty much near the top of the class again. When I went back to Holy Ghost, I found that it was not as challenging. But I did extremely well at Holy Ghost and remember taking a standardized test. At that time they gave standardized tests to seniors in things like English and math and so on, English and math for the most part. I finished first in math, among seniors, African-American seniors in Louisiana at that time. Speaker 1: Now, didn't you, didn't you win some sort of contest in school at some point? Was it grade school or-- Speaker 2: No, that was in high school. That was for math. I was number one in the state of Louisiana. Speaker 1: I think that's significant. This is the whole state, not just the colored schools, but the whole state? Speaker 2: No, that was actually--because we did not compete with the whites in those tests. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: That was a, they would not even give us the same test. (laughter). Speaker 1: So, at least you were the top colored student or Negro in the State of Louisiana. Speaker 2: Yep, yep, uh huh, yep. Speaker 1: Alright, so-- Speaker 2: And so, when I finished, when I finished Holy Ghost, and I think I finished third in my class. When I finished Holy Ghost I decided that I did not want to go to segregated schools, and so I left and went to Creighton University in Omaha, Nebraska. Speaker 1: So, when was high school graduation? That was-- Speaker 2: 1957. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21037 Speaker 1: Now, this is the year of Sputnik, I think. Sputnik goes up-- Speaker 2: It was right after that. I was at Creighton when Sputnik went up, so that--it could have been '57' [1957] because it may have been in my fall semester of my freshman year. Yeah, I think you're right, yeah, I think you're right, '57' [1957]. Speaker 1: Eisenhower is the president. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Civil rights--the Montgomery bus boycott just concluded, I think. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Was your family really, did they pay a lot of attention to the civil rights movement? Speaker 2: Not a lot, no. For some reason--no, because a lot of that was in New Orleans, not even so much in Baton Rouge, and by the time you got down to the smaller towns like Opelousas, we were isolated from those types of movements. Speaker 1: Was there a lot of, was segregation really strong in Opelousas? Speaker 2: Segregation was strong in terms of social life, in terms of education, even worship. We had a Catholic church that was segregated. If you went to the white church you had to sit in the back pews. So it was strong from that vantage point. Very little mingling with other races, with whites at that time. Speaker 1: Were the signs up publicly? Speaker 2: Signs were up, absolutely. I remember the courthouse, the white fountain, the colored fountain. They called it colored, same with the restrooms. Remember that? Even the service stations where you bought gas and so on, separate rooms. We were not admitted to the restaurants. Even in the department stores, you weren't allowed in some cases to even try clothes on and so on. So, yes, it was heavily segregated. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: Heavily. Speaker 1: Even though, even so to the substantial Creole population down there? Speaker 2: Yep, absolutely. Speaker 1: Same segregation? Speaker 2: Same segregation, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. I just wanted to make that point. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Alright. So, now, they were counting on that one drop rule and all that? Speaker 2: Yep, absolutely. It was strong. I had no white friends during that period. In the seminary, of course, they were all white, and some I became very close to, actually. Some, on the other hand, were clearly racist and it was difficult at times, but in Opelousas when I got back, you know, it was very segregated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21038 Speaker 1: I had few choices in terms of colleges if I went in Louisiana. I could go to the public colleges, either Southern or Grambling universities. There was one Catholic college, Xavier University in New Orleans at the time. And those were my choices. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, Dillard is a-- Speaker 1: Dillard also is a--it's a denominational school, and I forgot exactly what religion it's associated with, but segregated. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Dillard and Xavier were the two in New Orleans. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. So, where did you, did you have any advice from anyone about which school-- Speaker 1: I had very little advice. Counseling was minimal. In my own mind I thought I wanted to continue in a Catholic type of environment. I had heard about the Jesuits, of course, and well, even when I was in the seminary, you know, the Jesuits were considered, you know, the superior scholars in terms of priests and educators and so on. So, I clearly pursued, you know, the Jesuits as a possibility of furthering my education. I couldn't go to Loyola, which was a Jesuit institution in New Orleans at that time. And so, I looked at a number of Jesuit institutions as well as Notre Dame. Notre Dame is not a Jesuit university. So I decided on Creighton University in Omaha. I didn't have the opportunity to visit these universities. I looked at Marquette, I looked at Georgetown as well. Creighton was smaller than those two, and I decided I probably wanted a smaller institution. And so I decided to go to Creighton University in Omaha [Nebraska]. Speaker 2: Okay, so after--well, that fall you, did you take the train there? Did your family drop you off? Speaker 1: My parents brought me to Creighton. They drove me up, took the big trunk and all of those things. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. Now, one thing I had not mentioned was the bakery. I mean, did you work in the bakery growing up? Speaker 1: No, I didn't. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. I would have odd jobs in the summer, you know, whatever I could find. I remember working once as a busboy at a restaurant. One summer the only thing I could get was a helper on a construction job. And so whatever I could find in the summers, I did. Speaker 2: Okay. When we interviewed your daughter she talked a lot about the bakery. Speaker 1: Oh, well, they have fond memories because of the bakery, because when they were little kids, we would always go back to Louisiana every year, and especially in the summer we'd spend time there in Opelousas. And as I indicated, my uncle was a baker and he remained a baker throughout his life. And he lived about three doors down from my parents. So, when we took the kids down there, you know, they got to know Uncle Walton very well, and Uncle Walton would obviously just bring donuts and all kinds of pastries, wonderful pastries. So, they're related very well to the bakery in the family. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. I thought I'd raise that because she talked about it so much. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, oh yeah. Oh, they remember quite well. Speaker 2: So, Creighton--so now, had you been very far out of Louisiana? Speaker 1: I had--no, not really. I mean I'd taken vacations with my family. We went to California one year. I think that was just before I went off to the seminary. Then one year we went off to New York. That's when I visited Ebbets Field in Brooklyn and so on. One year we went down to Monterey, Mexico, and those are the only places that I had actually been. I had not visited different parts of the United States other than just those vacations with my family. Story_ID: 21039 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, what were your impressions of Nebraska and Creighton? Speaker 2: It's very different in many ways--different in terms of climate and topography, culture, totally different environment. And I was thrown into an environment that was predominantly white--the institution--very few blacks at that time. And, in fact, even Creighton's dormitories were segregated, so to speak. At least they tried to put African-Americans together in the same room. I was fortunate in that I--one of my best friends, actually, went with me. We went together to Creighton, from Holy Ghost the first year. So, we lived together for the first two years, actually at Creighton. And the social environment, while not segregated, was segmented (laughter), and most of the social life for black students at Creighton was with black students and families. So, I soon identified a couple of families who had come from Louisiana, actually, and living in Omaha. One individual who was in my class, Webster Young, his family was from Louisiana, and I think one may have had relatives in Texas as well. And so, he and I, you know, felt very, we felt this bond, and I guess their family sort of took me in. And during holidays when I couldn't go home because it was too far to travel, then I would go to their home and spend, and have dinner with them for Easter, for example, Thanksgiving, and those special days or special occasions. And for social, for the social life, I remember--actually, when the first week at Creighton--when they have a week for freshmen and so on--and then at the end of the week there's a big dance that they have. They call it a mixer. And all of the students would come together and have this, they had this wonderful time. And I felt isolated, and the few other blacks who were there in the first year felt isolated. And as it turned out, a number of upper classmen at Creighton, black upper classmen, came to that event and they identified us, (laughter) and it was interesting, because they say they came because every year there were African-Americans there as a part of that mixer that didn't fit, and they would take them, actually, and go and have a party somewhere else. And that's what we did, I remember that. And so we formed this bond, so to speak, and on weekends we would go to, I think it was St. Benedict's, that was the parish. And they would have a mixer, a little dance there, every weekend for college and high school kids. So, that was the major part of our social life, actually, even at Creighton. Story_ID: 21040 Speaker 1: So, what was the coursework like? What did you decide to major in, and what-- Speaker 2: I was a math major when I went. I mean, it was, that's what I wanted to do. And then after being in math for a couple of years, I started taking courses in biology, for example, and a whole host of courses. And at Creighton during that time, you also took a lot of philosophy. That was a requirement, philosophy, theology. And so, philosophy I thought was extremely interesting, but I was much better in the sciences. And so I became very interested in biological sciences. That really had caught my interest, and there was something that I could latch on to there, where I couldn't in math necessarily. And so I decided to pursue biological sciences. I had a mentor there, Dr. Cordes, C-O-R-D-E-S, who sort of took me under his wing, and he was a, he taught biology. And he gave me a job while I was there, and that was to take care of the cultures of bacteria and to transfer them and to maintain those cultures for his classes. And I did that, and became very interested in microbiology as a result of that, I think. I decided to change my major from math to biology and I also had a--minored in philosophy as well as in chemistry, because I'd taken a number of those courses as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any particular philosopher that you liked the best? Speaker 2: Father Renard. He wrote most of the philosophy books. He was a master at philosophy. I learned a lot from him. He taught--he wrote the book on Philosophy of Being. And then, I took other philosophy courses. I remember taking a course in logic in the philosophy department, one of the best courses I ever took, that really taught me to think, and how to think logically. So, I enjoyed Creighton. I think I had a good education. I could have immersed myself more, perhaps, at that time. I liked socializing and I liked sports and still like sports. I played intramural sports there. I wasn't good enough to compete. Speaker 1: There were, from what I remember, there were black athletes that played for Creighton. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Basketball team-- Speaker 2: Yep, basketball. Paul Silas was there at the time. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. Paul Silas-- Speaker 2: Paul Silas was a couple of years behind me. He played, so I got to see Paul play. Geez, I'm blocking--the pitcher for St. Louis-- Speaker 1: Not Bob Gibson? Speaker 2: Bob Gibson. Speaker 1: Was he there, too? Speaker 2: He was not there. Bob had already left. Speaker 1: He was from Omaha-- Speaker 2: He was, yes, yeah, he was from Omaha. He went to Creighton. In fact I went to school with his cousin, who actually came from Louisiana at the same time that I did, to go to Creighton. Story_ID: 21041 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about Creighton [Creighton University]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where I actually became introduced to fraternities, of course, college fraternities. As I indicated, although Creighton wasn't segregated, there really wasn't, there wasn't an open arm policy for African-Americans to join other fraternities. So, the traditional African-American fraternities were on campus, especially Alpha Phi Alpha and Kappa Alpha Psi. And so I did join Kappa Alpha Psi at that time, and I became a member of Kappa and really had good, you know, some good times, actually, and really developed friendships during that time in the fraternity. Speaker 1: Okay. I know you were saying off-camera that Gale Sayers was there in high school. Did you get a chance to watch him play ball? Speaker 2: I think at one time at Central. Speaker 1: You may have been at school with John Beasley, too, an actor? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 21042 Speaker 1: So, but your Creighton experience--so you decided to become a biology major. Speaker 2: Yeah, I majored in biology. I had a strong interest in microbiology. And so, from Creighton I wanted to pursue biological sciences, and especially microbiology. And also, because of the limited social type of experiences I had at Creighton, I decided to go back to Louisiana, and I went back to Loyola-- Speaker 1: That was 196-- Speaker 2: This was 1961. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I went back to Loyola [Loyola University, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And I applied to and entered Loyola in their biological sciences program. I really wanted to go to New Orleans. I wanted to be in New Orleans, I wanted to experience some of New Orleans. Of course, I knew about it, but I really hadn't spent any time in New Orleans except when my mother was there as a graduate student and I would go with her sometimes. So I went to Loyola. Loyola had very few African-American students at that time. I was the only one in biological sciences, and I was pursuing a master's degree. I had an excellent tutor there--one of the individuals that I--well, the friendship that I formed for, a lifelong friendship, Dr. Joseph Cooney, who had just come there from the University of Dayton. And so he took me under his wing. He was a microbiologist, and I really had a good experience educationally there. Again, there was no social life, but I was fortunate in that Xavier University was across the city. And so most of my social life was really at Xavier. It's where I met my wife. She was a sophomore at Xavier at the time. Well, she was going into her junior year--I'm sorry, she was a junior at Xavier at the time. And we met through a cousin, my first cousin, who had spent a year at Xavier, had befriended Myrna, my wife Myrna, M-Y-R-N-A... Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her last name was Ruiz, R-U-I-Z. And so, when I went to New Orleans, I, of course asked my cousin--I said, "Well geez, you know, who do you think I should meet?" And so, of course, Myrna's name popped up and I said, "Okay, we'll do that." (laughter). And so, that's, that's, where I met my wife, actually, in New Orleans and while I was at Loyola. And I had, I was there for two years, got a master's degree in biological sciences and decided to pursue a Ph.D. in microbiology from-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you get married shortly after you-- Speaker 2: No, I did not get married. No, no, Myrna and I dated, and I dated a number of young ladies, actually, at Xavier and in New Orleans during that period of time. But Myrna and I got to be pretty close at that time. And then I left after two years, after getting my degree. I'll tell you a little story about when I finished, because I finished in 1963. And I was working on my thesis, feverishly working on my masters' thesis, because I'd had an offer from Michigan State to come up and pursue my doctorate in microbiology, and they were going to give me a fellowship and it started in September. So, I had to finish this thesis and finish this research before I could go ahead and pursue that. If you remember, it was August of '63' [1963] when Dr. King gave his speech in Washington. And I was torn, because I wanted to go to Washington, I wanted to be a part of that, but at the same time I knew I had to finish this degree work that I was doing. And I felt a sense of guilt, actually, of not being able to go up to Washington for the March on Washington. And I guess I sort of rationalized to myself at that point in time, and I've internalized that actually through the rest of my life. And that is, if I'm going to make a contribution to civil rights, to the cause, then I'm going to do it through my educational efforts, and that it was probably more important for me to stay there and to finish that. Speaker 1: So, you basically made yourself a promise that you would use your attainments to help your people? Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly. And that was sort of a, I guess, a life defining moment for me. And I've had a few of those in my life, of course, and that one I remember quite well. So, I did. I finished my thesis for my work in the laboratory and then, of course, packed up and went up to Michigan State to pursue a Ph.D. Speaker 1: Now, were you married at this time? Speaker 2: I was not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was not married. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So this is 19-- Speaker 2: That was 1963. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21043 Speaker 1: Right. So, September of '63' [1963], I was up in East Lansing, Michigan at Michigan State [Michigan State University]. I started my doctoral work there under a man named Charles San Clemente, S-A-N C-L-E-M-E-N-T-E. So he had invited me to come up and work in his laboratory under his guidance, which I did. And Michigan State, of course, was far different from any other institution I had encountered at the time--very large, probably had up to 30,000 students at that time. When I went to Creighton, we had about 3,000 students. Loyola, certainly no more than 3,000 students. But the thing about Michigan State is because I was in a graduate program, I came into contact only with a relatively small number of people in that microbiology department and the biochemistry department where I did, where I took all of my coursework and did my studies and did my research. So, I didn't feel the impact, so to speak, of a very large institution, or as an undergraduate having to navigate a very large institution. Speaker 2: I hear a lot of scientists say that research basically narrows their association with-- Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely. It absolutely does, yeah, absolutely, yeah. And that was a, that was a good experience, a very challenging experience--taking microbiology courses, learning research techniques, working long hours in the laboratory. Myrna and I were still corresponding and talking by phone and that type of thing. So, we got engaged. Let's see, that was the spring of 1965. So, I was at Michigan State for two years when--and I think it was, it was probably that winter break, Christmas break, when I came home and proposed, and (laughter), and we became engaged that spring of '65' [1965]. Did it on Dillard's campus, in fact. She lived about three or four blocks from Dillard at that time. She was teaching. She had graduated from Xavier and was teaching in New Orleans. And we became engaged and we got married in December of 1965. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She came up to Michigan State, joined me, of course, at Michigan State. Our first apartment was a basement apartment off-campus, because you actually had to be married to apply for married housing. So, we couldn't do it right away, so we got a basement apartment right off campus. Myrna had really never seen snow before, and I remember we had only been there for a week. We got married in December, so obviously it didn't take long for her to see snow (laughter). So the first day that we had this big snow, I remember seeing it and I called her, because we were in the basement and we didn't know it was snowing, of course. And so, she came up and saw the snow for the first time. (laughter). It was quite an event. So, we eventually moved to married housing. We had a set of twins the following December, and they were born in Lansing, Michigan. That was Suzanne and her twin sister, Suzette. They--and we were in married housing at the time. We were in a one-room apartment. We didn't know we were having twins, by the way. So, that was a complete surprise. Speaker 2: Now, we have the story, though she can't tell it like you all can tell it, from Suzanne Malveaux, that's on her birth (laughter) which she doesn't remember in detail, but she-- Speaker 1: Well, I wouldn't expect her to, but-- Speaker 2: Well, we do. They have in the records. Anybody watching this knows that we have the story your daughter told. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, it was a complete surprise. In fact, my wife got rather large. And we asked the doctor, you know, are we having two? And he said no, but you have one big, healthy baby. And so, it was only at the time of birth that we discovered we were having twins. Myrna delivered Suzette first and she was still in labor. And she told the doctor, I'm still in labor. (laughter). And sure enough, Suzanne was born six minutes later. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, those were the days before ultrasound, and all this-- Speaker 1: We didn't do, that's right, the days before ultrasound. And I was not in the delivery room because they didn't permit fathers in the delivery room during that time. So I didn't know, actually, that all of this was going on. And the doctor came out and said congratulations, you have twins. And so, I thought this was a standard joke that he would use for first time fathers, you know, to get a reaction from them. And so I think I told him something like, "Don't play with me, I'm in school." (laughter). And sure enough, here they come, the mother and the two daughters being wheeled down the hallway. So, reality hit very quickly. And we were in a one bedroom apartment at the time, but that was fine, because the crib was in the bedroom and we could put both of them in one crib. They didn't know the other one was there for awhile, so it didn't matter. Then we eventually moved into a two bedroom apartment in married housing. So I finished--even after the twins were born, of course, we came back to Louisiana on a regular basis. Usually every summer and every Christmas we would visit. So the girls were only six months old when they came down for the first summer, actually. And we always drove because we couldn't afford to fly or anything like that. I finished Michigan State, finished my doctoral studies in the winter of 60-- Speaker 2: '67' [1967]? Speaker 1: '68' [1968], I'm sorry. Winter of '68' [1968], right, and I taught there for one term. I taught the spring term at Michigan State. I was interested in academics so I did teach there for one term, and I decided it was too cold to live in Michigan, and Myrna agreed with me. So we moved--so we started looking for other places where I could work, and so I interviewed at a number of places, including Howard [Howard University]. Southern University in Baton Rouge was very interested in me. There's a university in Virginia. Was it Virginia State [Virginia State University] or something? I don't, I think it was Virginia State at the time. And I think there were two others that I interviewed with, as well as Howard University, the College of Medicine at Howard. Story_ID: 21044 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this before we move on. What was your focus, what was the focus of your dissertation, and can you explain it in layman's terms? Speaker 2: Sure. Yeah, I, well, of course, it was in microbiology. And I had a strong interest in biochemistry as well. So, I did my doctoral thesis on the physiology and the biochemistry of a micro-organism, a bacterium of Staphylococcus aureus. When you hear about staph infections and so on, it was this particular organism. And my interest was really learning more about how this organism invades tissues and how it causes inflammation. So I chose to study in great detail, an enzyme, a protein that was made by this organism, called acid phosphatase. So the organism produces this protein, this acid phosphatase, in acidic conditions and tends to break down everything around it. So, I was trying to learn more about the characteristics of this particular molecule and how it behaves, and perhaps at some point someone could maybe find another molecule that would neutralize it, so to speak, and prevent it from causing the local inflammation and damage that it does. So, I studied the biochemistry of acid phosphatase, characterized it, and purified it very well. You have to purify it. And then I did all of the biochemistry on it, and so on. So, that was my contribution. I finished that work in '68' [1968]. So, I was a, I was a microbial physiologist. That was my field, microbial physiology. So, I was interested in the physiology of micro-organisms, how they behaved and what made them survive in certain types of environments. I came to Washington [District of Columbia], I interviewed in the department of microbiology in the College of Medicine. I was recruited by an individual there named Charles Buggs, B-U-G-G-S, an interesting name for a guy who heads up a department of microbiology, obviously. So Charlie Buggs recruited me to Howard in the department of microbiology. I was young, very young for the faculty at that point in time. It was very interesting, because he also recruited a man from the University of Michigan at the same time. His name was Rubin Kahn, K-A-H-N. Rubin was in his eighties (laughter). I was twenty eight, Rubin was in his eighties. And Rubin Kahn was in, he had developed, he had had a career in microbiology at the University of Michigan and developed a test for syphilis, to detect syphilis, called the Kahn Syphilis Test, actually. So he and I came together, interestingly, at the same time, to the microbiology department. I taught microbiology there to the medical students, to the dental students, medical and dental students, primarily. And it was during that time that Howard had it's, a lot of the student disruptions and so on. I came to Washington right after the riots. Martin Luther King was assassinated in '68' [1968], the spring of '68' [1968], and I came in the aftermath to Washington after the riots in Washington and so on in the fall of '68' [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was quite a sight, obviously, to drive through Washington, to drive down U Street to see the destruction and so on. And there was student unrest on Howard's campus at the time, in the medical school. And in fact, some of the individuals who were in the, who had, who were responsible for the disruption as undergraduates went to medical school. They were activists and, of course, decided to, not replicate, but at least start to create some disruption within the College of Medicine, and bring forth I think some legitimate issues that needed to be addressed in the College of Medicine. Speaker 1: For instance? Speaker 2: Well, for example, they felt that student aid could be distributed on a more even basis. They felt that the curriculum was a bit antiquated at the time. And these were students who by their very nature--because they had had that success in terms of really changing the undergraduate, some of the undergraduate programs. And so they felt that, you know, this could be done at another level. So, it was almost in their DNA, so to speak, to do these types of things. So, as a result we had a dean at that time who resigned as a result of that, a department chairman who resigned as a result of that. A number of changes went on. I was placed on committees at that time to look at financial aid. That was one of the sensitive areas, and I think I was chosen because I was relatively young and had just come out of school, and the students identified with me as being close to their age, so to speak. Most of them were in their twenties when they went to medical school. So I really got to know, you know, the university, the medical school very well as a result of the work, and that I sat on the curriculum committee. And then after my first, after my first year or so there, a couple of the faculty in the College of Medicine encouraged me to consider going to medical school. At that time also there were programs being established in medical schools called the Ph.D. M.D. programs because there was a shortage of physicians during that time. So, some schools established a two-year program for individuals with Ph.D.'s and put them through a very rigorous course and training so that they got their M.D.'s in two years. And I thought about that at some time, because actually the faculty members who spoke to me felt that it would be a good idea for me to pursue an M.D. degree. They said if you're going to be in a medical school, if you're really going to make a difference, and if you expect to really rise in the ranks, you need an M.D. degree. I took that to heart. And also, the type of research that I was doing was primarily bench research with micro-organisms. I felt I wanted to do more clinical type of research, and I thought an M.D. would be a way to, would be an avenue to pursue that. So, I could not afford the two-year medical programs that were being offered at other institutions. I had a family. By this time we had three children. My son was born right after we got to Washington, in that February. So I inquired, actually, about attending medical school at Howard. Story_ID: 21045 Speaker 1: So--let me stay on the faculty and work. They had a graduate program that we had just started. I'm willing to work, to work with graduate students, medical students and go to medical school. The dean at that time did not think it was a good idea. As it turned out-- Speaker 2: Now, this is Marion Mann? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. This is a guy named Albert Harden, H-A-R-D-E-N, who was the dean at the time. He resigned because of the turmoil within the medical school, and LaSalle LaFall became the interim dean. And I spoke to LaSalle LaFall about it, and also the vice president for health affairs at that time, Carlton Alexius. And they thought it was a great idea. And so, two of the young faculty at that time, myself and another individual in biochemistry, Willie McLemore--Willie was maybe two years older than I was at the time--and we applied to medical school and was admitted to medical school at Howard. They allowed us to teach--Willie in biochemistry, and I taught in microbiology. I had two graduate students that I led their masters' thesis during that period of time. And we taught full time during those first two years of medical school, so it was quite hectic. I had a family, teaching, and full time medical school. The second two years--and Marion Mann became the dean in 1970 when I entered medical school--so LaSalle LaFall was only interim during the period that I applied and entered. Marion came in 1970, and Marion let me continue that until I got to my junior year, because in the junior year you have a lot of clinical work at that time, and they didn't feel that I could manage a full time teaching--and I agreed, actually. But, you know, I still had to work, of course, while I was in medical school. I did have some part-time teaching responsibilities, and we also started a program with the D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] public school system called School Without Walls. And we took high school students and taught them science, actually, in the medical school. And there were a number of us who had Ph.D.'s at the time in medical school. Willie McLemore, and there were a few others in physiology and pharmacology who had Ph.D.'s while in medical schools. And we taught these students sciences in Schools Without Walls in D.C. public schools during those second two years of medical school. I graduated-- Speaker 2: Well, I was going to say, that's a lot of work. I think anybody listening to this would say, how did you manage all of that? Speaker 1: (laughter). Well, sometimes I look back and I say, I wonder how I did manage it. You know, I had a tremendous support system at home. My wife, I mean, she, you know, she really took care of the kids, took care of the family, took care of their needs, and permitted me to actually, to pursue these things. Because when I decided to go to medical school, we sat down and we talked about this, and I told her, I said "I'm going to have to work. So it means that you're going to have to probably pick up some of these responsibilities, chauffeuring the kids around and so on." And her answer was, "If that's what you want to do, we'll do it." Story_ID: 21046 Speaker 1: So, in 1974 I finished medical school. Then I had to decide, of course, you know, what to do with this medical degree, if I wanted to specialize. And I never really wanted to practice medicine on a full time basis. I had an interest in seeing patients. I loved the interaction with patients. I developed, you know, a strong interest in terms of that interaction while in medical school. But I also wanted to continue to pursue research, and I told Carlton Alexius as well as Dr. LaFall, that if you permit me to do this, to go to medical school and work at the same time, I'm going to come back to Howard [Howard University], and I'm going to try to make a contribution. I'm not sure they believed me at the time (laughter) but I was quite serious about that. And so I finished medical school and then I had to decide how to use both my Ph.D. training and M.D. training. So that means I was--there were some limitations there, because I had a degree in microbiology, and so I had to figure out how to use that as well as the M.D. degree. So, infectious diseases was clearly one direction in which I could go. But the field of allergy and immunology was growing at that time. And I was fortunate that during my senior year--we have some elective time--and I took most of my elective time and went out to NIH and worked in the laboratory there with a man named Alan Kaplan, who is an allergist and doing some work in immunology, which is, again, my field of microbiology. And I decided that I would pursue allergy and immunology as a sub-specialty because I could use both my microbiology background--because a lot of it was immunology--and of course, my medical degree. So, again in order to specialize in allergy and immunology, though, you have to first specialize in either internal medicine or pediatrics, and then do a sub-specialty in allergy and immunology. I eliminated pediatrics because I always was sick when I had rotations on the pediatric--when I was in medical school. Kids that have colds would come in, they give you all kinds of germs. I said, I don't want to do that. So, I decided to go through internal medicine. And I thought internal medicine was very challenging, actually. So, I liked the intellectual challenge of internal medicine, and I did two years of internal medicine at Washington Hospital Center. So, we stayed in the Washington [District of Columbia] area. That was the other thing. We didn't want to actually leave the Washington area. By this time the kids were in school and we wanted--so we really didn't want to uproot the family. So, I went to Washington Hospital Center in Washington, D.C. and did two years of internal medicine and finished my internal medicine training. Then I was admitted to the allergy and immunology program at Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University] in 1976 and did a fellowship in allergy and clinical immunology where I sub-specialized. Most of my time in the allergy and immunology specialty was again research. I did a lot of research, and worked with a man who clearly was one of the leaders in terms of allergy research at that time, Larry Lichtenstein, L-I-C-H-T-E-N-S-T-E-I-N. And so, I worked in Larry's lab for a couple of years and, of course, saw patients and honed my skills in allergy and immunology. I was, some of my better accomplishments actually occurred in terms of my science, basic science experiences and so on. I was able to really, to have some good findings, some very substantial findings while I was there in that laboratory. And, of course, I went back to Howard after I finished that fellowship at Hopkins. Speaker 2: Let me ask you this about Johns Hopkins, and some more about Howard, too, in a sense. Did you ever meet a Vivian Thomas? Was he around the-- Speaker 1: No. I knew about him, but I never did meet him, but I knew about him at the time. Hopkins was, even during that time, in the early '70's [1970s] was overcoming some of its history in terms of segregation and so on. I was the first African-American in the allergy training program there, so again, one of those 'nuther firsts that I had to go through. But I felt very confident, you know, at that point in time. I had a Ph.D., I was well-trained, better trained than most of the people who were in the program at that time. So, I could actually pursue, I think, research at the same time that I did my clinical training in the field. So I had a very good experience there, actually. And Larry Lichtenstein was very supportive of me and was a great mentor. So, I finished there and went back to Howard. I told Howard I was coming back, and they actually gave me some additional support, financial support, while I went there. They gave me a fellowship, actually in addition to the other fellowship I had from Hopkins, which allowed me, again, to support my family adequately. Story_ID: 21047 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so this is 1978 when you go back to Howard [Howard University]? Speaker 2: This is 1978 when I went back to Howard. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you come back as an associate professor or-- Speaker 2: I came back as an associate professor of medicine and microbiology, because I did teach some microbiology, but most of my time was in medicine at that time, in the department of medicine. And I headed up their allergy program. We started what we called a conjoint training program in allergy, where I took trainees from both pediatrics as well as internal medicine and trained them to be allergists. So, we would train them to go out and be sub-specialists in allergy. Story_ID: 21048 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I understand that you published some papers about the role of esophalus and inflammatory reactions. Speaker 2: The role of-- Speaker 1: B-a-s-o-p-h... Speaker 2: Oh, basophils. Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Basophils, alright. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. That was really sort of some of the seminal work that I was able to be engaged in at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University] and carried that over into Howard, actually. And what I found was that, first of all, basophils play a very significant role in allergic reactions. These are white types of cells floating around in the blood, types of white blood cells. And they play a very significant role because they release compounds like histamine. And when you have histamine being released throughout the body, you get symptoms like sneezing and itchy nose, itchy eyes. That's why you take antihistamines, to counteract the effect of the histamine that's being released by these types of cells. And there are other types of cells that do this. What I was able to find, actually, at that time, and it was a seminal finding, is that we could control the number of molecules on the surface of these basophils that allow the joining of the certain immuno-globulins to release histamine, okay. I don't want to go into a lot of detail, but in any case, it was a very significant finding. And so, I took this work into Howard. But I tell you what happened, and this was all bench type of research, so that's what I was really into, bench research, basic research. And I saw patients at the same time and trained fellows in allergy as well. But when I was at Howard, in my second year at Howard, there were some papers that were published in the early '80s [1980's] that talked about the disparity of asthma deaths and the high rate of asthma deaths among African-Americans, twice as high as white Americans. And because I was very interested in asthma, of course, and treating asthma patients and so on--and basophils played a very significant role in asthma, in the allergic reaction in asthma--I really decided then to focus my research toward more public health types of issues and to try to address some of those issues in terms of why is it that certain ethnic and racial groups really are disproportionately affected by certain types of diseases, including asthma? True, in terms of diabetes, hypertension and so on. And I wanted to pursue that, because I didn't know if it was environmental, whether or not it's an issue of access to care, whether or not it's genetic. What is really going on here? And so that's where I started to focus the rest of my career, actually, on asthma and the disparities that we note in terms of asthma among minorities. And as it turns out, Puerto Ricans, for example, even have a higher prevalence rate than African-Americans. And so, again, we're trying to sort all of this out, to this very day. Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you find? What is the difference? You know, I guess, one generalization we can make is that Puerto Ricans and-- Speaker 2: It's multi-factorial. There is no one thing that we can put our fingers on and say this is why we see these differences. Obviously, some of it is genetic, but we never really had the genetic tools to really study this until now. So we're now starting to develop those tools to get a better handle on the genetics. But it's also environmental exposure. And it's a combination of environmental exposure and how your genetics actually respond to the things in the environment, okay. So it's those types of things. And there are these other social factors that play into it. It has to with your access to good health care, high quality care. It has to do with your access to medications and so on. So, it's a multi-factorial and a very complex type of issue. And so, my research then really led me to start to develop programs that would address a lot of these social issues, address access to care and so on. And the NIH supported those types of studies. So when I discovered--when I, when this--I didn't discover it, but when it became known to me or when I really realized how these disparities existed in asthma, I went to the NIH, I went to Claude LaFant who was the director of the National Heart, Lung, Blood Institute at the time. And I pleaded with Claude to support studies that would help us to better understand why the disparities exist, and also to support the development of interventions that would start to close this gap of hospitalizations, emergency room visits, frequency of symptoms, and so on for patients with asthma, okay. He agreed, and so we developed these programs over time that really did show effectiveness in terms of closing some of those gaps. I that did for virtually all of my professional career at Howard and until I retired from Howard in 2005. Story_ID: 21049 Speaker 1: In 1994, Joyce Ladner was the acting president of Howard, and I remember getting a call from Joyce. I think it was a Thursday or Friday afternoon. She wanted to meet with me, and I'm down here, of course, in the school of medicine. Why does the president want to meet with me? And so I go up to her office. And so, Joyce asked me would I consider taking over as interim dean of the College of Medicine, and that was in 1994. She gave me a weekend to think about it. I of course spoke to my wife and decided to go ahead and accept that position. And so, I became the interim dean in August of 1994 in the College of Medicine. The board of trustees made me the dean, full dean, so to speak, at the beginning of 1995. And I served as dean of the College of Medicine until 2005 when I retired. During that period, Swaggert came in as president, Pat Swaggert. The vice president, who was Charles Epps at the time retired, so he asked me to take on the additional responsibilities of vice president for Health Affairs, which I did. I served in the capacity of vice president and then vice provost, because we changed that position to vice provost over time, until 2003 when I decided that I didn't want to do both jobs, and serve only as dean. And so I became the dean, just the dean of the College of Medicine until 2005. I retired in 2005. And I'll just relate to you another life changing moment, so to speak. In 2005, at the end of 2004, but especially at the beginning of 2005, my mother who was in a nursing home at the time down in Opelousas, became quite ill and was admitted to intensive care. And the doctors felt that she would not leave intensive care, that it was terminal. She had had about, she had been in a nursing home for about five or six years with Alzheimer's, and had over that time, had more deteriorating organ function, deterioration of her organ functions. And at the beginning of 2005 she was hospitalized in Lafayette in intensive care. I went down, of course, to Lafayette at that time and sat with her in an intensive care unit for about ten days. And I had a lot of time to think, and decided it was time to move on and do something different. In the interim, at the end of 2004, I'd been approached by the Merck Company Foundation, by Merck Company, actually, to head up a new network, non-profit network that they were creating to really look at the implementation of interventions for children with asthma. So, these interventions that I talked about that we had actually developed to manage asthma better, they were looking now to go to the next step, and seeking to go to the next step and say, well how do we take what we've learned? These programs that are evidence based, how do we take those and implement them in a health care system and make them a part of the health care delivery system? So that's what this network was intending to do. So, I was approached by Merck at the end of 2004 to consider to head up that particular network. I declined. I told them no, I wasn't interested, I'm dean of the College of Medicine, I'm very happy with what I'm doing. But with my mother's illness, as I indicated, gave me a lot of time to think. And I decided I wanted to go in a different direction. So, I contacted Merck and said I want to be a candidate. That was in February of 2005. I remember leaving the intensive care unit and making that phone call to them, and said I want to be considered. And so I was. My mother died at the end of February, 2005, and I went through an interview process and so on, and had made a commitment to them by April to head up the network. Story_ID: 21050 Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit and talk about some of the work that leads up to this. In 1986 you founded the Urban Asthma and Allergy Center, right? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was that and what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. In, again, well, between, let's see, I was at Howard from 19--, let's see, 1978 until 1983 as head of the allergy division. I left Howard, I did some private practice from '83' [1983] until '88' [1988], until about '89' [1989], about six years. My daughters were in high school at the time. I needed to make some money so that they could go to college. I knew that they would probably be going to an expensive university and they would be going at the same time, obviously. And I wanted to make sure that I could afford to send them wherever they wanted to go. As it turns out, in 1984 they were both accepted to Harvard, so I had two Harvard tuitions to think about, and so I practiced medicine at the time. And then in about the same time, I decided to also continue academics, because I didn't want to just practice medicine. I went on the faculty at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University]. So I went on Hopkins' faculty in about '84' [1984]. I think it was '83' [1983], '84' [1984], somewhere around that time, and stayed on the faculty until '89' [1989]. And I practiced part-time as well to support the tuition. My son, my older son, went to college. He started college at the time that the girls actually were finishing up, in their last year. So, I had three in college at the same time, so I really had to practice and make money, and I did that. But also, actually, I was on the faculty at Hopkins, as I said, at the same time. And when you're on the faculty at Hopkins you essentially have to support yourself in terms of salary. So, I supported myself with grant funds for the most part, so I got grants while I was on Hopkins' faculty and supported myself there. In 19--, let's see, that was 1989, I got a call from Howard [Howard University] and they asked me would I be interested in considering a candidacy for the chair of the department of microbiology. I did, I considered that. Marion Mann was actually on the search committee, and he is the one who actually recruited me and asked me would I come back and consider chairing the department of microbiology. So I went back in 1989 as chair of microbiology and served as chair until 1994 when Joyce Ladner tapped me to be the vice president--I mean the dean, the interim dean. Story_ID: 21051 Speaker 1: Okay. So, now you were in this position I guess in '96' [1996] when you held the African-American health summit? Speaker 2: In 1996--I started that Urban Health Center actually earlier than that. I think I, I think it was earlier than that. I can't remember the exact time because I was practicing, and I remember being in Baltimore at the time and there were lots of asthmatic kids and so on, and I started this Urban Asthma Institute. And that was in the '80's [1980s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was '86' [1986]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, '86' [1986], I'm sorry. I thought you said '96' [1996]. Speaker 1: I was asking about the African-American Health Summit. Was that in '96' [1996] at Howard? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right. Well, when I got back to Howard I decided that--well, when I was dean I decided that I had to really continue to pursue research, asthma research, and I continued my asthma research. And we often put together meetings and brought together individuals. And in '96' [1996] we had, yes, a large summit in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] where I brought together a number of individuals to talk about the development of these interventions, these evidence based interventions. How do we get a better handle on putting these programs together, getting the evidence that they do work, and how do we implement those in communities like the African-American communities where disparities exist? Speaker 1: Okay. Now this, some of this was broadcast on television. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And moderated by Charles Ogletree of the Harvard Law School. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay, that's important. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: And also '97' [1997] is when you were heard on the PBS News Hour... Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: ...where the subject was roaches. Speaker 2: Uh huh, right, right. Because then we had started to discover--well, again in terms of the disparities in environment and environmental exposures, of course--in urban areas was where we were seeing a lot of asthma, where there was crowding. We were looking for exposure to a number of different things. We found out that people were allergic to cockroaches and emanations from cockroaches, so we studied that in the lab to see what it is about cockroaches, what proteins are really causing these types of reactions. So yeah, so I talked about the implication of roaches and eliminating them from the environment as a way of really trying to reduce asthma symptoms in children. Speaker 1: So I take it from what I've heard in those days, they're airborne particles from the roaches' bodies and from their feces that get in the air-- Speaker 2: That's correct, because they get mixed up with dust particles and so on. And when people would dust and sweep and even vacuum--because the stuff, a lot of the stuff that you run through vacuum before we had hepa filters, of course, went out the other side of the vacuum, so you would spread it, (laughter), you know, these allergens in the air--when you're trying to clean them up with a vacuum, with the old vacuum cleaners. And that's all we had at that time. Speaker 1: So, our other--I was wondering when I was listening to this in those days. You know, the smells that you have in the black community. Well, there's a lot of--in poor neighborhoods, with which I'm not unfamiliar, there's a lot of incense burning. There's a lot of people smoking marijuana openly and, you know, there are other smells you may not smell everywhere else, you know, that are-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so, right. So, in addition to allergies from cockroaches and dust mites, then you also have irritants like cigarette smoke and marijuana and all of these other different--and incense and so on, that irritates kids' lungs and cause them to have asthma attacks. So, all of these things we're trying to bring to people's attention, that you can control your child's asthma symptoms by eliminating some of the things that are causing the problem. And that was the whole issue there. Story_ID: 21052 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just saying off-camera that there's a tendency today to sell over-the-counter products that mask smell, and-- Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: And do you think that's a good idea, I mean, in terms of people trying to mask the smell instead of trying to actually get rid of whatever it is? Speaker 2: If you're talking about in the environment of someone who has asthma, and especially children, it's not a good idea because really what you want to do is get rid of what the problem, what is causing the problem in the first place. You want to deal with the cause. So, if it's tobacco smoke, for example, rather than trying to mask tobacco smoke, or other types of strong odors--you really want to get rid of those, because the lungs of an asthma individual, especially a child, is extremely sensitive to those types of irritants in the air. So, the threshold to stimulate them, in terms of causing asthma symptoms, is much lower than someone who doesn't have asthma. So, it's not a good idea to mask these things, and that's not the approach that you want to take. Story_ID: 21053 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now, was--now, you had founded the Urban Asthma Institute? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: And you're working on the health summit. Was-- when you took the job at Merck in 2003-- Speaker 2: 2005. Speaker 1: 2005. Did you consider, is Merck [Merck and Co.] like considered like a leader in the study of asthmatic-- Speaker 2: No, not really. It was interesting how Merck came to this decision. Merck wanted, the Merck Company Foundation wanted to identify a public health problem they felt that they could have an impact on, where the science was strong, and the interventions in terms of controlling disease were there so that they could be implemented and had already been done. So, they looked at a number--they looked at diabetes, they looked at hypertension, they looked at other diseases, but they chose childhood asthma. And they chose childhood asthma because, again, we had learned a lot about asthma, about the underlying causes of asthma, the physiology and the pathology of asthma. We learned about what causes asthma in the environment, the things that children are exposed to, for example, like cockroaches, like tobacco smoke and so on. And the interventions had been developed and shown to be effective in terms of reducing symptoms in these children. So, now the next step was how do we take all of this information and apply it in a real world setting to see if we can start to close the gap of disparities and so on. And that's what, that's why they chose childhood asthma, because all of these things were available. And that's why it interested me, because I was interested, always interested of course, in closing that gap, but also had developed some of these interventions as well. So, that's why Merck chose childhood asthma and put together a non-profit organization to pursue it, so that it would be totally divorced from the business side of Merck, so whatever we do in a Merck childhood asthma network, would not be for the benefit of Merck. It would be for the benefit of the community that we serve. So, we're non-profit, and so it allows us to work independently in that regard. Speaker 1: So, the focus of the Merck project here is research or education, or both? Speaker 2: The focus is to really learn how to take what we know, what we've developed in the laboratory and through clinical studies, to take that and to implement it in health care settings and apply it in communities so that we can sustain those efforts over time. That's what we do. So, we fund sites around the country that take different programs, evidence based programs, and they apply it in those communities and they put it into systems that they think can sustain that over time. One of the interesting things that happened when I came here--and I started in the middle of August 2005--two weeks later Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans. And obviously it became, well, it became obvious that we could play a major role in terms of helping those kids who have asthma in New Orleans. One, the health care system is totally disrupted, so getting access to health care is a problem. Two, they're going to be exposed now to many different types of toxic substances in the air and water and they're going to be exposed to molds that grow in their homes and everywhere because of water and the flooding, okay. And we already knew that kids in New Orleans, that the asthma problem was very bad in New Orleans among kids, and we knew that a lot of those kids were allergic to mold. We knew that, because that had been published in the literature. So, here was a condition that was ripe, obviously, to make that condition much worse. So, we felt that we could go in and really assist those kids and those families in terms of managing their asthma and health care. And we could do it through a case management model where we take health educators, people who are trained in managing asthma--not necessarily doctors and not doctors, actually--but lay people, and educate them about asthma. And they can help those families actually manage the asthma, okay. So, that helps in terms of, that assists them in terms of the health care that they get, and access to health care. The other thing is that we went into their homes and accessed the homes and determined how much mold they were exposed to, and helped them to actually eliminate those things that they were exposed to in the home, okay. As a result, those kids who were in that program did extremely well. They had fewer hospitalizations, emergency rooms, and they had fewer symptoms, fewer asthma symptoms, as a result of that intervention that we put in place. We didn't do that alone. We did that with the NIH [National Institutes of Health] because we knew it was a big problem that we could not manage alone. We didn't have the resources to do it alone. So, we worked with the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. David Schwartz was the director of NIEHS at that time. And I went to David, and I said, "David, we have a problem down in New Orleans. We have children with asthma, exposed to mold and other toxic things. Let's go down there and see if we can put in place an intervention that we know works." Case management: which we had already done. Home intervention: which we had already done. But we put them together and brought them down to New Orleans after Katrina, and we were able to implement it down in New Orleans. So, those are some of the programs that we support in environments where we think that we can make a difference, okay. So, we do it in Philadelphia, we do it in Puerto Rico. Again, I told you the Puerto Ricans have a significant problem with asthma. So, Puerto Rico, we have interventions there--in Philadelphia; south side; in Englewood; in Philadelphia; south side Chicago in Englewood, we have a program there as well. New York, upper Harlem, had a program there. We're starting programs in Arizona where the Hispanic population is quite high. We're starting another program on the other side of Puerto Rico at the present. We just started that program fairly recently. We're starting a program in Michigan as well. So, we support programs around the country, where we take these interventions that we know work and implement them in health care settings there. So, we work with clinics, we work with schools. We're in Los Angeles, in the Los Angeles unified school district, where we actually support the school system there. And we take school nurses and we take them out of the schools and take them into the homes of asthmatic kids, and they work with those families in terms of helping them to eliminate the things that they're exposed to in the homes. And as a result, those kids are missing fewer days from school because of their asthma. So, those are the types of programs that we support. Story_ID: 21054 Speaker 1: Do you think that the communities, the black community, Puerto Rican community, and other communities affected by this, really take the situation of asthma as seriously, you know, on the surface as it should be taken? Because I know so many people that have asthma, but the precautions, and even it seems the supervision around them is not that great. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I've been in situations where people have almost died if I had not taken them to the hospital. So-- Speaker 2: You know, I'll answer that with a question. And the question, and the question is do you think that's true about diabetes and hypertensive cardiovascular disease? And the answer is yes. Because we don't take those seriously. Those are chronic diseases, okay. And to manage a chronic disease, you have to be on top of this every day, even though you don't have symptoms, even though your diabetes is not out of control. It'll get out of control if you don't continue to do something about it. That's true of any chronic disease. Asthma is a chronic disease, and unless you're managing it when you don't have symptoms, then you'll end up having severe symptoms, okay. And we don't think about that, no. And in fact, the medical community is not trained to manage these conditions, so to speak, in that manner. We're trained primarily in hospitals to deal with acute type of situations. Speaker 1: A crisis. Speaker 2: Crisis, to manage--and that's good, there's nothing wrong with that. But we are learning actually now how to go out in communities to be in clinics, you know. So, now more and more of our medical students are in clinics and in places where they can manage those chronic diseases. When I came along, we didn't have that. It was primarily hospital based training. So now we're starting to do that, and now I think the community is starting to appreciate that that's the way we have to manage those diseases. But it takes a lot of education. We're not there yet. Speaker 1: Okay. But do you see progress? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, every day, every day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, you know, that's why I continue to do this on a day to day basis, because we are making progress. There's no doubt about that. We have to take community by community, family by family, individual by individual. That's the only way I think we're going to really make it work. Speaker 1: I think the difference with asthma from those other chronic diseases we have--hypertension, diabetes, heart disease--is that at some unpredictable point, I mean unpredictable in terms of when a person can go from being healthy to dying in front of your eyes... Speaker 2: To death. That's right. Speaker 1: ...and that's something that the other diseases don't seem to have, that feature, and that's-- Speaker 2: Of course, cardiovascular disease, you see it more, because more people are dying of heart disease and strokes. You see it more in terms of diabetes. But asthma is the same thing. We have about 4500 deaths per year. Most of those could be prevented, okay. So, yes, we don't have as many deaths. Fortunately, people get symptoms and then we can treat the symptoms, of course, and we can reverse a lot of that. With diabetes, you can't always reverse that. With cardiovascular disease, you can't always reverse that. Speaker 1: Well, what I'm referring to, I guess, is the asthma attack where a person can't breathe, and it's happening right in front of your face. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And the average person, you know, sometimes there's no supervision, no parents at home, there's no one around and... Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: ...that person, you know, can die. Speaker 2: And they do, and they do. And many die on the way to the emergency room or in the emergency room, because it's too late. Story_ID: 21055 Speaker 1: And one thing we haven't talked about yet is the establishment of the National Human Genome Center in Howard. And you oversaw the establishment of that in 2001. So, tell us something about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, right. As I indicated when I-- that was during the time that I was a dean, actually, and I continued my research and I became--and we started to learn more and more about the genetics of asthma. We started to identify certain chromosomes, different genes that were associated with asthma and, of course, the human genome project was in full swing during that time. I talked about the disparities among African-Americans and the potential role, actually, of genetics in terms of causing some of the gaps that we see. But all of the genetic studies that were being done and the clinical studies that were being done really didn't use very many people of color. And, so, at Howard we started to recognize the role of genetics in a number of diseases, including asthma, because I told you about my family history, for example--many people with it, and, of course I end up with it, my sister ends up with it, and my grandson, my son, and so on. So, we wanted to learn more about the genetics of asthma, you know. What's really important in terms of our genetics? But we didn't really have studies that were being done on people of color. So, I proposed at Howard that we put together this human genome center where we start to collect data and information about people of color, the genetic information. So, we have clinical information, now let's get the genetic information and let's see if we can make some sense about what we're observing clinically and what we're seeing genetically. And the way to do that, of course, is to now start to collect as many samples as we can from the community, and especially with people with chronic diseases, like asthma, like diabetes, renal failure and sickle cell and so on. So, that's why we started the Human Genome Center. And it wasn't just to collect information, but it was also to study what it is that we have and to make that correlation between genetics and clinical findings. So, that's what it was about. Speaker 1: In 2003--now, this sounds interesting. The first genetic trust, and out of it comes the genomic research in the African Diaspora program. What is that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, Dr. Dunston [Dr. Georgia Dunston], who you interviewed, played a very significant role in that. In fact, she was the first director of the Human Genome Center. And, so we worked with a group, a company that was really going to help us to identify populations of African-Americans around the country, and bring them together and get blood samples, and to gather that clinical data that we needed from them to understand the genetics of these diseases. So, First Genetic Trust was the group that was actually going to do this. They were going to run, help us run some of these analyses and so on. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, Rick Kittles is his name. Speaker 2: That's right, Rick Kittles, right, yep. Speaker 1: Did he have something to do with this? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yeah. Rick was part of the Human Genome Center. Another individual was Charles Rotimi. Charles Rotimi is now at the NIH as part of the National Human Genome Research Institute that Francis Collins headed up for a long time before he became NIH director. So we had a strong group of people within that center. We also had consultants who actually helped us to give guidance to that center. Another individual who provided consulting work and direction was Gary Gibbons. I don't know if you interviewed Gary. You need to interview Gary if you haven't interviewed him. Gary is going to take on, is going to become the director of the National Heart Lung Blood Institute at NIH. So, he's going to be, he's going to be our fourth African-American director of an NIH institute very shortly. Speaker 1: Okay. Gary Gibbons. I wrote the name down. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 21056 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Now, you're still working with Merck? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you work like full-time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, you have--it just seems by looking over your life story and hearing it from others, because all of these people mention you--you have a tremendous work ethic. (laughter). Do you recognize that yourself? Speaker 2: You know, I recognize it, and my wife reminds me of it (laughter). When I was at Howard, she says--she would kid me sometime. She said, "I think you love Howard [Howard University] more than you love me." (laughter). I spent long hours at that institution. You know, I was there into the night. I would go back Saturday, Sundays, so, I know, it's a crazy work ethic. (laughter). Yeah, it's strong. It's my mother. You asked me who influenced me. It's primarily her. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you see yourself slowing down any time soon? Speaker 2: Sure, I've slowed down, I have to. (laughter). Yeah, you know, your physiology takes over after a while and it slows you down. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I enjoy what I do, and as long as I enjoy what I do, you know, I will certainly continue doing it. Story_ID: 21057 Speaker 1: This just came to mind, too. Does your own, does your research and what you know about asthma give you more confidence going forth as a person with asthma, and having a son with asthma? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yeah, absolutely. You know, in fact, just recently, May 31, the NIH [National Institutes of Health] released a, what they call a strategic action plan. And the strategic action plan is to address the childhood asthma disparities. That's what their action plan is all about. And that action plan was the result of a presidential task force that was put together during the Clinton administration. And that task force was to address the environmental and the safety issues of children in this country. And they developed certain programs to address that during the Clinton administration. The program went dark during the Bush administration and was revitalized during Obama's administration. And just recently, they chose childhood asthma as the disparity in which they're going to concentrate their efforts. These are federal agencies. HHS [Health and Human Services], HUD [Housing and Urban Development], EPA [Environmental Protection Agency]--all come--and CDC [Centers for Disease Control], all come together and put their resources together to address childhood asthma disparities, okay. That was announced May 31 here in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. The announcement, and to make that announcement, two secretaries were present--Sebelius from HHS, Donovan from HUD, and the administrator of the EPA, Lisa Jackson. They were there, here in Washington at the Boys and Girls Club in southeast Washington, a major event, okay. And they released this strategic plan, the things that they're going to do to close this gap on childhood asthma. So, you ask me, what's the satisfaction that you get out of doing something like that? That report and that strategic action actually came for the most part from the work that we do here at M Cam. Because we work with them, we educate them in terms of what childhood disparities are. We tell them what works. We show them in the field that we're doing these types of things. And they've adopted a lot of that in this action plan, so that, you know, as long as you're having those types of successes--and the fruit of your labor is now starting to bear by these types of actions and bringing federal agencies together--and agree that this is a very significant health problem in this country, then that's gratifying. So, that keeps me going and makes me come in every day. Story_ID: 21058 Speaker 1: Okay. Well it's part of the answer--you've already given part of the answer to this question that we always ask. And that is, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, you know, my legacy--and I think in terms of the scientific community and in terms of the medical world, is going to be about asthma. It's going to be about addressing the disparities in asthma, and how do we do that and what does it take to do that? What do we have, what tools do we have to really address those issues? And can we do it? And the answer is yes. And can we mobilize entities like the federal government to become interested in that, and to take that on as a task? The answer is yes, we can do that. We brought in NIH, for example, into New Orleans after Katrina to work with us to do some of those things. Yeah, we can do that. And so, you know, yeah, I had a lot of help doing this. You can't do this alone. There are so many people, you know, who have been involved in this whole process. And I've had such great teachers and mentors along the way, that, you know, they've guided me in terms of doing some of these things. So, I think that's pretty much the legacy. Story_ID: 21059 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, sir, when you look back at everything again, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Uumph. (laughter). I think if I could, yeah, I would give more variety to my life and to my mind and be more engaged in the arts and those types of things. I've sacrificed a lot of that. Most of my reading is scientific literature. I wish I would have read more of the classics, and I wish I had gone to the opera more--or would have gone to the opera. I think I've been to one in my life. You know, I wish I would have done maybe some of those types of things, and expanded, you know, my horizons that way. Story_ID: 21060 Speaker 1: Okay. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm encouraged by what I see. I see young people really who are well-prepared, well educated, but also thinking, I think, the way I like to see them think. So, for the African-American community, I'd like to see many of these young people take charge of the community, give back more to the community. We, a lot of us, I think, fall short in terms of giving back. As we develop skills and have these great opportunities to learn and be in wonderful schools and so on, we sometimes forget where we come from. And we need to learn to apply those skills of knowledge and that goodwill to those communities. And I think if, you know, if you don't bring along the least of us in the community, then I don't think we've really completed our jobs, and we have a lot of that yet to do. Story_ID: 21061 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us something about your family. We've talked a little bit about your daughters--and you've got a son? Speaker 2: I have two sons, I have two sons. My wife is-- I have an interesting family. (laughter). I think I may have influenced them to some degree in terms of work ethic and so on. Every one of my children has either a graduate or a professional degree. My wife has a graduate degree. So in terms of education, again, education plays a very significant role in our family. As it turns out, my two sons married women either with professional or graduate degrees. So, you know, well, we're very accomplished in that regard. You know my daughter Suzanne. My other daughter Suzette is an attorney. She's on the faculty at Catholic University [The Catholic University of America], a tenured professor there. My son, my older son Courtney is an attorney--Penn State and William and Mary, and he now is the Commissioner of Labor and Industry for the State of Virginia. My younger son has a Ph.D. in English and teaches at Montgomery College. So, but while you're proud of those things, the thing I'm most proud of is that they're good people. They really are good people. And I can communicate with them. We can sit and talk. They're very concerned about family. We're blessed. 'He' gave us now four grandkids. (laughter). My older son has two sons. My younger son just had a son who is eight months old, and my daughter Suzette has a daughter who is going to Yale [Yale Univrsity]. So--but, they're all very good people, and they're concerned about their communities. And so I'm, I just feel blessed that I have those types of people surrounding me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything we need to ask about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: (laughter). Boy, I think I've covered the waterfront here. (laughter). Wow, yeah. No, there isn't anything that I can think of. Story_ID: 21062 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I guess I'd like to maybe be remembered as someone who worked with his community and tried to make a difference in those communities. Someone who mastered a field of medicine, but also tried to apply that knowledge and make it better for people who suffer with asthma...