 Story_ID: 466081 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer, and I wanna have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: Okay. (Pause) Now? (Laughter) Okay. [HistoryMaker] Denise Nicholas, D-E-N-I-S-E, N-I-C-H-O-L-A-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what happened to the Donna? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Never used it. Speaker 1: Never use it. Speaker 2: Never used it. It's on that birth certificate never to be seen or heard from again. Speaker 1: Okay. But the true name is Donna Denise Nicholas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --but we go by officially Denise Nicholas? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Can I have your date of birth? Speaker 2: You can, if it doesn't stick in my throat (laughter), 7/12/44 [July 12, 1944]. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Is May 19th, 2007. Speaker 1: Okay and I'd like to have our location as The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Mich- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're located--yeah, we're at The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: Actress, writer. Story_ID: 466082 Speaker 1: Now I'd like to start out by just asking you five People magazine-ish questions, short answers. You don't have to think about them too much. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food, oh my goodness (laughter). I'm such a foodaholic, I eat everything, let's see. Let's say seafood. Well you want it more specific? Speaker 1: What did you say? Speaker 2: Seafood (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seafood, oh seafood. Okay, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You think less food, no seafood. Speaker 1: And your favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Oh, actually you know the South of France. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh god, favorite phrase or saying? Oh can we come back to that one (laughter)? Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 466083 Speaker 1: Now, I want to start out by asking you about your parents. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you--we start with your mother? Can you give her name-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and what you know about her background and her growing up. Speaker 2: She's Louise Carolyn [Louise Jones Burgen], maiden name Jones. She was born in Dayton, Ohio in 1921. She attended schools in Dayton--public schools in Dayton until the end of junior high school and I think that was Paul Laurence Dunbar [sic. Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Early College High School, Dayton, Ohio]. She started Paul Laurence Dunbar School and then they moved to Detroit [Michigan] and she went to Northwestern High School in Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Did she talk anything about her growing up? Speaker 2: Well she, she did sometimes. But I think it was a very difficult time for her and her sister, my aunt Ruby [ph.], and my grandmother, my grandmother Ethel [Ethel Jones Bradley]. I think they struggled. My grandfather died in the 1930s and it was quite rough I think, so she didn't really talk about it too much. My grandmother before she died talked a little bit more about the old people in my family, the Ohio section of family. Speaker 1: Can you talk about them? Speaker 2: Well, they were small farmers from Xenia, Ohio. I knew my great-grandmother, Grandma Hines [ph.], very, very well and I did not know--I met her husband, my great-grandfather one time before he died. And when I--by the time I met him, he had moved to Michigan and my grandmother took me to meet him soon before--not long before he died. He was quite a broken man. All I remember, I was a little girl and all I remember is walking into this apartment in Roseville, Michigan, and seeing this old man who, who was just skin and bones and he--there were cats, these little cats jumping out of the sofa. (Laughter) And I remember as a little girl, look at all these cats and I was--I've never been a cat person. I was like, "Ah." So but I talked to him and I have a beautiful picture, a photograph of him at home and his name was Elzie Clark [sic. Elza Clark] and my grandmother said that he was a musician, he played locally and moved to Indiana at one point and then eventually ended up in Michigan. Speaker 1: Do you know how your mother's, you know family came to Ohio? Had there been any discussion about that? Speaker 2: I have tried--I tried to find out to go back the next generation and I haven't been able to. I assumed based on what my grandmother's sister, my great aunt, told me before she died, that they had been in that area of Ohio for a long time, they were small farmers. And they obviously were a very mixed raced people and they, they did not say to me what the circumstances were in terms of slavery and coming out of slavery, I assumed it was a similar story. I don't have the specifics but I know that they had been in the Ohio area for quite a long time. Speaker 1: Were they all fair skinned people, your mother's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side there is, there's a crop of people that is very mixed looking. There are second marriages where people are quite brown. My grandfather on my mother's side, my mother's father John Jones [ph.], I have a photograph of him looked--you can't really can't tell he's black at all, but he was in World War I [WWI] in France. I tried to find out if he had gone into the [U.S.] Army as a black person or a white person. And I not--was not able to find out. I, I can do more research on that and I probably will because I'm so interested in his life. But I do have this picture in my mind from something my grandmother told me that she met him when he came back from the war in Europe and he was walking down the street in the area that they lived in, in Dayton and she said he was so handsome (laughter). She said he was just so handsome and my grandmother was a pretty little brown skinned woman and they met and they married and they had two daughters, my mother and my Aunt Ruby. But I have this image of, of these people at that time and say 1918, 1919, 'cause my mother was born in 1921. She's the oldest. Story_ID: 466084 Speaker 1: Now did you--was there any discussion about passing in your family? You know you mentioned your grandfather, but was there any discussion at all that you remember hearing? Speaker 2: Well there was a lot of discussion about it because evidently an entire trunk or branch of family tree on my mother's [Louise Jones Burgen] side just disappeared, they passed for white. They were gone. Speaker 1: And this is the Jones? Speaker 2: This would be, this would have been John Jones' family and he evidently his mother had two husbands and one chunk of people was you know very fair skinned and the other chunk were quite brown skinned and those people just disappeared. Speaker 1: Now, tell me did your mother share any other stories about growing up at all or you know that? Speaker 2: She, she started to talk more about--she has talked more about once they moved to Detroit [Michigan]. The Ohio part of it I think for her was very, very difficult because my grandmother [Ethel Jones Bradley], once my grandfather died, my grandmother had to go find work and she had to do all kinds of things to keep, to keep them together. At one point I know she told me--my grandmother told me this that she went as far as Birmingham, Alabama, looking for work and I guess this was during the Depression [Great Depression] and ended up as an elevator operator in some store in Birmingham and I just remember her telling me what a hard and brutal city Birmingham was then. Now we all know what happened later there. But once she got to Detroit, my grandmother took her two daughters to Detroit. She worked in some big sewing factory. These were--my people were all blue collar people and she had a finger missing and I was--she said that it was cut off in an accident at that plant by a big sewing machine. So it was, it was rough going, it was rough. Speaker 1: Now what kind of person would you describe your mother as? Speaker 2: She's very quiet. She's a reader. She told me that when she was in junior high school, in high school, she liked to draw and liked to do fashion design, but she never pursued. She did not go to college at that time but much later in her life when she remarried, she did go to, to college in, if so and in Michigan and in Ann Arbor [Michigan]. I went to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] so we were living in that area. And she was an editor for a while. She's a very smart--but she's very quiet and very pretty, very, very beautiful person and nobody believes how old she is to this day people look at her, they say how old is your mother? I say she's eighty-five but she does not in any way look to be her age. She's quite remarkable. Her doctors tell me if they could bottle it and sell it we'd all be rich, okay (laughter), so she's quite remarkable. Story_ID: 466085 Speaker 1: Now your father, let's talk about him. His name and you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been trying to figure out that Otto business. You know his name is Otto [Otto Nicholas, Sr.], it was, he's deceased. My brother is, is the Jr. [Otto Nicholas, Jr.] so the name is alive. But I was thinking and I never asked my grandparents on my father's side this question, 'cause I didn't think of the question until they were both gone, "Why did you name your son Otto?" And then I'm thinking about Germany and I'm thinking about World War I [WWI] and what was in the news at the time that he was born in 19--I think 19--1920 and they probably pulled that name out of the newspaper because of the German--what was going on in Germany during end of the war--World War I. So the Nicholas part of it is from Kentucky, Harrodsburg, Kentucky. My grandfather and my grandmother on my father's side came to Detroit [Michigan] from Harrodsburg and in that family there's a mixture of white, African American and Native American and there are people again in that family, on that side of the family who also passed and who didn't, and my grandmother on my father's side is very fair skinned, was a very fair skinned woman. My grandfather, Samuel Nicholas, was I think he was the prettiest color there is to be, that kind of red, red brown color. He's just--he was bald up here and when the sun hit his forehead it was just--his color was beautiful. I used to just stare at him so, so he--they came to Detroit in I think they let's see Daddy was born in Detroit so they came to Detroit probably right at the end of World War I. They worked very hard, my grandmother did domestic work. My grandfather did--worked at the People's Outfitting Company [Detroit, Michigan] and different places but they were very, how shall I say it, they were very structured people. My grandmother on my father's side was a very severe and structured person. She wanted things to be a certain way and as a result of that, things--they lived better than their economic profile would you know would lead you to believe. So as a child, we spent our weekends with my grandparents on my father's side. It's where I learned about silver and china and really beautiful things because she had exquisite taste. Where this woman got this I do not know, but I think some of it had to come from working for people who had beautiful things and taking that knowledge and bringing it to her own life. She was very, very proud, very proud and I think one of the people that she worked for as a domestic at some point had given her this bag of clothing and she brought it home and she--and I said you know, "Grandma what's that?" And she said, "It's clothes." She said, "But you're going to wear it?" (Laughter) And she took those things to the basement. She was not having it, not having it. So she was very active in civic things in Detroit, the united Negro women's clubs and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. She had teas at her home. Her home was beautiful. She was a great gardener. She had beautiful flowers. She was a great cook. I think because my grandfather lived and there were two people working, they were able to maintain more stability than on my mother's [Louise Jones Burgen] side 'cause when my grandfather, my other grandfather died, it really threw that side of the family into you know a, a pretty dangerous situation. So it's a lot harder I think for them. Speaker 1: Now let me have your grandparents' name on your father's side (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On my father's side it's Waddy Bridget [Waddy Nicholas] and Samuel Nicholas. And on my mother's side it's Ethel [Ethel Jones Bradley] and John [John Jones (ph.)]. Story_ID: 466086 Speaker 1: Now on your--did your father was he a talker, did he talk about growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, he was a storyteller. Otto [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] (laughter), Otto was a storyteller. In my book 'Freshwater Road' [Denise Nicholas], there are two characters who are deeply inspired by true life characters and the character of Shuck, the father character, is very much my father or put it this way he is an idealization of who I think my father was so. Speaker 1: So but he didn't--did he have a--was he a number's runner? Speaker 2: Yes he was (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, he was? Speaker 2: Yes he was. He was. He didn't have a bar in Detroit [Michigan]. He did have a bar in Flint, Michigan, for a while during the 1950s but that was his world. He, he was a night life guy and I remember when he took me and my brother [Otto Nicholas, Jr.], because my parents were divorced when we were little, he took us up to Flint to visit his bar and I remember just thinking, what is this thing? It was just like, it was right near the Buick factory [Buick City, Flint, Michigan] so it was a real blue collar bar. It was rough. But he had entertainment in there blues singers and stuff like that but his dream just like Shuck's dream, was to have a real sophisticated place because he was a very sophisticated man. So he, he had exquisite taste. He was elegant, he was smart. Some of the things I tried to give to the character Shuck in the book about how smart he was even though he wasn't formally educated. His native intelligence was extraordinary, and people skills were through the roof. So I, I wanted to capture that kind of character because those men were so important to the survival of the black community, especially in the '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Now what's interesting also though his mother [Waddy Nicholas] you said was so structured-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and, and strict-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what did she think of her son then I mean in his occupation? Speaker 2: I must tell you she worshiped the ground he walked on because he was so good to his mother. He was--he made her life so much better, so much better. I mean my grandmother wore minks, and, and traveled because my father was a numbers man and when he hit the number, he treated his parents. (Laughter) So you know like he treated us. So I don't know at the beginning you know when he was still in high school and it looked like he was gonna go in the direction of being a street kind of a guy, what that did to her, I don't know that story. But I know that in time she came. I'm sure she was afraid for him you know all the time. But he was very, a very generous person, very generous so. Speaker 1: Now what, why did your grandmother not want you--were those children's clothes or were they--the clothes she went--took in the basement and said you can't-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. I don't even know what they were (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were they adult clothes or-- Speaker 2: I think they had to be, I don't know I never looked in the bag. It wasn't gonna happen so (laughter). She was you know she had a lot of pride and I mean we didn't really want, we weren't rich but we didn't want for anything you know. So, I must tell you that she, she continued doing domestic work until she could no longer work, when she was diagnosed with cancer and so, but she had an attitude, it was her work, it wasn't her life, and she was very good at what she did and she worked for a lot of school teachers and you know people who were you know not--you know people who had some education and so forth so she was probably in the best of circumstances that that occupation would allow. But my father being a numbers man was in and out of money. So he was constantly up and down, up and down. But on his up sides, he was so incredible and so I think what one time he hit the numbers and he, he had--he always drove a Cadillac like Shuck in the book and he took her to work and he dropped her at this person's house where she worked and they fired her because she came to work in a Cadillac. She was, she was living as well as they were living and they resented it so they fired her. Story_ID: 466087 Speaker 1: Now, how did your parents [Louise Jones Burgen and Otto Nicholas, Sr.] meet? Speaker 2: They met in high school. They met at Northwestern High and I think from the pictures I've seen of my mother at the time, she was drop dead gorgeous, just really stunning and he was very handsome and my father was All-City track at Northwestern High School in Detroit [Michigan] and you know that's in the high school Northwestern High School by the way was--had been only recently integrated when they got there, so there were a lot of white kids there and so they met because they were two you know they were two stars (laughter) in the school, so. Speaker 1: So Northwestern High School later became a black school right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 466088 Speaker 1: So, let me ask you about your--you know your earliest memory of growing up (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Well let's see. I grew up in Detroit [Michigan] on the west side of Detroit. My brother is three years older than I and I already talked about the fact that we spent our weekends with grandparents [Waddy Nicholas and Samuel Nicholas] 'cause they had a bigger house and a backyard and all kinds of stuff, so we went to let's see, we went to a number of different elementary schools because my mother [Louise Jones Burgen] was struggling during this time. She and my father [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] were divorced. Speaker 1: Now okay tell me what age were you when they got divorced? Speaker 2: When they got divorced I think I was about three around in that area, three. So my grandparents' home became a stabilizing force. Speaker 1: Now, now which one because you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On my father's side. Speaker 1: On your father's okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. So my brother and I grew up. We went to good schools; elementary schools at that time in Detroit were incredible. Speaker 1: Do you know which ones you went? Speaker 2: We went to Thirkell [Thirkell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan]. We went to Pattengill [Pattengill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] for a little while and I think we also went to Wingert [Fanny E. Wingert Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], I think that's the name of it Wingert, but my mother was struggling during this time because they'd broken up and my father was up and down, up and down, so things were rough for her for a bit there but still she, she stayed afloat. She was working and she was very intent on keeping us in schools that were good. So there were a couple of moves we made that had only to do with her keeping us in schools that she considered better schools. So there was a lot of moving during that time but in a way it's, it's difficult for you socially if you're moving around a lot, but I see the benefit because the schools were, were really good and Detroit Public Schools [Detroit Public Schools Community District] at that time were excellent, really good. Speaker 1: Now, I, I wanna make sure I heard you right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You're saying that you were spending time at your father's grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes, my father's parents' house. Speaker 1: So your parents--so how did that work in terms of you know the parents were divorced so I was just trying so the--I'm trying to understand the relationships there. Speaker 2: Well he was always--even when they separated and divorced, he was very much a presence in our lives and my grandparents were also. Speaker 1: So they must have taken a liking to you and the kids? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. So we were there. I mean through their, whatever their travails were as a couple; they were stalwart grandparents so that never, that never changed, never for a second did that change. Speaker 1: So, do you remember, so you moved--do you remember the addresses of the places you lived or the place because you were young? Speaker 2: I was very young. I don't remember the addresses, but I do remember the streets. Euclid [Street] near La Salle [Boulevard], let's see, oh god (laughter), now you got me. There was another let's see. When we went to Pattengill, we were on--I can't remember the names of the streets beyond that but Euclid for a long time, um-hm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So you're saying that--okay Euclid, what was the other? Speaker 1: Euclid near La Salle and then 14th Street for Thirkell Elementary School, we were just two or three blocks from the school. I can't remember the side street. There's an apartment building on the corner. Let's see, that's, those were the two I think the places we stayed the longest at that time. Speaker 2: And who was--you had an older brother? Speaker 1: I have an older brother. Speaker 2: And it's just the two of you? Speaker 1: Well when my mother remarried later we have a sister who died, Michele [Michele Burgen], yeah. Speaker 2: So can you give your--Michele was the sister who died-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: How much younger was she? Speaker 1: She was nine years younger than I. Um-hm. Speaker 2: And your brother, his name? Speaker 1: It's Otto Nicholas, Jr. (laughter). Speaker 2: Poor guy. Okay. Does he have a nickname? Speaker 1: Well, they call him--we used to say Little Otto and Big Otto (laughter). He's terrific, he's terrific. Speaker 2: Now how much older is he then you? Speaker 1: He's three years older than I am, um-hm. Speaker 2: Have you ever talked to him about your memories of growing up? Speaker 1: I do. And you know as we get older, we talk more and more about it. And he has for some oddball reason, maybe because he stayed in Detroit and his connection to things are just as they were years ago and I've lived all over the place and moved around, mine are fading. So no, we talk about those things. We talk about listening to radio shows and I have to ask him, "Well did we listen to so and so, and so and so?" And he'd say, "Yes." And, "Do you remember when we got cowboy outfits, and 'Annie Get Your Gun' and all that stuff?" "Yes." He has--he's a model train collector so he has this huge Lionel [Lionel Corporation] train set up now. I mean now he--that started when we were three, I was three and he was six or I was four and he was seven, but he has much more information about those early years than I have. Story_ID: 466089 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now let's go back to you know some of your memories of that time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'd like you to take yourself back to those early years and tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Sitting in my [paternal] grandparents' [Waddy Nicholas and Samuel Nicholas] front porch in Detroit [Michigan], there were two smells that when they come to me today, it's a total flashback. One, there was a Wonder Bread (laughter) factory or whatever a bakery a few blocks away and when they baked the aroma blew--or the smell blew all over the neighborhood. It was incredible. The negative aroma was they were next door to a Gulf [Gulf Oil] gas station (laughter) and so if you sat on the porch in the summer; you got this aroma of gasoline so those are the two big ones there. This is--the neighborhood, I'll use my grandparents' neighborhood because that, that stayed the same for the entire and it's still there, it's still in our family. It was--it's a neighborhood of single family homes that was integrated in the 1930s and so little by little it became an all-black area of Detroit, a great historical area of the city and you knew everybody. My grandmother knew everybody. I remember vendors, farmers coming in selling produce. I remember a fishmonger. I remember the black people who owned the grocery store a block away. I remember the black people who owned the drugstore a block away. Speaker 1: Do you remember their names? Speaker 2: No, I don't. My brother [Otto Nicholas, Jr.] probably would. So in that period of time before that neighborhood started to go down, that neighborhood was so rich in, in, in black culture and black history and people coming and going, people doing well, people owning their own homes as pride of ownership was incredible. Everybody had a beautiful yard, everybody had flowers, everybody barbecued in the summer. We had huge family picnics on Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan], some of which I try to capture in the book ['Freshwater Road,' Denise Nicholas] because I wanted not only to, to capture this kind of man that my father [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] was in terms of the black community as a whole but also the family life on black people in Detroit at a certain point in history because it was sweet, it was really, really quite beautiful and I think so it was, there was always backyard sitting, there was always front porch sitting, there was always conversation, there was always visiting, there was a continuum of life and a rhythm that was really quite remarkable and I don't find it any more, I don't find it any more. Story_ID: 466090 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you, you did a very good job with sights and smells, what about sounds? Speaker 2: Well in Detroit [Michigan] the sound is always cars. I mean it was--that's what I remember, cars. But I don't--also music (laughter), lots and lots of music. Now even though the city of course is known for, for the Motown sound which is, which is fine, my father [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] was a jazz buff so we went--he would take my brother [Otto Nicholas, Jr.] and me to places that were not supposed to be because we were too young but everybody knew him. So he could take us into places and sit us somewhere with a Shirley Temple drink or a ginger ale and you know hear music. He loved Dinah Washington. So I, you know I went to Klein's Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan] (laughter) when I was eight years old or something so he was, he--and I knew the Modern Jazz Quartet, I knew them you know I knew the players so, so I would say Motown yes, but Detroit is a--was a rich, rich city as far as jazz is concerned and so as a young person coming up even when I went to--out to Milan [Michigan] to live I went back to Detroit on the weekends a lot. So I had the benefit of both sides of our culture, both streams of our culture in terms of popular music because as a young person everybody was listening to it. The girl groups and the doo-wops and all of that, but because my father's taste I was completely exposed to jazz music from, from the time I was very, very young so it's not, it's as much a part of me as the popular music that came out in Detroit. Speaker 1: Did you ever see Dinah Washington perform in those early years? I mean you heard really through listening (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I heard her through my father. Yeah Dakota Staton and he--my father used to stand me up in the middle of the floor and make me lip sync to Dakota Staton so (laughter) I don't know I couldn't sing. He so wanted me to be a singer. He wanted to be--he loved nightclubs you know, he loved women and pretty gowns you know like with flowers in their hair like I said and 'Freshwater Road' [Denise Nicholas] and he, he saw me that way. So in fact when I decided to be an actress and you know to, to let go of my formal education at that time, he was the only person in the family who was happy. He loved--he loved my career more than I did (laughter). He was my biggest fan and my greatest cheerleader, period. Anything that was Hollywood or show business or anything that smacked of that world, he was there. Story_ID: 466091 Speaker 1: Let's talk about those you know other memories you have about your time in Detroit [Michigan]. You know it could be--let's talk about maybe family holidays-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or you know incidences that you know you remember. I do want--so what you're saying is that even though--I just wanna get back to this, even though your parents [Louise Jones Burgen and Otto Nicholas, Sr.] were divorced, your father was very, very much a part of your life? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Very much so. Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very much so? Speaker 2: You know he lived, he lived a life that was outside the mainstream so it wasn't a consistent, he didn't have a consistent work life so but he had a, a presence that stayed in the room after he left and it was a testament to that. When he died, my brother [Otto Nicholas, Jr.] and I in Detroit gave--he didn't--my father did not want a funeral. He wanted a party. So we did. My brother has a huge, huge yard in Detroit and when people heard that Otto Nicholas had died, it was an incredible, incredible celebration of his life. People came from miles around. People that had maybe seen us once when we were little, but they knew him, they knew Otto. And it was, it was an amazing day, amazing day. People loved this man. They loved him (laughter) so. It was, it was great. Speaker 1: Now so let's go to some memories about-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know around holidays, do you remember any instances, you know, were you and your brother close? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah we were very close. We had, Thanksgiving always was at my grandparents [Waddy Nicholas and Samuel Nicholas] on my father's side and that's where--I mean she was a great cook and it was a formal sit down dinner, my cousins, my brother, me. There was the children's table which we always sat at the children's table and then the adults sat at the big dining room table. I remember my grandmother teaching me how to polish silver, how to dust the rungs of the chairs, not just the back part, but get down on your little hands and knees (laughter) and get those little dust things down there. She taught me how to--all the things that you need to know about setting the table, my grandmother taught me and it was usually around those big dinners like Thanksgiving particularly. Christmas was a shared holiday between home and grandparents. So we'd go back and forth and what--we always had Christmas tree at home and my grandparents always had a Christmas tree. So we usually had toys at both places. One of the greatest memories I have of those years is when my brother first got his Lionel [Lionel Corporation] train. Of course he got good toys you know boys get good toys. He had trains and got--he had an erector set, he had the stuff that you could really work with with your hands, model, model planes and he was you know, he's very, he's a very quiet, focused person and I was you know this wild child. So he would set up, he set up his Lionel train when he first got it under the dining room table so he could make the tracks go around the legs and of course because he was older and more able to concentrate and focus, he would just get into this train with his, his cars and things, and I want him to pay attention to me and he wouldn't. So (laughter) what I finally started doing was going to get rocks and debris and stuff and putting them on the track and then he would stop the train and the train would wreck and he would--and I said he would have to deal with me usually by punching me in the arm. He was--and he's still that way to this day. He goes into his basement in Detroit where the train is all set up and my sister-in-law says, "Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Nicholas], he can go down," both retired now, "he can go down there for hours and I feel like I'm living in this house all by myself. I'm so glad you came to visit so I have somebody to talk to." But that's you know that's the kind of person he is. He's very quiet and very focused. So but we had great memories. There was that house that there was an apple tree in that, in that backyard and we picked apples. My grandmother made the best apple pie on the--in the City of Detroit. Story_ID: 466092 Speaker 1: I remember my father [Otto Nicholas, Sr.]--neither of my parents were hitters, they didn't spank us too much. So we might have gotten a swat you know, but at one point there was a construction site on the side street from my grandparents' [Waddy Nicholas and Samuel Nicholas] home and my father was there that weekend, we were all there and he--and it snowed in Detroit [Michigan] and he had warned us to not go by that construction site 'cause there's a deep hole in the ground and the snow you didn't really--you couldn't tell how deep it was and of course, that's the first place we went and we were playing all around the construction site and he came out and he grabbed us and he got us and that's the only time he spanked (laughter) both of us. And you know they're spank--and my mother [Louise Jones Burgen] was the same way. Her spankings were funny. We would start laughing because she just didn't have the heart to really be cruel or you know to really be harsh and so one time my brother [Otto Nicholas, Jr.] and I were playing army with his army men and and we had little throw rugs that we made into islands and then the ocean and we had G.I. Joe, we had all this stuff and we were laughing and having so much fun and my mother said we were making too much noise and we were supposed to be doing our homework and we were playing and she had warned us two or three times to quiet down and we didn't, we were just going at it full tail. She came with the broom stick (laughter) and she was gonna swat us on the butt, well we star- she looked so funny standing there fussing at us with this broom stick and she's a slight person you know. I'm big and she's, she's a petite and she just stood there fuming, fuming and we just started laughing so she never did hit us. She, she--we I don't know we just didn't, we didn't suffer that kind of treatment as children at all but not that we didn't get punishment, just didn't involve physical pain. Speaker 2: So how were the punishments? Were they timeout, you know? Speaker 1: They were--I guess would be similar to a timeout. You'd have to just go somewhere and be quiet or you couldn't watch television you know not that we had a whole lot of watching of television in those days anyway. But we had you know it was some pretty strict rules about homework. I was telling the students that the events that I went to for Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] this morning that one rule was every Saturday you had to go to the library. So we walked to the public library on West Grand Boulevard and took our books and got a new supply of books and brought and came home. So we had to read. We had to do homework. These weren't negotiable in any way shape or form or fashion. That was, you know education was extremely important, extremely important. Story_ID: 466093 Speaker 1: So do you remember school then, you know and did you have any favorite teachers, you know. Speaker 2: I remember Mr. Moore [ph.] in science class. He seemed to be very compassionate towards the students, he was very nice. And I was always a dunce in science and math so he was a nice person. I remember some of the other teachers. You know Detroit Public Schools [Detroit Public Schools Community District] at that time had free music lessons and I took violin lessons for a while and it was just awful. My mother [Louise Jones Burgen] said we cannot have this, you're disturbing the neighbors for blocks around (laughter) with this instrument, no she didn't say that, but it was just, I never did get it you know. I just was just squeaky, squeaky, it was awful so those--that was the best elementary school time for me was Thirkell Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan]. The school was integrated at that point. It was going through that shift that began to happen in, in Detroit schools so there were good teachers there and the standards were very, very high. We had field trips constantly. We went all over the city. They took the students everywhere. You know we went to the fair, we went to the museum, we went to the theatre, we went, we did everything so that you, you grew up with a sense of being in the world, a sense of the city around you, which you could extrapolate into the world that you didn't just live in a little you know in a little enclave you know. You lived in the city so you had a sense of the place that you lived in which was great. Speaker 1: Now Thirkell, what grades were you in at Thirkell? Speaker 2: I was there from kindergarten, was I there--yeah kindergarten to third, I think third grade, third, fourth grade (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And then, then afterwards you? Speaker 2: I was at Pattengill [Pattengill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] for one year. Pattengill was also a very good school. There was another elementary school I think just for a little while and that would have been Wingert [Fanny E. Wingert Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] and I think, yeah Wingert and that's where they started testing me and they double, double promoted me. Speaker 1: So why do you think, do you remember--so you were always a good student? Speaker 2: I was quiet. You would never know that now but (laughter) I was very quiet and a reader. I was always a reader. I was a good student. My brother [Otto Nicholas, Jr.] says, now I didn't know this, my brother said to me recently when I was at home in Detroit [Michigan], he said, "You know the whole time we were in school I was trying to keep up with you." I said, "But you're three years older." He said, "But you always got the good grades." He said, "No matter how hard I studied, no matter how much homework I did, I could never get the grades that you got." Well I wasn't aware of that then, but that's--he just told me that recently so I guess I was always a good student. Speaker 1: So when did you get double promoted? Speaker 2: Eighth and ninth grades. Speaker 1: That's when you moved to Milan [Michigan] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Michele [Michele Burgen] was born and then my stepfather's sister was a guidance counselor in the Detroit Public Schools and she was the one who insisted that I get tested. And so they gave me what the Iowa basic skills test [Iowa Test of Basic Skills] and whatever the other tests were current at the time and based on the test they put me up a grade, a half a grade then another half a grade. Speaker 1: Okay. And so the first half a grade occurred when you were still in Detroit? Speaker 2: That was going into that yeah eighth, eighth grade. Speaker 1: Oh, eighth. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what ju- were you in junior high at that point or did you go from elementary to high school? Speaker 2: I went one year to junior high school. Speaker 1: And what was the name of that? Speaker 2: That was, oh god do I remember, that was let's see oh god, I'll think of it. I can't remember the name of it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Tell-- Speaker 2: Aretha Franklin's sister was in that school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Carolyn, Carolyn Franklin was in my class at that point, yes. Speaker 1: Is that the one who is the--no, no, no am I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She died. She died. Speaker 1: Okay she died. Okay. Story_ID: 466094 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what is the young Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Nicholas] like? I know you say you were quiet but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what is going on in your head? You know what, what are you, you know thinking of you know, what are you dreaming of? You know what are the books that you're reading? I mean I'm just trying to get a sense of what. Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think I was pretty, pretty fragile. I think the best times were the times with my dad [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] or with my brother [Otto Nicholas, Jr.] in close association with my brother because I worshiped him, but I think I had a lot of, I think my imagination was beyond my ability to understand it so I had things always going on in my head, fears and demons and I could--I'd see things that were scary to me and I would make things up and I read things that, I read books that I either got from the library, but at one case there was a woman, a Jewish family that lived next door to us, she was a reader, she had lots and lots of books and she had two sons. And so she said I--she told my mother [Louise Jones Burgen] that she had all these little girl books from when she was a child because she thought she was gonna have a girl and so it was the 'Bobbsey Twins' [Laura Lee Hope] and the 'Nancy Drew' [Carolyn Keene] and all that stuff, so she gave all those books to me when I was quite young. So I, I think that reading in a sense was an escape. You know and I think sometimes it was a world that I could, I could control you know because there was a lot going on with the divorce of parents, with the moving around, with--there's a certain level of insecurity that's creeping in there even though the grandparents [Waddy Nicholas and Samuel Nicholas] is like that, that home and that place is like an anchor, that's their thing and I'm coming there as a, you know as a child, as a visitor in a sense. So I think I was very sensitive to the emotional stresses and strains that my parents were going through, that my mother was going through for a lack of resources during those times that my father wasn't stepping up or couldn't step up. I think I was more overtly showing those things. My brother I think kept a lot of things inside so I think that books and reading were a bit of an es- you know a thing to hold on to. I'm not so sure that that isn't the case oftentimes with children that they'll take whatever they can get their hands on to steady themselves and that's what I did. Speaker 1: So what, what books were you reading do you remember? Speaker 2: 'Bobbsey Twins,' 'Nancy Drew.' (Laughter) Didn't have a whole lot of black books at that time. Let's see what other, I read, just read--now I can remember the first time I read 'A Tale of Two Cities' [Charles Dickens] I guess it was--it had to be a little bit later. But god did it make an impression on me. It just stayed in my mind and I wanted--and 'Wuthering Heights' [Emily Bronte] and, oh my dear, I read the Brontes [Emily Bronte, Charlotte Bronte and Anne Bronte], I read and my mother used to always quote she, she would read Paul Laurence Dunbar poetry because she'd gone to that school in Dayton [Ohio] and sometimes when she'd wake us up she'd come in and say, "Lias, Lias, bless the Lord. Don't you know the day is abroad" ['In the Morning,' Paul Laurence Dunbar]. She would do that poem and I remember her saying that. My mother was--my mother liked to sing too and she would--she had a very pretty soprano kind of voice, she has, and she sang all the standards of her, of her heyday of the late '30s [1930s] and early '40s [1940s]. So I knew the words to all those songs. When I was growing up and I just, I could sing all the old Jo Stafford songs and you know songs that older people knew because she used to sing them constantly in the house. She sang. She loved to sing, she loved music. Story_ID: 466095 Speaker 1: Do you remember your parents [Louise Jones Burgen and Otto Nicholas, Sr.] arguing at all, do you remember those you know just--was--there wasn't, you were protected from it? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember actual arguments. I know that they had to have happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember later after their divorce and in between time before she remarried, I remember her being very frightened and very upset if he hadn't paid child support or, or you know if he had been going through a dry spell and wasn't stepping up. I remember the stress in her. I remember her crying and I remember her saying that if not to me than to my grandmother [Ethel Jones Bradley], her mother, that she didn't know how, how we were gonna make it through this particular patch, this particular bit of time. Speaker 1: Now how--where was she working? She-- Speaker 2: She worked for a while at the Detroit Arsenal [Detroit Arsenal Tank Plant; Detroit Arsenal, Warren, Michigan]. Speaker 1: And this would have been during the war [World War II, WWII] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no this was later. Speaker 1: Later? Speaker 2: This was later. Speaker 1: Later okay, okay. Speaker 2: During the war, I wasn't born. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: But I'm trying to remember a later job she was a clerk typist and secretary, so I mean she was you know I think she, she moved around a bit with those jobs because she was black (laughter) you know. Speaker 1: Did you remember any other--was it back then any--I mean now divorce is very common-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But do you remember other people who you know parents were divorced or was that more of anomaly? I'm just wondering or did you feel badly being you know the child-- Speaker 2: I did, I did feel that. But I, I don't remember if I was seeing or hearing that reflected in other children's stories as we played together and so forth, but I do know that I felt very deeply the impact of being in a single parent home, thinking that everybody else had two parents at home, definitely felt it. Story_ID: 466096 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your stepfather and even the time of your parents [Louise Jones Burgen and Otto Nicholas, Sr.], you know your mother remarrying. Do you--how did she meet her--you know your--do you know that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. Speaker 1: Do you know--can you give his name? Speaker 2: Yes, his name was, he's deceased, Robert Burgen. He's from-- Speaker 1: Can you spell that? Speaker 2: B-U-R-G-E-N. He's from a very old Detroit [Michigan] family. His sister, my Aunt Finette [ph.], as I said earlier was a guidance counselor in the public schools of Detroit. I don't know how they met or how their dating process is when I was into my own little world then. I do know that once they married, I stayed in Detroit for a while with my Aunt Ruby [ph.] and back and forth with my aunt and my grandparents [Waddy Nicholas and Samuel Nicholas] and then eventually moved with them, they had moved to Milan, Michigan, because my stepfather was the head of probation and parole at the federal prison [Federal Correctional Institution, Milan] in Milan, Michigan, and they moved there and my sister [Michele Burgen] was born. They settled in and then I went--my mother wanted all of her children, the three of us to be together. My brother [Otto Nicholas, Jr.] did not wanna go out there. He wanted to stay in Detroit, so he stayed at grandparents' house and I fought to stay in Detroit, but I was too young and then she brought me out there. So I ended up going to high school [Milan High School] in Milan and that last year of junior high [Milan Junior High School, Milan, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Was that hard since you loved your brother so much? Speaker 2: It was very hard. It was very hard (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So-- Speaker 2: So every weekend I was skedaddled off to Detroit to be with him and, and you know now it started out as every weekend, but I must say as I settled into it and settled into school out there, the school, my schoolwork demanded that I stay and do you know because I was on college prep track so I had to work. Speaker 1: So now, how far is Milan from-- Speaker 2: It's only about thirty-five miles, about fifteen miles south of Ann Arbor [Michigan], it's not any big trip. Speaker 1: And your father was--your stepfather was doing what? Speaker 2: Head of probation and parole at the federal prison there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so that was the main employer you think out there? Speaker 2: Yes and it still is. Although there's some new industries moving there, I was just there to do a book event and the high school inducted me into the high school hall of fame [Academic Hall of Fame] and so I was there and driving all around and the prison is still the major thing, but there is I think a Toyota company factory [Toyota Technical Center, Saline, Michigan] coming in and some other companies coming in and the space between Ann Arbor and Milan is shrinking because of the development of Ann Arbor kind of reaching out to its (air quotes) suburbs. Story_ID: 466097 Speaker 1: Now this is a direct--a very big contrast though between Detroit [Michigan] and Milan [Michigan] so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You don't even know (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Teeny little black population, how many black people were there? Speaker 2: We were the only black people in the town, in the town, in the whole town, that's it. There were about ten or twelve students in high school, black students in high school [Milan High School, Milan, Michigan] who lived in farms in the surrounding area, in the town we were it. It was very stressful for me, very. I mean very. I though oh my lord, oh my lord, how am I gonna get through this? But I wasn't thinking in those terms I wasn't so conscious, I just didn't feel that comfortable socially but you know looking back now I'm thinking that was the best thing that could have happened to me because Detroit was also going through you know changes. The schools were going down and you know it just getting to be pretty rough there and so it was a smart move. It was a smart thought to see ahead to take me out of that environment at that point, but I'm gonna tell you, I think I had five dates in high school. It was just you know--when I got to Ann Arbor [Michigan], I think I dated the trees (laughter). I just was so, so happy to get away from that environment and now--but then I think now when I was just there, it gave me the foundation for everything and I do mean everything that I have done since. Speaker 1: Well let's talk about that a little bit. What, what happened there that you think was important? Speaker 2: Well it just, just there was, there was a school that wasn't a great, great school but it was a good school, it was a good basic school and there wasn't anything for me to do in this town but homework and read and focus on education which is what I did. The summer of my junior year I was--I competed to, to be a part of the National High School Institute at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] and I was accepted. I was on National Honor Society, I was just--there were--it became--I became the student that I was probably supposed to to be so well--I mean it's hard, it's a hard, a hard one to call because you want high school also to be social and fun and to have that other part of your life balanced and filled out as well so I was not so much on that side because it just wasn't you know, you know it was, it was all white school and these were conservative white people so it's not some liberal enclave suburb or something, this was rural, conservative. There was no interracial dating you know, not that that's be all but at least that would be something so it wasn't that people were mean to me. They were not mean to me. But that other thing that happens that subtle wall, the wall is there so you can, you can have lunch, you can have dinner, you can do fun things but you're two separate worlds, you're living in two separate worlds. So I experienced that all through high school. Speaker 1: Do you remember any racial incidents? Speaker 2: Only in American history class and the American history teacher got to talking when we got to the section on slavery and by then you know my stepfather [Robert Burgen] who is a fairly well educated man, had started to give me other things to read so I was reading about Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], I was reading--I was filling out that part of my education that I wasn't getting in school and so I remember being extremely upset with the dismissive way he treated that section of history and I challenged him in class and other people remembered it because when I went back to high school, a couple of months ago, there was some people there who were in my class who had been in that class and they remembered, I was like oh my god. And they said well he was a dreadful teacher you know. You know I said well I don't know about his, his entire teaching, life teaching credentials, I do know that he gave short (unclear) to slavery and I wasn't having it. So. Speaker 1: So what was he doing, what did he--he just said that, what did he say about slavery? Speaker 2: Well I think there was like a paragraph in the textbook which is a slap in the face to begin with and honestly he just didn't even deal with it you know. Just like we weren't there and it didn't happen. So I remember my hand shot up in the air and I was on my feet (laughter). Wait a minute, wait a minute, let's talk about this. So-- Speaker 1: Which is pre-'60s [1960s] too right? Late, late, late fift- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually 1960. Speaker 1: Oh it's 1960. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah we're 1960, um-hm. Story_ID: 466098 Speaker 1: We were just talking about slavery, but I was asking about, you know Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, what on the dat- were there any white young men who approached you to date? Speaker 2: No, no. I don't know if that means there were no fellow students [at Milan High School, Milan, Michigan] who were interested but I think the, the lines were drawn and you couldn't cross over those lines because certainly there were what seemed to have been in my memory flirtations you know but no I didn't date anybody then. We were talking about my stepfather-- Speaker 1: Right. That's right. Speaker 2: Robert Burgen, so he had gone to Michigan State [Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science; Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]. He was older--quite older than my mother [Louise Jones Burgen], quite a bit and his sister my Aunt Finette [ph.] had gone to University of Michigan graduate school [Horace H. Rackham School of Graduate Studies, Ann Arbor, Michigan] in the 1930s, so this is a completely different set of influences coming into my life although, although education and books had been stressed we were still a blue collar family with a certain flair because of my father [Otto Nicholas, Sr.], a certain sophistication based on his life. So this was a whole other class element these people were upper-middle class black people in Detroit [Michigan] and as a result of my being now a part of that family, other things begin to, to happen and my Aunt Finette certainly tried to gear me in the direction of Jack and Jill and those kinds of organizations but by then by high school, I was already set in a certain kind of rebellious mode and I remember going to one or two kind of trial meetings and I came back and then I remember talking to my dad and I said, "Daddy, everybody in that club looks just the same." (Laughter) He said, he would call me baby, he said, "Baby you don't have to do that." And I thought, but I didn't understand really, I just--the only--well I did understand something. I didn't understand all of it. And I didn't even deal with it until much later. So I didn't. And in fact when I got to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], I didn't pledge a sorority so I have never been a, a joiner of women's groups until now, of course, as a, as a darn near senior citizen. You start looking around going well you better join some women's groups (laughter). You better have some sisterhood going on here 'cause it's gonna get rough. So you know now I'm, I'm more open to those sorts of things and certainly have done that. But at the time, I was you know--and I was also moving in the direction of being very political, very, very political. Story_ID: 466099 Speaker 1: I wanna ask one question before it gets away from me-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Just hold that thought, but was there any discussion about good hair/bad hair? You know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was. Sure. Speaker 1: Can you tell me how it came in the context of yourself? Speaker 2: Well I think, I have a cousin on my father's [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] side, my father's sister's daughter who has kinky hair and we were very close as children. We all grew up playing at my grandma's [Waddy Nicholas] house and all that and so she went to the beauty shop one day (laughter) and I said can I go, can I go? So I went with her and they straightened--they put a hot comb on my hair and I got back home and my grandmother looked at my hair and then I think my mother [Louise Jones Burgen] picked us up--picked me up that day and she looked at my hair and said, "What, what did you do to your hair?" Because it was just flat as a pancake. It just was you know. And I said, "Well they did what they did to Barbara's [ph.] hair on my hair," and they thought oh Lord and then they started you know you don't do that. You don't have that kind of hair, blah, blah, blah. So that was really the first time I understood that there was a difference in hair. I didn't at that point really understand good hair/bad hair that--you know that concept is fed in later I guess you know that idea they just--I must tell you because my father is the kind of person that he is, a lot of that stuff that we beat each other up with as black people, he stood against all, all of it. He was very political without being consciously political in a sense of, he had common sense and he loved black people and he taught us that. So he would not allow for all these separations of people because of skin color and because of hair texture. I can't even begin to tell you how against these things my father was and he spoke to that. You know he always spoke to that. Speaker 1: What would he say? Speaker 2: He said you know what--he said the only color, the only color, the only color is Negro. We are all black, that's it. There is no difference. And I mean he just--he would not allow for that kind of thinking so it was, there was no way I was going to go down that road because he, he discouraged and he, he sustained it. And I loved him so much I wanted to be where he was, I wanted to be in his head you know, so I listened to him. Story_ID: 466100 Speaker 1: Now why did you love him so? Why--you're a daddy's girl, clearly. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Why were you such a daddy's girl? Speaker 2: You had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it how he made you feel, would he light up the room when you saw? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, just lit up the room. And he would take me with him in the Cadillac and I was Otto's [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] girl so you know he just, he made me feel so special. And he made both of us feel special. We were Otto's kids. So and then you know I'll tell you a funny story when I was about to go to the National High School Institute at Northwestern University, it was very expensive, it was five weeks here in Evanston [Illinois], the campus of Northwestern, you stayed in a dorm, you studied on a college level with students from all over the country, it was competitive to get there. I was accepted and then it wasn't enough money to, to pay for it and my mother [Louise Jones Burgen] you know felt that my father should pay for it, not my stepfather [Robert Burgen]. And so we were in a quandary as to how I was gonna do this 'cause I didn't have at that time, they didn't have any scholarships. So my--I know my daddy wanted me to go to this thing, he really wanted me to go this thing (laughter) so and he wanted me to go in style. So as fate would have it, he hit the number. And so he, he called--no actually I was with him when the numbers came out that day and he hit the number and he said we're going to Saks Fifth Avenue shopping and then we're going to get you packed and we're going to drive you to Evanston in the Cadillac. And so off we went and we went shopping and all new clothes, everything pretty and he drove me to the dorm in Evanston and he paid for my tuition and room and board for the National High School Institute. So that's, that's why because for the big, the big flourishes, the big moments, he's the man. You know the day-to-day, the harder stuff of course is my mom you know and that's always you know that role always gets you know the mumble grumble, but for example when we were quite young my grandmother [Waddy Nicholas] had very close friends in New York [New York] and my father would take my brother [Otto Nicholas, Jr.] and me to New York and when he would dress us and buy beautiful things and we'd go to New York so he took me all around New York when I was only a little tiny person. So I mean I was--he would take us to restaurants, places that he wanted us to feel comfortable in, places that--where black people rarely even went in those days. I remember how he would fold money in the palm of his hand to--and shake the maitre d's hand and this money would slide off and we would, we would be well taken care of even if there were white people sitting in a restaurant staring at us because we were the only black people in there, but he, he so wanted us to be people of the world. He wanted us to be comfortable. He wanted us to know New York. He wanted us to feel as if we belong there, as if we owned it so he took us to shows, he took us to see the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters], he took us to see singers when we were young and he would always take us backstage so we could meet people. So that's why you know he was--that's the person he was. Story_ID: 466101 Speaker 1: Now how much did you grow up learn- knowing about the numbers? And what would you hear about the numbers, because the numbers permeated the black community (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Well it was a constant you know and he [Nicholas' father, Otto Nicholas, Sr.] did, as I wrote in the book ['Freshwater Road,' Denise Nicholas] he did keep numbers in his head. He would take bets and keep those numbers and bets in his head and he would come back to my grandmother's [Waddy Nicholas] house and write his slips, policy slips all from memory and you know, I was--he had friends who were higher up in the numbers racket than he was. People that we knew, that we were around as children so. Speaker 1: Do you know who the head numbers people were in Detroit [Michigan] at the time? Speaker 2: I don't know their names, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 466102 Speaker 1: Tell me about the politics. You know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was--what were you hearing? What was going on? What were people discussing that you became interested in, in politics? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, I think coming from the kind of background that I come from where you have this person who's a street, basically a street, a very sophisticated street person, his [Nicholas' father, Otto Nicholas, Sr.] take coming out of his life experience for example, him being involved in the race riot in Detroit [Michigan] in the 1940s, his--he's very Afrocentric, very Afrocentric. So without quoting books, he's teaching any way you know. I knew who Duke Ellington was when I was a little girl. I heard and listened to Count Basie and heard him mention things like Paul Robeson and things like that so that's his kind of social political take on life which is just a natural, a natural thing for him. When my mother [Louise Jones Burgen] remarried, my stepfather [Robert Burgen] is the more intellectual, his family, more educated and intellectual stream of that and his people in his family were then a part of my life too. For example, he had a cousin who at that time was a professor at the University of Puerto Rico in Rio Piedras [University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico] so we went to visit him in Puerto Rico when I was in high school [Milan High School, Milan, Michigan] and this was at the time of Castro [Fidel Castro] and Cuba. So he gave me books to read too. Now these are, these, this begins the real academic political part of my development because 'Cuba Si, Yankee No' [sic. 'Listen, Yankee,' C. Wright Mills] was a book he put in my hand. I was a young woman--I mean a young girl, I was in high school, just high school. He then went on to the University of Ghana of the Coast [University College of the Gold Coast; University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana] so I had these, these little influences that were coming through high school time and then once I got to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], some of that started to, to coalesce into making me the person that I was eventually going to be and I started taking political sciences classes. I started hearing about what was going on in the Civil Rights Movement in the South. Speakers were coming to campus constantly. I was involved in the campus NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] with one of my roommates at Ann Arbor [Michigan], Martha Prescott [Martha Prescott Norman], we did a tutor--tutoring program for the black kids in the Ann Arbor school system [Ann Arbor Public Schools], so these things started to pick up pace. By the time I met Gil Moses [Gilbert Moses], who I married, I was right, right on the brink of developing into a person who is most interested in art and politics. Story_ID: 466103 Speaker 1: How did you end up going to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]? Was it this aunt that or-- Speaker 2: Well you know it's a state school and so I applied and then my-- Speaker 1: But what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) SAT scores--I wanted to go to University of Michigan. I had a scholarship to Albion College [Albion, Michigan], which I did not accept because I preferred to go to Ann Arbor [Michigan]. To me Ann Arbor was the place and it was the school with the grand, great reputation and so I wanted to go there and I was accepted. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember how many black students were there at the time? Speaker 2: Not many (laughter). There were, god let's see, there were thirty thousand students or in the area of that and maybe, maybe three hundred black students and not including football guys, sports guys. Speaker 1: And so who--do you--were there any people you befriended that first year you know that you know would be worthy of mentioning? Speaker 2: I--Martha Prescott [Martha Prescott Norman] who I mentioned, who was from Detroit [Michigan] originally from Providence, Rhode Island, we were roommates, not my first semester, but second I think, we are still close friends to this day. My--one of my other roommates who's Jewish, Avis [ph.], who is from Chicago [Illinois], who now lives in New York [New York], we are still very close friends to this day. So those are the two people from my Ann Arbor experience who I have maintained a sustained--friendships with over the years. There are other people, but these were the close, these are real close people to me. Speaker 1: Now Gilbert Moses, how did you meet him? Speaker 2: I met Gilbert on a break from school. I went to New York. I took some time off from study and I think I went on--I think that was a spring break, I'm not sure. I dropped out of school. I went to summer school I was moving very fast. The first year, freshmen year, I went to summer school that summer and then by--into the fall of my sophomore year I was running out of steam. So I dropped out of school for a while. I went to New York took an apartment with two other students-- Speaker 1: Now well how did that happen? I mean the New York and I mean you're just like I went to New York (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well you know I already--daddy [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] had already taken me to New York any number of times so I mean going back to New York was like the mecca, you know I wanted to be in New York because New York was the place to be and so I thought I would just go there and work for a bit and then come back to school. I just wanted to live in the city and live that, that life. So that's what I did. I worked at J. Walter Thompson advertising agency [New York, New York]. Don't ask me how but I did. And actually in the international department because I was taking a lot of Spanish at the University of Michigan and actually Spanish was my minor for about two minutes and thirty five seconds. So when I went to J. Walter Thompson looking for a job. I could speak Spanish fairly fluently and they hired me and so I stayed there for, what, not--I don't even think it was a full year. Story_ID: 466104 Speaker 1: But I went to a party in my neighborhood I was in and I had an apartment on 82nd Street near West End Avenue [New York, New York] and I went to a party and I met Gil Moses [Gilbert Moses] who was playing his guitar and talking about touring theater and talking about Mississippi. And that's when I first really heard what was, you know a plan, a something about Mississippi. And I've been hearing things. People, speakers coming to campus [of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. I was aware but I was entranced because here was this black guy who had gone to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] who had gone had studied at the Sorbonne [University of Paris, Paris, France], who had worked in touring theater in France and he was so smart, so smart and he was from Cleveland [Ohio] and I, I was like, oh my dear this is like of course he, he wanted to know if I had seen the movie 'Black Orpheus' and I had not seen it. He was way more sophisticated than I was so of course I ran back to Ann Arbor [Michigan] and hurried up to see 'Black Orpheus' (laughter). So he was always calling me (unclear) (laughter), oh it was just so silly. But what's beautiful about it is that black, young black people were seeing each other this way. That we were, we were, we were romanticizing each other in a way that we barely even do now. So that was beautiful and of course he could sing, he had a beautiful singing voice, he was, he was a poet, a writer and I fell in love so, I think I fell in love with his, with this romantic notion you know of, of this, it was almost like a movie to me. That was, that was how it happened. Speaker 2: Now tell a little bit, I mean you said that--how much older was he then you? Let me ask (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just two years. Speaker 2: Just two so he was-- Speaker 1: Two years. Speaker 2: --twenty really? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was twenty, you were eighteen. Speaker 1: Um-hm, about eighteen I think, yeah um-hm. Speaker 2: And he had already spent time at the Sorbonne-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and you know had he--he had graduated Oberlin or not? Speaker 1: I don't think he graduated Oberlin, I think he went to the Sorbonne and I think he worked at least a summer with Jean Vilar and the touring theater in France and that's where the Free Southern Theater concept actually came from. Speaker 2: Now nothing about your background to this point had been in theater. Do I take it? Speaker 1: (Shakes head). Speaker 2: Okay that's what I wanna understand, nothing? Speaker 1: Nothing. Story_ID: 466105 Speaker 1: What were you thinking that you were gonna major in at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was in a period of transition because my, my first predisposition was to major in political science with a minor in Spanish. And I was taking history. I was taking political science, near eastern studies, history of the Middle East. I was doing a lot of pretty intellectual academic stuff, but at the same time I started feeling that something was missing. I wasn't doing what, what I felt really passionate about. I started taking art history, some art history classes and that opened up something else in me. Then in the Spanish department, they were going to do a play in Spanish and I read for the play because my professors said I was moving fairly quickly in Spanish and so I got the part and the play was going to be done in Spanish and that was before, just before I met Gil [Gilbert Moses]. So I did the play 'La barca sin pescador' by Alejandro Casona and I loved it. I also did a play in high school [Milan High School, Milan, Michigan], the junior class play and I enjoyed it. So but even when I met, when I met Gilbert and he, and he talks about the Free Southern Theater and I thought, oh god this sounds like, this sounds like something so incredible. I wasn't sure of all that it was but something about it attracted me. My plan was not to go there and be an actor. My plan was to read--critique--read scripts and do critiques to help in the theater office. That was my plan. It wasn't to, to act on stage. Speaker 1: What did he tell you he wanted--what did he say about the theater and all? Speaker 2: He was so passionate about the theater. He was a theater man. He was at Karamu playhouse [Karamu House] in Cleveland [Ohio] and had been there since he was a little boy so his love of the theater was all over him and he transmitted that and you picked that up from him. He was a theater animal and his, his passion for it and his, his, his love of it was all--I mean you just, you just got into it because he sold it that way I mean it was just all over him. Speaker 1: But what was he saying he wanted the theater to do? Speaker 2: He wanted the theater to, he wanted to do what Jean Vilar evidently had done in France and that is take the theater to the people. He wanted to do a theater in, in the rural South and expose people, particularly black people who had never see theater before because he believed that the experience of theater is a life altering experience. He believed that. So that's what he set out, he and then eventually with John O'Neal that's what they set out to build in the South. Story_ID: 466106 Speaker 1: So you get married-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You, you meet and within what time period are you married? Speaker 2: I think it was six or seven months later, eight months. Speaker 1: Now what are your parents [Louise Jones Burgen and Otto Nicholas, Sr.] saying about this? Speaker 2: They just about rattled the fillings in their teeth I think (laughter). They were just horrified, horrified. Well they met Gilbert [Gilbert Moses]. Here to them he was like a beatnik. I mean he was--he had on jeans and sandals and I mean this is not--this was not in the master plan. This was--you were supposed to finish school, marry some nice--by then I'm firmly black middle class so I'm supposed to marry a doctor or a lawyer and here I come with this afro wearing, blue jeans, denim shirt, going to Mississippi man where my father almost had a heart attack. My mother was speechless because they had been you know moving my track to the place that they wanted it to be and here she comes. So (laughter) they were not happy. They were not happy at all. And the thought that I was gonna go to Mississippi and work with him in this theater [Free Southern Theater] just, it was, it was horrible. Speaker 1: So where did the wedding occur? Speaker 2: The American Place Theatre in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Were they there? Speaker 2: No, no just friends, theater people. His friends mostly and actually it was an African dance troupe that was performing and I cannot for the life of me remember the name of the troupe performing at American Place Theatre at that time and they danced down the aisle of our wedding. It was incredible. It was so beau- it was small, but it was so, so beautiful. So. Speaker 1: So once you got married, how long were you in New York before you went south? Speaker 2: I think just, let's see, it couldn't have been more than a month or so. I can't remember for sure, somewhere about a month. Story_ID: 466107 Speaker 1: So now you move to New Orleans [Louisiana], is that the first pla- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We moved to Jackson, Mississippi. Well actually Gilbert [Gilbert Moses] and John O'Neal and others who were setting the theater up were there first and then I came down to Jackson. Speaker 1: Okay and why was Jackson chosen? Speaker 2: Well it was the, the seat for the Mississippi Freedom Summer was based COFO it was called, Counsel of Federated Organizations, was based in Jackson and we wanted to--and we would be working very closely with COFO in terms of our tour of Mississippi. We would only tour the towns where there was a voter registration project ongoing so that was, that was why. And plus Mississippi was the thing, Mississippi was the, the wall to get over you know so they wanted to plunk the theater right in the middle of the--right in the thick of things and that's what we tried to do that for a summer, 1964. Speaker 1: And in 1964 so who are you meeting when you move down there 'cause? Speaker 2: I met let's see that first summer Peyton [ph.] the painter, Mary Lovelace O'Neal, who's a brilliant artist who is now ahead of the art department at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. She eventually was married to--married John O'Neal who was a co-founder of the Free Southern Theater, she's from Jackson. Let's see, the other volunteers who came to Mississippi for the Free Southern--now they were volunteers of course coming in to Mississippi that summer for Freedom Summer and what Gilbert and John did was in a concert with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and with COFO was to try and weed out a few people who were interested in theater as well as politics and then talk to them about being with the Free Southern Theater and that's how we got that first small group together for the first tour. Speaker 1: So let's talk about who the first group was? Speaker 2: Oh god, now you would ask me that (laughter), okay. There was let's see Stu House who's from Detroit [Michigan]. I think Eric Weinberger. Let's see who else was in there John, Gilbert and myself. There were two--there's a woman who since died and I can't think of her name. She was in that first group. There were only I think six, six or seven of us that first summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We did a little bit of fundraising in New York [New York]. The fundraising committee was Carol Feinman, [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, Brock Peters. It was, it was amazing, it was amazing. They had a fundraising party at the Village Gate [New York, New York]. We went and then we went back to Mississippi with our little money. We got a very small Rockefeller Foundation grant to mount the first production. Speaker 1: Now what was John--how did John O'Neal and Gil meet? Speaker 2: Now that I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But John was from University of Illinois [sic. Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and I think he was a philosophy major and I don't know I think they met in context of SNCC because I think John was a SNCC person originally. Now there was another party involved in that very beginning of Free Southern Theater, Doris Derby because the theater actually started at Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] and then we moved into the city. And I can't remember our first rehearsals might well have been on Tougaloo. And our first play was 'In White America,' that's what we did the first summer by Martin Duberman. Speaker 1: Now but--who was it Gil and John that were the key heads at the beginning? I just want to get that clear. Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yes absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now, but you don't know how the met? Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: Okay, now when, when so you moved down and what is--how did you go from working in office, you know going to actually acting, how did that even come about? Was it because it was a need you know? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Here we need--can you try it? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a need. I think there was an actress, black actress who was supposed to come that summer who didn't show up. You know how everything was helter skelter all around crazy that first summer and remember that also was the time that Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], Chaney [James Chaney] and Goodman [Andrew Goodman] went missing, we're talking June of '64 [1964], the end of June and it was rough. Things were very scary in Mississippi. So a person didn't show up and they asked me, Gilbert asked me if I, if I would do it and I said well I've only you know I did a play in the romance languages department at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in a high school play [at Milan High School, Milan, Michigan]. I don't know if I can do it. I was, I was scared and they read--they worked with me. Gilbert worked with me and got me up to speed and I--that was the beginning (laughter). That was the beginning. Story_ID: 466108 Speaker 1: Let's talk about that, that first play and, 'In White America' [Martin Duberman] and let's talk about the theater you know some of the things we were talking off camera about (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it just--we were-- Speaker 1: You arrived in, to--you arrived in Jackson [Mississippi] what month? Speaker 2: June of 1964. Speaker 1: And so you got married in April? Speaker 2: I guess it was April or May. It was close in there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. I'm sorry, May of 1964. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was May. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so what do you--I mean whose there? Who are you meeting-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know? What is, where are you based out of, that's the type of things I'd like to know. Speaker 2: We were based in Jackson at the beginning and and the theater was really structured at Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi]. Doris Derby, Gilbert Moses and John O'Neal were the three organizational people. I am trying to remember where we did our first rehearsals around Jackson, it might well have been at Tougaloo, I don't recall, but we got going because the actress Madeleine Sherwood, white actress from the theater and film world, came down there to Mississippi. She had been on the New York [New York] fundraising committee and she came to Jackson and she told us to stop sitting around talking about doing the theater and get on with doing a play. It was quite amazing, this little white lady. And so that was the final kind of push, a little moti- motivational force that pushed us on to selecting Martin Duberman's play because it was small, it required just six actors, a guitar player. We could mount it quickly. We could travel easily with it around the State of Mississippi. The plan was always to go to those towns where there was a voter registration project. So I think the first summer we went to seventeen towns. We had a station wagon and I think we--I don't even think we had a truck that first summer. We eventually did have a small truck for props and sets and costumes. We had a station wagon and I think a car. I think was just two vehicles traveling around this place that was so violent and so scary at that time. It was incredible but I didn't--I don't have it with me and I'll, I'll get it to you the tour schedule for that first time, I do have it at home. There was a book ['The Free Southern Theater by The Free Southern Theater,' Thomas C. Dent, Richard Schechner and Gilbert Moses] done by Bobbs-Merrill [Bobbs-Merrill Company] on the Free Southern Theater and some of the tours are in that book. It's really quite--and some photographs as well, it's quite wonderful. So that was, that was the beginning. Speaker 1: So is 'White America' what you performed through those seventeen towns? Speaker 2: Yes. We just did the one play. Speaker 1: The one play? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And talk about the play. Speaker 2: The play is excerpts from other things, other pieces of theater that have to do with black history in America--American history, black people in American history. So I don't know if I can remember the pieces. There's a piece in there from Little Rock [Arkansas], the girl--one of the girls who went to a high school and the day she went to school which was a piece that I did. There was a piece by Frederick Law Olmsted. There was, let's see who else was included? Excerpts from names that you would recognize, speeches that were dramatized. There was, there was some music in there as well. So now we performed, because there were no theaters. We performed only in churches and this is where Council of Federated Organization [COFO], the rest of the Civil Rights Movement worked in conjunction with us to help us set up our performance places. Our public relations in the individual towns, all the--you know the contact people, calling ahead. All the things that would help us have a successful tour; all were coordinated with the Council of Federated Organizations-- Speaker 1: So what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] basically. Story_ID: 466109 Speaker 1: So when you came into a town where were you--how many performances were you having? How did you work with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] you know on the other--voter registration drives? I mean I'm just trying to understand how it worked (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Well you know all the--all those towns that we went to, let's just use those seventeen. All those towns had a voter registration project in you know in progress with, with SNCC being fully represented. So we were a part of that and that's the way, that's the way it was structured at the beginning. There was some ill temper about that because there were people at SNCC, there were people there to do voter registration work who did not think that the theater was an appropriate avenue of expression to to be bothered with that summer because they thought the work that the other work was more important. But Gil [Gilbert Moses] and John [John O'Neal], who were also deeply political convinced them that the theater was a, a vital part of the awake- it could be a vital part of the awakening of, of Mississippi, that it would provoke, depending on the play that you did and where you did it, it could be so provocative in terms of discussion, in terms of thinking, in terms of helping people to redefine themselves. So that was, that was the push and pull, that was a part of what was going on. And the other part that we were talking about earlier the other push and pull had to do with whether this theater [Free Southern Theater] was going to be a traditional theater that was just on the road and performing in churches or whether this theater was going to do something that in a sense and had not really ever been done before, and we didn't quite know what that was and at different points in times we experimented with that. For example in Bogalusa [Louisiana] and Jonesboro, Louisiana, rather than doing set pieces, plays we did improvisational pieces based on what was going on in that particular town at the time and it was incredible. Gil Moses and John put these pieces together in Bogalusa I think it was, it was a great fight struggle going on with Crown Zellerbach company [Crown Zellerbach Corporation] and black employees and, and unions and all these things. Plus the voter registration work and the Deacons for Defense and Justice. So they put together an improvisational piece using some of the people from the town. I think if, if my memory serves me one of the things they were trying to show in that piece and we used masks that were made of brown paper bags was that power structure in that town from, from the people who ran that company to the sheriffs, to the Klans [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], to the White Citizens' Council, all were the same people and so we did improvised pieces and it was, it was wonderful, it was wonderful. In another town in the community center I think we were in Holmes County, Mississippi, the community center had been burned down by the, by the Klan and in that--on this one road where we and we all stayed in homes of people in the community for the whole summer every town and this place some builders and contractors had come, white kids, young people from California had come to rebuild this community center and that's the community center that we were going to perform in, except they hadn't gotten quite far enough along, it wasn't finished. So when we got there the framing was up but the roof, it was still open to the sky and we performed 'In White America' [Martin Duberman] in that open space with two cars of local people parked on each end of the road with shotguns to keep the Klan from coming through while we were performing and shooting at us or again trying to burn down the community center. That night those townspeople sat on their front porches so that we could sleep guarding us with shotguns. I'll never, I'll never forget it as long as I live. Shotguns across their laps on the front porches so that we could eat dinner and go to sleep. So it was like that. It was like that more often than not in all the towns we went to. Speaker 1: So did you wonder what you had gotten yourself involved with or were you taken with the power that you were having on the audience? Speaker 2: I think it was sometimes both. I think there, there were a couple of times where I was so sick with fear I passed out. The fear was tangible you know. It was, it wasn't butterflies, it was hor- it was terror because you just didn't know where it was coming from, what was gonna happen next. In McComb, Mississippi, somebody threw a bomb at the stage while I was on it and you know that was the end of, of that show. But we knew we were followed, we were harassed but I've been telling kids in high schools and in places I visited with my book ['Freshwater Road,' Denise Nicholas] that because we were all in it together, there was a certain courage that or a certain confrontation with your own fear that was helped because you weren't standing there alone. You knew that everybody was in the same boat. So you, you dealt with it, you dealt with your fear every single day. And at any point, you have the freedom to get on the train or the bus and get out of there. You had, you had the right and you had the freedom to go. You were there purely because you wanted to be there. No one was forcing you to be there. Story_ID: 466110 Speaker 1: Now does one incident or town stand out experience wise? I mean you talked about you know the-- Speaker 2: Community center [in Holmes County, Mississippi] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the community center. Speaker 2: It was, I think for me one that I always remember and relate to was in Ruleville, Mississippi, we were--this is the second tour or maybe the third, anyway we were doing 'Waiting for Godot' [Samuel Beckett], Beckett's play, and Fannie Lou Hamer was the you know the lead person in that town so I met her and I stayed in her home and slept on the floor, because the house had been shot into but we didn't know what that play was going to mean to people. It was a big argument in the theater [Free Southern Theater] in terms of doing that play or not doing that play because it's, everybody says it's so intellectual, it's so difficult, ya da, ya da. So we did this play. We had James Cromwell who became a big famous Hollywood actor, he came down from Carnegie [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. We had by that point Murray Levy from New York [New York], John O'Neal was in it and Gil [Gilbert Moses] was in it. So I was working stage manager I think on that production and we did the play in Ruleville, I think in a church and Fannie Lou Hamer was in the audience and the audience was kind of struck dumb by the play (laughter) but you know what so were we, so we were all kind of sitting there, oh god what are we gonna talk about. And-- Speaker 1: You said they were struck? Speaker 2: Well, we were all kind of, you know I mean even people, we were--I was in the audience you know backstage and I never, I mean the play always gave me problems of course. It's supposed to give me problems but Fannie Lou Hamer stood up in the church and she said, she led the discussion. She said, "Well, I guess we know something about waiting don't we?" Everybody said yes ma'am, yes we do. And then from there opened up the discussion because in the play a character has a rope around the neck of one other character and then we started talking about slavery, we started talking about the incident, the rope being not only around the neck of the person who is the slave but in the hand of the enslaver is also, is also a kind of prison. So we, we talked, we had this incredible discussion with people who barely had a sixth grade education. So it flew in the face of everything, of every assumption that people have about people not having a formal education which was what Gilbert knew was going to happen anyway. He knew from the beginning that the theater, the images, the language, the physicality of it would open doors in people's minds that they didn't necessarily need to read a lot of books to get to. They didn't have to. They could go into that room without being college educated if, if it's presented in a way that they emotionally and spiritually can tie, can tie into, which they did over and over and over again. Story_ID: 466111 Speaker 1: So now what did you learn about yourself in the process? Speaker 2: That I was Chicken Little (laughter), no that I was terrified a lot of the time. I don't know. I'm not so sure that I was, I don't mean to be silly, I was afraid a lot of the time, a lot of the time and I think you, you constantly questioned whether everybody else's fear was as great as yours so that was, that was one thing that was ongoing. I love--I began to love theater. I began to love performing and the idea--and the whole concept of, at that theater [Free Southern Theater] of doing everything, doing the PR [public relations], doing the sets, costumes, working in a group experience. I loved it. It began to bring me out in terms of having a--developing a personality because there was no way you could go off in a corner and read and be quiet and hide. You had to deal, you had to deal with everybody because we were living in a close quarters and working constantly together. You had to become a group person, which was good for me. I needed that. And I think everybody had the same experience. More importantly I think for me, I fell in love with Mississippi and with the people there. And I think the, when I started writing 'Freshwater Road' [Denise Nicholas] the reason the terrain felt so comfortable to me even though I had to go back and do the research and all of that, it felt like home to me when I started working on this book and I knew that my, my love of the place also took into account the history of the place, that it was a bloody history and a brutal history and I had as a consequence of that a vested interest in the place. I felt like it was mine too because so much blood had been spilled there. So many black people have died in that place and so much suffering and pain has gone on there. I felt a part of it. I felt this is me too. This is my history. These are my people so I feel every time I go to Mississippi, I feel like it's a kind of homecoming. It ties me to who we are as a people in, in a most primal way imaginable. Story_ID: 466112 Speaker 1: Now your father [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] you said came down. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he think of the circumstances, the performance you know, your marriage to Gil [Gilbert Moses], I mean all those things? Speaker 2: (Laughter) He eventually forgave me that, but when we moved the theater to New Orleans [Louisiana] at the end of the first summer, we had been threatened, harassed. Our members had been, not been arrested but taken down to police headquarters in Jackson [Mississippi]. Gilbert and John [John O'Neal] and then eventually Tom Dent [Thomas C. Dent] and Richard Schechner out of New Orleans decided that it would be better to try and run this theater from New Orleans so we could live like human beings and not be afraid all the time and tour back into Mississippi. It would be a little freer environment to work in so we moved the theater to New Orleans at the end of the summer, 1964. And I forgot the question. Speaker 1: Well I was asking about your father coming. Speaker 2: Daddy came to New Orleans. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He came to New Orleans. He did not tell me he was coming and I think it was the, it was the fall of '64 [1964] or just into '65 [1965] and I don't know where we were, I think we were at rehearsal or something. We had, we had an apartment building in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana] on Burgundy Street and I think we had three apartments in the building for Free Southern Theater people and I had been somewhere and I was coming back to the apartment and one of my co-actors, Murray Levy, who had heard me talk about my father, knew that my dad was there. He had let him into the apartment but I didn't know and when I got to the door, Murray said, "Somebody's upstairs in your apartment." And I thought, oh who and he said, "I don't know. I don't know, you better go." So I went up the stairs, I went running up the stairs and I opened the door and there was my dad (laughter). He was standing there looking very Detroit [Michigan] slick, dressed to the nines and he and he just--it was incredible, it was just wonderful and he went--we went to dinner, we took him to dinner at some--we found an integrated restaurant so we could take him to dinner and, and then he stayed, he stayed two days and then he went back to Detroit. Speaker 1: Now how did he and Gil get along then? Speaker 2: They were fine, my father-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --could get along with most anybody really. He was very much a man of the world, he didn't have any trouble. Speaker 1: Now were you at this time also--one name that I haven't heard you mention was [HistoryMaker] Bernice Johnson Reagon was she, because was she down there around this same time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, was there any collaboration between you know her, her singers [Freedom Singers] and the Free-- Speaker 2: Free Southern Theater? You know I think there was and I think it might have been at the point when I was leaving to go to New York [New York], but yes, I know Bernice. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely. Story_ID: 466113 Speaker 1: Now New Orleans [Louisiana] also is a different place-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) then what--in fact what strikes me is that even though you said you know, I said, well you went off to New York [New York], you know you had really never been south you know and then New Orleans is a you know--I mean that's another culture. Sometimes I think it reminds me sort of European. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's just different there. Speaker 2: Yeah it is. Speaker 1: So how were you adjusting to all of this? Speaker 2: Well I fell madly in love with New Orleans. There's no doubt about it even though you know there were plenty of issues, racial issues there that were deep and long and historical. It was not this free place that people liked to assume it was. At the time it was, it was difficult you know. I mean they had pockets of of things that were a little more progressive at least in terms of personal and intimate relationships and some housing issues where people lived in the city neighborhoods. But there was a lot of racism in Louisiana and a lot in New Orleans too, but I fell in love with it and I guess it was the culture, the differences of culture of the, the accent of the people, the sound of their voices, the music in their voices, the way they spoke just drove me wild. I loved it. I fell in love it immediately. So I you know I lived in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana]. I lived right around the corner from Tennessee Williams' house where he lived in New Orleans. I was in heaven. (Laughter) It was like I've arrived. This is where I wanna be and the food was incredible. I started--we started to meet local people and I just I like river towns you know and it's the river, there's the river, there's the Mississippi [Mississippi River]. I just felt, I felt very at home in New Orleans, very much so. Story_ID: 466114 Speaker 1: Now what happens with your marriage? You and Gil [Gilbert Moses], is it just because it came together so quickly as a--you know you really were too young, I mean? Speaker 2: I think that. I think all of that. I also think that my flaw as a woman in terms of selecting men or finding men to be with is this and it's taken me years to figure this out. I'm such a workaholic myself. I'm a career woman. I have always been and that's who I am. I am attracted to people through, through the doorway of their work. I don't think that people are different from the work that they do and of course we all are and that that always surprises me, it surprises me to find out that I don't really know a person, I know their work. I love their work. I don't know the person at all. I have blinders that way and my marriages are completely and utterly just like that, that I have fallen in love with the creativity of a person without any knowledge of who, who the person really is. It's a dreamy kind of way of being in the world and it doesn't really work (laughter). So but yes that was the case with Gilbert. Speaker 1: So you, he goes back to New York [New York] and you stay? Speaker 2: I stayed, I think he went, I think he came to Chicago [Illinois] for a bit and then eventually he didn't come back to Free Southern Theater and then I went to New York and started my career. Speaker 1: Okay. So Free Southern Theater stayed in, in New Orleans [Louisiana] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 466115 Speaker 1: What is the time period for Free Southern Theater? Would you say, you know having started in 1964 and then you know what is when we look at the height of the theater? Speaker 2: Well I think the height of it was '65 [1965], '66 [1966] you know and, and maybe '67 [1967]. I was gone by '67 [1967]. I left in September of 1966 to go to New York [New York], but they kept the theater together and actually I think they were touring into the '70s [1970s]. I don't know I lost touch with them because I was so focused on what I had to do in New York. Speaker 1: Okay. But when you look at the theater, what do people consider seminal and very important about the work that was done during that period? Speaker 2: I think that we got--that we a small group of people, brought, created and built and brought theater to people who never seen theater before in Mississippi--in the rural South and I think that it--you used the expression guerilla theater and there was that feel about it as well. It was dangerous. It was oftentimes euphoric, the experiences, in Indianola, Mississippi, we performed 'In White America' [Martin Duberman] at a community center. We had a, a phone call from the White Citizens' Council via The Nation magazine and they said they wanted to come and see the performance. So twenty-five members of the White Citizens' Council came to the performance. We were in the theater, in the community center looking out the window, the townspeople, black people were coming and everybody was getting seated. We looked out the window and there was this caravan of cars, all with white men and stingy brim hats coming up the road, and they parked and they came in and they sat in the back of the performance area. They didn't say a word to anybody. We were terrified, terrified. We performed and we did a knockout performance of 'In White America' and then they were interviewed afterwards by The Nation magazine, and the piece that ran in the magazine basically said that their reason for coming was because they wanted to see if the Free Southern Theater was in fact Communist inspired and they had deduced after seeing the play that in fact (laughter) we were all a bunch of little Communists running around the South. It was so insane, so insane, but it was one of those moments where you're standing on the stage and you look out and the enemy, people who are just as soon see you dead are sitting there watching you perform. So we had these adrenaline pumping kinds of experiences all through the time that I was with the, with the theater. I mean just one after the other. Story_ID: 466116 Speaker 1: So now you, so you stayed there for a little bit (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Right? For how long? Speaker 2: For--I was there for basically two years. Speaker 1: Two years? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, no but you stayed, you were there for two years but you stayed--it said to focus on building a library and informations? Speaker 2: Oh that was in New Orleans [Louisiana] when we moved to the 9th Ward-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm, so '64 [1964], '65 [1965], '66 [1966] we moved out to the 9th Ward. We found a property out there that was for rent. I stayed and tried to--I did build a library for the 9th Ward children who were--who lived all around the theater at that time. Speaker 1: And then you said you spent a little time in Cleveland [Ohio], did you--'cause you were in 'Three Boards and a Passion'? Speaker 2: Oh that was on tour. That was a tour. Speaker 1: That was on tour. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: How do you know that you--what makes you go back to New York [New York]? You said you loved New Orleans but-- Speaker 2: I did, but I loved New York too. And I got, actually got a call from the actress Viveca Lindfors who had seen a CBS--CBS came down to, to look at the theater and do a special on a program they had called, 'Look Up and Live' that used to come on Sundays and they did a piece on the Free Southern Theater. Viveca Lindfors saw the piece on CBS, got in touch with me in New Orleans and wanted to know if I wanted to come to New York, was I ready to come to New York and start my career because she thought I was good. And she was putting together a piece called, her husband George Tabori was putting together a piece called 'Three Boards and a Passion,' and it required two older actors and two younger actors and she wanted me to be the younger actress in this piece. This piece was selections from classical theater. From Brecht [Bertolt Brecht] to Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and she was gonna tour--they were setting up a tour for her to go into the Midwest and back to New York, mostly colleges. So that was what brought me up to--she brought m- basically brought me to New York. Story_ID: 466117 Speaker 1: What did you say her name--who recruited you? Speaker 2: Viveca Lindfors, the Swedish actress who worked in movies in the '40s [1940s] and--the late '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] and then also was a theater actress. Speaker 1: What did she say she liked about you? Speaker 2: She said she liked my, she liked me on screen and that's all she'd ever seen of me was this CBS thing ['Look Up and Live'], but I, I don't remember that she said very much except that she wanted me on stage with her which was quite a compliment. Speaker 1: So this 'Three Boards and a Passion' [George Tabori] tours, it tours for how long? Speaker 2: That was I think a two month tour. We rehearsed in New York [New York]. It was Harris Yulin, Viveca Lindfors, Roscoe Orman who went on to 'Sesame Street' fame and myself, and we went, let's see I know we performed in Chicago [Illinois], we performed in Cleveland [Ohio], Detroit [Michigan], actually Cleveland because one of the pieces we did was, oh god now I can't remember it, oh dear you might know it, the European play ['Clutterbuck,' Benn Levy] where one character does not speak and I'm just having a senior moment, maybe I'll come back to it. Anyway, oh god, I'll come back to it. Okay. Speaker 1: French? Okay, sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], let's see, somewhere in Indiana, anyway it was really my first-- Speaker 1: Touring? Speaker 2: Well, my first professional acting job. And it was you know straight off the boat from Mississippi, so it was great, it was a great kind of introduction to New York because I was, I was employed. I was working with people who were, you know top the theater people, and so was somewhat protected for a, for a bit to kind of get my feet wet and get going in New York. It was a great, great experience to, to have it that way. Speaker 1: What did you learn from them though that? Speaker 2: Well I became friends with George Tabori, the playwright, and with Viveca and so they you know they were well connected in New York and very social, very European, elegant and I was invited to their home to parties and so forth so I met--I had kind of a, a nice-- Speaker 1: Charmed existence? Speaker 2: For a, for a while you know (laughter) until I ended up on the Lower East Side [New York, New York] in a dreadful apartment with the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] but it was great, it was great. You know I had some, some great experiences like that was a little gem of an experience. It wasn't very long. I think the whole thing I think we rehearsed for three weeks, toured for six weeks maybe. The whole thing might have been two and a half months, but it was my introduction to New York and when I got back into the city I was looking for work and just learning the ropes of auditions and you know I didn't have an agent or anything just kind of going around, and then I ended up with there was a play at the Martinique Theatre [New York, New York] called 'Viet Rock' [Megan Terry] against the Vietnam War and I--they needed replacements, so I went to audition and I got the job. So that carried me through the fall and it closed on New Year's Eve, 1967, New Year's Eve night 1966 going into '67 [1967], so again that was a great experience because it exposed me then to Joe Chaikin's Open Theater where I once started taking classes. So all these things began to be connected the people that I was meeting and and I wasn't--I wanted to do, I wanted to work with Joe Chaikin [Joseph Chaikin] in the Open Theater because I wanted to to put a little edginess in my work and I didn't just wanna do traditional theater which is maybe coming from the Free Southern Theater experience and I wanted to push up against, to push up against a little bit, so then I did some work at the Judson Poets' Theatre, some poetry readings. And by, by this point I'm taking classes, I'm taking dance classes, I'm taking acting classes and eventually--soon working with Kristin Linklater who was the premiere voice teacher in New York at that time. Story_ID: 466118 Speaker 1: How did you get introduced to Kristin Linklater? Speaker 2: Oh god, do I remember, how did I--I don't remember how I got introduced to her. I remember when I came out of Mississippi I had developed quite a little southern accent after the Louisiana and and Mississippi, so my voice was (laughter)--it was, it was too colored, not colored in the sense of race, but it had too much regionality to it, so I had to take classes to go back to the middle you know which really is not Midwest either, just to be without any accent so that when I went in to do an audition, I could you know pick and, and choose what color I wanted to put on it, but I was decidedly southern when I came up from the South. So Kristin eventually became the voice teacher for the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] but I worked with her before she started working with us at the Negro Ensemble Company and I--it must have been a contact and somebody told me to go to her, I don't remember. Speaker 1: So wait did you start going with her before you became associated with the Negro Ensemble Company? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simulations) Oh, okay, I see, okay, okay. That's unusual that someone would work with the whole company, I've not heard of that. Is that-- Speaker 2: Well she was the voice teacher for the professional company. Speaker 1: Oh, oh. Story_ID: 466119 Speaker 1: So tell me who was in the company, the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] when you came? Speaker 2: The--I was in the original company. Speaker 1: Oh, you were in the original (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh absolutely. I was one of the first of the original fifteen and we now, I hope I can remember all of the names. Rosalind Cash, Moses Gunn, Esther Rolle, myself, [HistoryMaker] Hattie Winston, Judyann Elder, Frances Foster, Clarice Taylor, Bill Jay [William Jay], Norman [Norman Bush], what's Norman's last name, can't remember, let's see I'm running out. Allie Woods, I'm missing some, anyway that's good, the better part of it. Michael Schultz [HistoryMaker Michael A. Schultz] was one of our directors, [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson was our dance teacher, Paul Mann was our acting teacher and Kristin [Kristin Linklater] was our voice teacher. Speaker 1: Now didn't [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee come into the company or was that later? Speaker 2: No, no, not while I was there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait a minute, now who else--wait okay. Speaker 2: It was [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks, [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward and Jerry Krone [Gerald Krone] were the adminis- three directors of the theater. Speaker 1: Okay. And then but later, would Sidney Poitier? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh, unh-uh. Speaker 1: No, no. Why am I drawing--okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) No. Speaker 1: So how did the ensemble company come into being, let me ask that? Speaker 2: Well that was the brain child of Robert Hooks, Douglas Turner Ward and admin- the administrator was Jerry Krone. It really was an off shoot of a workshop that, that Robert had in New York [New York] before the Negro Ensemble Company. That was the beginning. And from his workshop I guess he got out--now I'm gonna speculate just a little bit because I remember hearing these stories when I was there. He and Douglas Turner Ward were friends. Lonne Elder [Lonne Elder III] was in that original group too, but not as a, not as a founder, he was a playwright, he was associated with. So they decided to try to build, what I guess would be the closest description of the regional theater within the City of New York, and they got a huge Ford Foundation [New York, New York] grant to build a--to put this theater together and we were at the St. Mark's Playhouse [New York, New York] on 2nd Avenue and 8th Street [St. Mark's Place] the first year, well actually the first couple years. Speaker 1: So what was the purpose, what was the stated purpose of the theater? What did the theater wanna do? What, what space were you sort of creating for yourselves? Speaker 2: Well they wanted to build a fully professional, on par with the best, regional theater company, a company, a company that worked together over, over a period of time in training and in performance. And that's basically what they did. Speaker 1: So how, now let me see is it Lloyds--okay, and you were studying dance with Louis Johnson at the same time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me--oh yes, okay, now wasn't Frank Silvera, was he? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: No. God. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: This is--I'm doing, I'm going down all the wrong paths. Speaker 2: He was earlier and then he had gone to California I think by this time and he had a, he had a workshop in California. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: I never went there, but I heard about it. Speaker 1: Okay, I gotcha, okay. So when was the first performance, do you remember that? Speaker 2: Our first season was, the first play was 'Song of the Lusitanian Bogey' by Peter Weiss. Our second play was 'Kongi's Harvest' by Wole Soyinka, I think it was Wole Soyinka. Speaker 1: What about 'Summer of the Seventeenth Doll' [Ray Lawler]? Speaker 2: That was in the first season as well and then we did four plays, what was the last play we did that season? Speaker 1: 'Daddy Goodness'? Speaker 2: 'Daddy Goodness' by Richard Wright and Louis Sapin. Yeah I was in three plays that first year. No I wasn't in 'Summer of the Seventeenth Doll,' I was understudy, it was great. Speaker 1: Now tell me that 'cause this--was it truly an ensemble group? Speaker 2: Yes it was. Well it--and that was the point of having us study together as well as, it wasn't just about doing the plays it was about building an ensemble theater and that's why we worked with Louis and with Paul and with Kristin. The fifteen original members of the company also trained together so that when we broke out in our first production, we were so close, we were so knitted together as a company that we could, we could, you could, you could feel it from the stage that we were, we were in tune, we were molded together. Story_ID: 466120 Speaker 1: So what was your training consisting of? Can you talk about that a little bit? Speaker 2: We did dance. You know our dance instruction with Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Johnson] for example was not, you know we weren't trying to to join a dance company but it was movement for actors with some specific, for example in 'Kongi's Harvest' [Wole Soyinka], there was African dancing in the piece so we would, we would work specifically on that kind of dancing for in the rehearsal process for that play. Generally speaking we worked in dance classes in a more general way, dance and movement for actors and we--really to knit us together and to get strong and to have grace and agility and so forth. And the same with the, the voice work and it was scene work with Paul Mann, with us working together, working together, working together and then that segued into the first the rehearsals for the first piece and that 'Song of the Lusitanian Bogey' [Peter Weiss], which was about the Europeans in colonial- in colonialism in South Africa and in Mozambique and Angola, so it was a political piece. It was not traditional, I call mama on the couch plays, it wasn't that kind of a play, it was a play that had a lot of music, it had a lot of movement, it had mystery and it was very, very political, overtly political and it was kind of shocking but it--we got incredible reviews, just across the board. We hit, when we hit the ground, we were running at top speed in New York [New York]. It was great. It was absolutely great. So that's a great experience. Speaker 1: Now let me--so are each of you working day jobs or are you totally committed (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Once we were hired for the original company, we were paid actors. We worked. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Because there was you said there was this-- Speaker 2: There was a grant [from the Ford Foundation, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: --grant. Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay and this was, this is when they were funding things like this? Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So was the purpose to really try to diversify the arts you think or you--who had gone to get the grant? That's what I'm-- Speaker 2: Well, Jerry Krone [Gerald Krone], [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks and, and [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward, you know they were-- Speaker 1: And what had Douglas? How had they come to know each other? Do you know that, that history? Speaker 2: I know they'd all been around New York long before I ever got there. So you know Doug had done the play, written the play, 'Day of Absence,' and that had been done by PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] and I think it had been done in New York off-Broadway as well, so they were, they were New York, black New York theater people and they had a comaraderie and a knowledge of each other that was there long before I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I'm gonna ask another name and you're probably gonna say no, no, no either. But was [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards around at all? No (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) Not during that-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I think he got involved in the training program for the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] later. Speaker 1: Later. Okay. Speaker 2: Or if he was involved that first year and I can't remember. He was not involved with us the professional company at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So did all the plays get well reviewed in that season? Speaker 2: That first season, yes. Speaker 1: That first season okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you were performing out of St. Mark's Playhouse [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes, that's where we were. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you--was that your rehearsal space and your performance space as well-- Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. With, just--okay so what about 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men'? Can we talk about that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause this--And who is writing all these plays? Speaker 2: Now these were all different writers, but 'Ceremonies' is Lonne Elder [Lonne Elder III]. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: Right. 'Song of the Lusitanian Bogey' was I went through it was Peter Weiss. I forgot--Lawler [Ray Lawler] was the 'Summer of the Seventeenth Doll,' I can't remember, 'Kongi's Harvest' was I think it was, I think it was based upon Wole Soyinka, I'm not, not exactly sure. We can check that. What was the other one? Speaker 1: 'Daddy Goodness.' Speaker 2: 'Daddy Goodness' was Richard Wright and Louis Sapin. Story_ID: 466121 Speaker 1: So now let's talk about 'Ceremonies' ['Ceremonies in Dark Old Men,' Lonne Elder III] though and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we didn't do 'Ceremonies' that first season. Speaker 1: No, you did it the second season. Speaker 2: And I was gone. Speaker 1: You were gone? Speaker 2: I was gone to California to do 'Room 222' (laughter), the pilot. Yes. See the pilot came up for 'Room 222,' the casting, 20th Century Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Television] in New York [New York] came to the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]-- Speaker 1: To scout? Speaker 2: To scout and they selected, there were two actresses in the company among hundreds of actors all over the country where they were--we were called in to audition in New York first. A few of us were then selected to be taken to California for first round, first round of screen tests. I was one of those. Then there was a second round of screen tests, and I was selected for the second round of screen tests, and it was getting down to almost me and maybe one or two other people. So at that point I was called in by the artistic director of the Negro Ensemble Company and I was told that if I pursued the television job, and I hadn't gotten the job yet but I was on track, I would not be welcomed back to the Negro Ensemble Company because they were trying to build an ensemble theater and they couldn't have people running off to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] to do television and then coming back. My thought was, and I discussed it with a few people involved in theater, if the schedules work, why not allow people to do it? Because it only brings more power you know to the theater but it was--they saw it as being it would be too divisive that it would be too difficult for one person to be that kind of you know television celebrity type and the others not have that, so they let me go and I did not know if I was gonna get 'Room 222' but in order to sign, in order to go forward with the second screen test, I had to sign a contract for 'Room 222,' so if I signed the contract, I was not gonna be welcomed back to the Negro Ensemble Company. So I signed the contract. Speaker 1: Now was there any back and forth on your part? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And who were you sort of confiding in and talking to? Speaker 2: Rosalind Cash was one of my close friends there. By that point I was dating [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks and I talked to him a lot about it because he was already doing television and theater and he was able to but he was still based in New York, it wasn't like he was having to go back and forth across country. Speaker 1: But wasn't he still--administrative part of a company? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: So he--was there a tussle though, I mean he didn't try to intercede on your behalf to say that-- Speaker 2: Well I think he did. I think he did. But Doug [Historymaker Douglas Turner Ward], you know Doug was the artistic director and he had final, final authority. So when I went back to California to do the second screen test for 'Room 222' everything was riding on it because I no longer had the theater. So-- Speaker 1: Now who replaced you in the ensemble? Speaker 2: Let's see, I really don't remember. I was so upset, I think I just blacked it out of my mind for about ten years (laughter). So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I can understand that because here you have this you know rave review. You're in this-- Speaker 2: Oh we were doing great. Speaker 1: You were in this unique space-- Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: --really where not many actors have an opportunity to be pay- you know to work and be paid-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, and ensembles are, you know they become like family. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 466122 Speaker 1: Do you know who you're competing with at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By that time when it's down to two or three people, I don't really know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know that my first screen test was with Billy Dee Williams and I knew Billy Dee--I didn't know him well, but I kind of had met him in New York [New York] and he didn't get the part so the second time I tested it was just me. There was no co-actor and it was what's called a personality test and you just stand and look in the camera and at that--the producer director was Gene Reynolds and he just stands by the camera and asks you questions and you just start talking, and I think they were really judging your ability to sell the show. Because I already had done the acting part of it and they liked that part. But could I carry it off, the promotional tours, the talk shows, the press, the PR [public relations], the marketing side of it and that's what that test was for. And I started talking and they had to, they had to get the man with the hook to get me out of there (laughter) because everything was you know it was, it was a do or die situation now that you know. So-- Speaker 1: So did you know much about the show you were going into? I mean-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't even have a television in New York. I didn't have a television. I lived in a mouse infested, roach infested two bedroom apartment on the Lower East Side [New York, New York]. This is when I was with the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] with a bathtub in the kitchen. And I was tired of that. There's no doubt about it. I wanted out of that. And but I loved the work that we were doing at the Negro Ensemble Company. But it was, it was time for me to move on. It was time. Speaker 1: So you go, you go--because theater is so different from film and you know not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very. Speaker 1: --everyone can make the transition in that way. Speaker 2: Well I didn't think I made it that first year. I remember talking to Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Hooks] who had done by that point a TV show in New York and I worked a little bit on that show and Jack Warden who was on that show it was the first 'N.Y.P.D.' police show, Frank Converse, and I remember that first season of 'Room 222,' every time I go to dailies or see a show cut together, I would go, oh my god, I was just--why am I, I look like a monster on screen? 'Cause I'm doing, I'm acting, I'm acting because it's theater to me but it isn't theater it's, it's film and the camera's right in your face and the microphone is so sensitive and everything is so much smaller. And it took a while to, to make that acting adjustment and I certainly got advice from other people who were more experienced. I didn't, you know I wasn't, I wasn't satisfied with my work. Story_ID: 466123 Speaker 1: There are several things I wanna talk about when it re- relates to this. One is sort of the business of-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know TV, because--did you have an agent at the time, you know who was negotiating your your deal, you know with--its 2Oth Century [Twentieth Century Fox Television]--you know 20th Century Fox? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got an agent while I was with the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. I think-- Speaker 1: Who was your agent? Speaker 2: At that time it was International, IFA, International Famous [International Famous Agency; International Creative Management], I think was my first agent. They came to NEC as well and they signed me that same night that they came to the theater. They came backstage and they signed me. So they did the deal for 'Room 222.' Speaker 1: Okay. And, and what else are you--okay so you go, you go out there, now are you with [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks at the time? Speaker 2: No. Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay so you're not, so you go out there-- Speaker 2: By myself (laughter). Speaker 1: --by yourself, I mean where do you decide you're living you know? Speaker 2: Well they put me in a hotel which was close to 20th Century Fox on Pico Boulevard at first and then you know they helped, they helped me, the public relations office and 20th Century Fox and ABC, that was an ABC show, and I found a furnished apartment up, up in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] near Sunset [Boulevard] called the French Hill Apartments [Los Angeles, California], this beautiful, beautiful furnished apartments, so I got a studio apartment there and it was gorgeous with a little patio, there was a pool. I was like--you know it was like a whole new world and then of course I had to get car (laughter) because you can't be in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] without a car and I had to learn my way around, I mean you know I was young, so it was exciting. Speaker 1: Because you're twenty-six, right? Speaker 2: Yeah and this is my first time in California and I got a car and I started learning you know the way, my ways around L.A. I remember at some point, that first few months I was there I had an impacted wisdom tooth. I didn't have a dentist, I didn't have a doctor. I didn't have anything I was new so I had to--got a recommendation for a dentist who was in the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California] and I had to drive myself to the Valley and I got directions which I was going on the 405 [Interstate 405] over to the 101 [U.S. Route 101] and I had never driven on kind of hilly terrain before (laughter), and so I remember being in the car with this aching tooth driving and I remember getting so dizzy I thought, oh my god, look at these mountains, look at this place. I'll never get this, I'll never get this, and I found my way to the dentist and then oh god, then I had to have somebody come out there. I had to leave the car. Somebody had to come and pick me up because I was sedated and then go back the next day to get--it was just doing everything wrong, but I got into it you know. I rented a television. I didn't buy a television because I thought I'll never stay here. I'll do the series then I'll go back to New York [New York] and I'll work off-Broadway and I'll just not stay here because this is--it wasn't you know really settling in that this was gonna be my life. It was like I'm gonna still even without the Negro Ensemble Company, I'm still gonna go back and forth. I'm gonna do some television then I'm gonna go back and do some stage. So I did that for two years. I went back every break I had. And then finally I settled in because the work on the show was very demanding. Story_ID: 466124 Speaker 1: What was the work like and what was the schedule like? When you're shooting a show like that, you're shooting how many episodes at one time? You're shoot- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We just shoot one, one a week. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: One--I think we were doing one a week. Speaker 1: Oh, so you do. Speaker 2: At that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was filmed, on camera film, it wasn't tape. And so you had long hours, you know your hours could be anything from, you know four or five to eleven or twelve. No work on the weekends. Like on location you can work on Saturday. On 'In the Heat of the Night' we shot on Saturdays, so it was a six day schedule. On 'Room 222' it was a five day schedule. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is really ensemble like too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --because you're all you know together-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --and talk about the other people who were in the cast? Speaker 2: Michael Constantine was the principal of the high school, Walt Whitman High School. Karen Valentine was the student teacher, and Lloyd Haynes was the history teacher and I was the guidance counselor. Speaker 1: Okay. So really two, two-- Speaker 2: Two black leads. Speaker 1: --two blacks and two whites. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And, and so what, are there--okay that first year, let's talk about the first year. What was the learning curve the first year and were there scripts that were given to you that maybe you took you know issue with the betrayal or how things maybe you know things that you were asked to say you were-- Speaker 2: Lloyd. Speaker 1: --Lloyd-- Speaker 2: Lloyd Haynes. Speaker 1: Lloyd, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Well there were a couple of things that early on I think they had to probably have been in the first season. The good thing about that show was that the producers and the writers were really smart people. They were liberal, progressive, put it that way. They were trying something by putting two black leads in this kind of show. They were not--it wasn't a yuck-yuck comedy show. There was no buffoonery, so I mean these people were educated people. They were, they were educators. So it was new, it was new and they were sensitive to issues and I'm sure none of this would have happened, now this is, this is the glory part of it for me. None of it probably would have happened without the Civil Rights Movement, without those years in the late '60s [1960s] when things got a little testy in America, so these things, this show I'm sure is an off-shoot or the next step as far as certain people are concerned for, for opening up a bit to society. So it was a good place to be and for me coming out of my kinds of experiences it couldn't have been any better, I don't think at the time so I felt very, I felt comfortable even though I was nervous about the fact that I was learning a new discipline, this television acting, camera work. I didn't know anything about it. I'd never taken any acting classes for film or television. There was learn--again learn as you go. But Gene Reynolds was a, is lovely, lovely man. Allan Burns, all the people who ended up in Mary Tyler Moore's camp, (unclear) or that whole bunch these were, this was the cream of the crop of Hollywood television at the time. So it could--it was a sweet experience. There were problems and they were not humungous things in terms of big racism things, but there were several things and I was sensitive to them with my kind of background. There was I remember one scene where, so they, they constructed this relationship, as subtle as it was, between Lloyd Haynes and myself and this kind of sweethearts, although they were afraid to do very much with it at the time, there was a scene that they--something had happened to Karen Valentine, the character and they wanted me, now Lloyd is supposed to be my boyfriend, he's in the scene, something negative has happened to him, but they wanted me to focus on her. I couldn't say the words of what was wrong with that, but my gut tells me this is not right. I can't do this as a black woman, I won't do it. So I got into a huge battle with him about it and I think we ended up with some (laughter), some kind of compromise. I don't even remember but I do remember going to war about it because I said no if something has happened to him and he's supposed to be the person that I care about, my attention is going to go to him first. But they wanted me to take care of the little white girl and I wasn't gonna do it so we fought. The other thing was that they, they were afraid to really illuminate the relationship, to really shine a light on it and they said, I didn't know this right off, but that there had been codes against black people showing affection and love for each other on screen for years and years. I didn't know any of this. Story_ID: 466125 Speaker 1: Gene Reynolds was the producer of 'Room 222' and he was the person who basically hired me for that show, and I was a little discouraged that first season because they didn't have any black staff writers on the show, and you know in addition to the fact that I always wanted to write and started submitting ideas for 'Room 222' even in the early days, I thought well you know if I can't get a job writing on the show, which is understandable, I mean I really was green in that area, I, I told them that I knew so many black writers in New York [New York] and they wanted to--you know, they were attuned to me so they went--we went to New York and I set up and it was over on 8th Avenue, I can't remember where we were. I invited every theater writer that I ever met, you know including Lonne Elder [Lonne Elder III] and everybody that I met and they met with Gene Reynolds, and I think they watched an episode of the show and he got work samples from all of them, but I don't think anybody ever got hired. But I mean there was--that was revolutionary in and of itself that they even, you know listened to me to, to that degree, that they spent the time, the money and the effort to be attuned to that issue. So that was, it was great. That was a great day. Sorry people didn't get hired but-- Speaker 2: Do you think that the group was not used to maybe writing for TV (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 2: And probably the samples-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --you know I bet that was that had something to, you know, to do with it. Speaker 1: That had--that was a part of it. Sure. Story_ID: 466126 Speaker 1: So now, what do you feel that the show like--so the first time you were in production, how many episodes did you do? You said you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That first-- Speaker 1: --like a season was how many? Speaker 2: I think it was--at that time it was twenty-two episodes. Speaker 1: Okay, so you work, so you basically shot for twenty-two weeks? Speaker 2: Yeah, with some breaks in there. Speaker 1: So now how did you find--which is half a year-- Speaker 2: It basically turns out to half a year. Speaker 1: Right, half a year. So what did you know that you were part of a hit show at that point, during that first you know shooting season? Speaker 2: Yeah we knew that. Yeah because we had TV Guide covers and I think we had Emmy [Emmy Award] nominations. I don't--the show I think the show won. I never won but I was nominated. I had a Golden Globe [Golden Globe Award], two Golden Globe nominations. We knew. You know we wanted it more. The network ABC was I think more the, the rear guard in a sense. The network wanted a comedy show. The creators of the show, James L. Brooks, was the creator of the show they wanted something different. They wanted a show that was not either full out comedy or dark side drama. The wanted something that was back and forth between the two, which was new. And they didn't--ABC fought them, and fought them and fought them and then ABC I think, I'm speculating, I think they wanted to get the show off because it was tired of dealing with the fusses and the fights about what the show really was. Was it a comedy or was it a drama you know, and television thinking at that time and since it's kind of you know block thinking. It's, it's not too complex, so I think that was one of the issues that 'Room 222' was, was dealing with. Like for example, network wanted a laugh track. Producers did not want a laugh track so we didn't start with one then eventually we got one so you know that kind of--those kind of battles were going all the time behind the scenes, the stuff that people don't know about. Speaker 1: Are you talking about all the four years or all that first year (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was going, that was going on at the end of the first year I think it started. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So there were people at the network who didn't want that show to succeed. There were people at ABC who did not want that show to succeed. Speaker 1: Now why do you think the show succeeded? Was it just because of the audience, was it the lineup; you know where it was placed because a lot of times where a show was placed has a lot to do with its success. Speaker 2: Sure. Well I think it was a combination of things certainly the lineup and I know they switched us around a number of times but also I think it was, it was a show that people related to and I think people were ready to see black, young, attractive, educated people on television. Now they could have built--I think done a better job of building on that to ensure the show's longevity but they were more interested in silly. They wanted silly, so-- Story_ID: 466127 Speaker 1: Now what were the shows that were on when you came? You know you said 'Julia' was one that we had already--it was on during the time that you were on? Speaker 2: Right. 'Julia' had been on one year I think. Archie [Archie Bunker]-- Speaker 1: Archie (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'All in the Family' was on and that was the biggest show ever. Speaker 1: Now what network was that on? Was that on-- Speaker 2: That was on CBS, I think and we ['Room 222'] were on ABC. Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And anything else? Speaker 2: I can't remember another. Speaker 1: Okay, but 'All in the Family' had some black, but it was mainly you know an all-white show. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: About racial issues you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --dealing with racial issues. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now what--but that show was sort of legendary because of what the white community--see itself sort of in a, you know in a way. What, what, so what other shows though do you remember coming on during the time that you were on the air though, other black shows? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know about black shows right in that little (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was 'Mod Squad' ['The Mod Squad'] was that little-- Speaker 2: 'Mod Squad' might have been on when we were on. Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Clarence [Clarence Williams III]. Speaker 1: So who were the people you were meeting in the Hollywood sets, since this was you know you went from New York [New York] to you know Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. So who were the people that you're meeting and getting to know and what is the community, because this is a new community emerging. I mean up to that point then there were some people who had been in the black Hollywood of films but you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Television is the new thing. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Well, I knew Clarence from New York so, remember who the other--now remember there was a show called 'Get Christie Love!,' remember that? I think that was in the early '70s [1970s] too. There was a small group of and, and the fact is Sidney Poitier, Poitier said to me, you're one of the reasons that people started coming to, to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] because they saw you on television and they thought that it was possible to have this career as an actor in television because of your presence there and Lloyd Haynes and others who were working in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. So I can't remember all the people that I met at that time because having been in New York, people were coming out from New York just as I came leaving the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] and most of the people I had met in New York at off-Broadway theaters or uptown in Harlem [New York, New York] or on auditions or whatever in New York, so they weren't new to me. You know Glynn Turman I think was already--Dick Anthony Williams, I'd met in New York. He eventually came to California. Other members of the Negro Ensemble Company began to come to Los Angeles to work in film and television and eventually settled in there and stayed there too. So it was a change. It was a big, big change. As television became more you know entrenched as far as a part of our culture generally and for black people too. Story_ID: 466128 Speaker 1: Now what things were your responsibilities though as being a cast member of the show ['Room 222'], like you know, just what were your--you know certain number of appearances. I mean, you know I'm just trying to understand life as a-- Speaker 2: Well for sure you were obligated to do one, as I recall, one promotional tour a season that ABC set up and these were city a day tours and they sent a chaperone with you from, from either from FOX or from ABC. I never traveled--they never let me travel alone. And eventually I took a makeup and hair person with me too. When I went to--I mean it was, it was the hardest (laughter), the hardest work, that you went from city a day. You did all the local shows, talk shows, radio shows, newspaper interviews and you did them just like this. And you did them all over the country, all over the country. In between that if it was something special, a special event that, that the network had been contacted about and they thought that it would be of some service in promoting the show, they would send you there. Now they were very good to you. You lived very well. You know, you were always were in a limousine. You stayed in the best hotels. You ate in the best restaurants and you were well taken care of. So that was you know that was the work. Speaker 1: So let me just understand. The season went--the shooting of the season, not the season-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --went from what month to what month? Speaker 2: If my memory serves me we started, we would start filming the new season in June. The new season shows would go--episodes would go on the air in September. There might be a break in there for a week or so then you would film until, 'cause you have your holidays to take into account as well. You would film until early January. Speaker 1: And then the promotional tours were when? They were-- Speaker 2: They were usually coming in the spring. Speaker 1: In the spring, I see (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And not in the August period for the new, you know new--or September? Speaker 2: You might do some promotion then too. Story_ID: 466129 Speaker 1: Now what were you learning about being a personality, it's a big--you know once again I wanna say, it's a big difference from you know being in the Negro Ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to being you know a nationally recognized you know TV star. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what are you learning about how you have to conduct yourself? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know your private life versus your public life, that's what I'm trying to under-- Speaker 2: Well I think it was pretty strict you know and for example in those days, and in the early '70s [1970s] they still had morals clauses in your contract. So you had to I mean there was no drugs. That wasn't gonna happen. When you traveled you were with women, you know I had the chaperone who was female and a makeup person and there was no you know cavorting around, and you know also, we also were obligated to go to all the affiliates' dinners, the big ABC things where all the network executives were there. Kind of, you were like a piece of meat walking around. But you had to look good; you had to take care of yourself. You had to stay within--you had--what they stressed was that you had to present yourself, even as a private citizen, kind of within the boundaries of the character you were portraying. That was their wish. I don't know--I never pushed it too far to see you know if you could live outside of that but you know when you show--I did a lot of events other than what they set up for in terms of those big city a day tours. There were plenty of other things that I did, tons of events, all over the place. So you did a lot of that. We did a lot. And I never knew it at the time, but it wasn't quite clearly in my conscious mind, that I was laying ground work for the other work that I would do in the years to come that I would, that I would build bit of an audience and that people loved the character that I was playing [on 'Room 222'] because like you said they were, it didn't make them wince. It didn't make them feel--it made them feel good about being black that, that I was playing that kind of character, so all these things worked in my favor at that, at that time. But it was it was intense you know. I didn't, as far as private life, I had, I had had nothing but issues with my private life, rarely with my work life. Not, they've been battles but bringing these two things into some kind of alignment so that I could have a real private life has always been a challenge of mine, of my life and only at--in isolated times I've been able to do it successfully. Story_ID: 466130 Speaker 1: Can you talk about your first Golden Globe Award nomination? Because that would have been the fi- you know first, you know and your first Emmy Award nomination? Can you? Speaker 2: I, you know I don't remember really much (laughter). I have the certificates for the Golden Globes. I don't--I think the show was nominated for an Emmy. I don't think I was I was nominated for any. Speaker 1: No, Best TV Actress-Drama [Best Performance by an Actress In A Television Series-Drama]? Speaker 2: For Emmy? Speaker 1: It says Golden Globe (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think--yes I did two, I got two Golden Globe nominations for 'Room 222.' I never went to the event. And you know the event that you see now on Golden Globes was not the event that was in the early '70s [1970s]. It has grown and grown and grown and grown and grown. So it's a Foreign Press [Hollywood Foreign Press Association] award, and you know I think in those days I took a lot of things for granted about that part of the work. I kept thinking, this is just the beginning. I'm going to do greater work. I'm going to do better work. I'm going to do more complicated characters. I never for a minute realized that, during those days, that there was a glass ceiling as far as race. I never--'cause I was coming out of '60s [1960s]. I was coming out of the, the mindset that we changed the world and I thought things would continue to evolve in an upward motion. It was only much later looking back that I understood that it wouldn't have mattered. There, there was only so much I was ever going to be able to do in that business at that time and it's really not that different now. So I didn't know it then, no. I believed the sky was the limit. Speaker 1: Well that's understandable to think, you know given what had happened with the '60s [1960s] and everything. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Cough) Look you know, the '70s [1970s]--when you look at the early '70s [1970s] I mean people were at advertising agencies-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: People actually were going to advertising agencies, people were in business. It was a very--in many ways, I think it like in you know coming out of the '60s [1960s] was a really vibrant period-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --where there were a lot of hopes and we're doing a lot of interviews of people from that time period-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --whether it's in Corporate America (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you know it hasn't much changed (laughter). Speaker 2: And people are pretty much saying the same thing. Speaker 1: It hasn't really much changed. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It doesn't matter what field-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Like I've been doing a lot of people in Corporate America, but you know the things they did, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: One guy he was on the cover of Fortune that was it. He lost his job you know so. Speaker 2: Wow. Story_ID: 466131 Speaker 1: Now, did, did you get along with your cast members the whole time? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So there was no behind the scenes drama, no-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, not really. I think that Lloyd [Lloyd Haynes], God rest his soul, had some issues and I think one of the things that happened to him was that he was, he was a very handsome guy and he didn't have a long background in theater or television, so I think the success of the show shocked him for a bit and it was hard to--hard for him to deal with it. So aside from that we had, the four of us, and some of the other people on the show, the younger--the actors playing students, we were pretty close. We had a lot of good times, a lot of good times. I don't remember any full out fights or screaming and running around you know being crazy. I don't remember anything like that on 'Room 222' ever you know. We had an issue with what I think one time was a strike. And I think it was (unclear) strike, crew and stuff, and I remember not knowing what, what to do. I was torn, I did not know where to go, but I had the conversation with my agent and I said I would rather not cross a picket line since I'm SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists], I'm a union girl, so I didn't go to work and that was it. You know there was no, eventually the strike was settled. We, we had a good time, we really did. We had a good. It was, it was a sweet little moment. We were all young and we were all making a little money and like I said earlier the sky was the limit for everybody, you know. Story_ID: 466132 Speaker 1: How long is a long--you know four years is a good amount of time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a good run. Speaker 1: It's a good amount of time-- Speaker 2: It's a good run. Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, 'cause you're not having to really sort of work--you know worrying about the next paycheck-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, where things are gonna come from. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now what are you, like are you yearning for the theater at all. I know you said, during this time period are you sort of enjoying your celebrity, you and your family-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean your-- Speaker 2: Especially my dad [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] (laughter). Speaker 1: Was he out there? Speaker 2: He sure did come out there. He came to every opening night at the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], every night, every opening night that we had he was there in the front row. He would go to The Cattleman [New York, New York] restaurant and eat a rack of lamb and drink Crown Royal and then come to the theater [St. Mark's Playhouse, New York, New York] and snore (laughter), but he knew all the actors in the company and they all loved him, they all loved him. And he came to California when I was doing 'Room 222.' He came out, yeah. Speaker 1: So now what is your mother [Louise Jones Burgen] thinking of this career? Is it-- Speaker 2: I think it took her a longer time, because I had dropped out of school. It took her, you know once she saw that I was working in television and I was making it a career, then she came around you know. And she was exceedingly happy when I went back to school in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and finished my undergraduate degree so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand. You understand that too, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 466133 Speaker 1: So, now the next role was Michelle in Ba- 'Blacula,' was that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. That was my first little movie (laughter). It was the cult, the cult film. That was during 'Room 222.' That was my first, my first film. I don't really know what to say except it was fun (laughter), it was fun. Speaker 1: Now why did you end up doing that? What, what made you interested in that? Because that's part of the sort of whole you know, I wanna say blaxploitation, but it was sort of part of the-- Speaker 2: Horror. Speaker 1: --horror classic. Speaker 2: Horror classic. Speaker 1: Horror classic. Speaker 2: Well it was for me, personally and selfishly, it was about me getting some film that wasn't television and that was primarily my--the recommendation of my agents at the time. Because I didn't have any feature film. So that was the primary motivating force. The, the director [William Crain] was black. Now I can't think of his name and the cast was mostly black, so it wasn't like a big paying job or anything but it was kind of fun. William Marshall, I got to work with him and let's see Vonetta [Vonetta McGee] was in it, Emily Yancy. You know all these people we remained friends over all these years so it was a fun experience. It was kind of--it got a little squirrely there for a while because, I'm trying to remember who the producers were, the director was fired midway somewhere because he was too slow or something. Anyway there was a little drama on the set. Speaker 1: And do you know who had written it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know who wrote it. Speaker 1: I'm trying to look here to see. Speaker 2: But I have a poster at home and I can certainly tell you (laughter). Speaker 1: But it was a financial success? Speaker 2: I think it was, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. That work? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But it wasn't high paying you're saying-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: It was sort of an independent-- Speaker 2: And it certainly wasn't high class (laughter). Speaker 1: But it holds its own. Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Do people still show it you think? Speaker 2: Well, you know I went to Canada. I was working in Toronto [Canada] for a month doing a TV movie ['On Thin Ice: The Tai Babilonia Story'] about Tai Babilonia that was based on her life and I was playing her mother [Cleo Babilonia] and I was on the set and one of the crew guys said, it's an all-white crew, he says, "Were you in that movie 'Blacula'?" And I said yes. And he said, "Oh my god," he said, "do you know that movie is a cult classic in Canada?" I said, "No, I didn't know that." He said, "Oh we love that movie." I said, "Don't--I don't even want to know why. Okay don't tell me why. It's enough that you love it, thank you." Story_ID: 466134 Speaker 1: So, now next I have you down as 'Let's Do It Again,' you know and you were and that's 1975 you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's about '75 [1975], '76 [1976] you know, with Sidney and Bill [Bill Cosby]. Speaker 1: Yeah, now how had you come to know Sidney Poitier? Speaker 2: I met Sidney in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. During the Negro-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, during Negro Ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company] time, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was he doing then? Speaker 2: I don't know what he was doing. I know there was a concert at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], a fundraiser I think, and I think it was it had might well of had something to do with Vietnam [Vietnam War], I'm not sure but I was there and on--backstage. I don't know if I read something or whatever, whatever but I was introduced to Mr. Poitier that evening. That was the first time I met him and then the next, let's see, the next time I, I might have seen him might have been back--might have been in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] a couple years later when I, so now I'm trying to remember, how did it come to pass? I know I was called in to read for 'Let's Do It Again' and then my agents called me and said that he wouldn't hire me and then, then I said, well I need to talk to him because I really didn't know him that well. I had met him maybe at a couple of social occasions but I got--I knew his production office and I called his office and I told him I wanted to talk to him about 'Let's Do It Again.' That's when he told me he couldn't hire me because he said people couldn't get past my face, and I said well I want a screen test and I can be funny (laughter). I was trying to convince him that I could be funny and I talked some more to my agents and they set up the test at MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Inc.; Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc., Los Angeles, California] and that's--and my mother [Louise Jones Burgen] worked with me on the scene and they told me what scene to do and my mother and I rehearsed and rehearsed, and my mother was in California and that's when I put the outfit together. And I had these big boobs out to here and the blond wig, and high heeled boots and, and the gum, cracking the gum. I think the gum got it more than anything. Speaker 1: So he loved you in it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did, he loved it. Speaker 1: Now, so he produce this? Speaker 2: No, he was the director and his company was one of the co-producers as I recall. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc.]. Speaker 1: --this is really Sidney Poitier who had enjoyed his own success-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and was able to do some things. Speaker 2: Well you know this was after 'Uptown Saturday Night' 'cause that was the first one. I wasn't--yeah so that was already done and that I guess had done very well. So this was the second one. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is a, a wonderful cast though. You've got lots of people in this cast, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Bill Cosby. Speaker 2: Lee Chamberlin, let's see who else, oh dear-- Speaker 1: Calvin Lockhart? Speaker 2: Calvin Lockhart, John Amos-- Speaker 1: Jimmie Walker. Speaker 2: Jimmie Walker. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and-- Speaker 2: Ossie Davis, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: It was terrific, it was terrific. That was a fun, fun shoot. That was, that was--when I look back over, over my work in film and television, that has to be right up there at the top because of all the people, and working with Bill Cosby and working with Sidney and just you know idolizing these people, especially Sidney for me I always you know I just--I couldn't believe I was working with him and Bill was hysterical, crazy and wonderful, so it was a great work experience, it really was. Speaker 1: (Cough) Now where did you--was that shot in-- Speaker 2: In Los Angeles [California] and we did location work a couple of days in New Orleans [Louisiana] and a couple of days in Atlanta [Georgia]. Story_ID: 466135 Speaker 1: Tell me what the, the movie ['Let's Do It Again'], you know what the plot was? Speaker 2: Oh, you would ask me that (laughter). There is so--now I have to remember. There's--what is it, like one of those, what do you call those organizations, those black organizations? Speaker 1: Fraternal order? Speaker 2: Fraternal order and they need money and they cut--okay and Bill [Bill Cosby] and Sidney [Sidney Poitier] are the members and we're the--Lee and I are wives of--and they come up with a scheme to to make money by betting on a fight. Jimmie [Jimmie Walker], oh god it was--and there's hypnotism involved because Sidney has to hypnotize him to make him into a--what was the other boxer? I can't remember who the other boxer [Rodolphus Lee Hayden] was who he fought. So. Speaker 1: Lee Chamberlin (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Lee was the wife of Sidney and-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's so--sorry-- Speaker 2: I was the wife of Bill Cosby and so they--and then they make bets and they bet, oh god it was complicated, and Calvin Lockhart was the, was like the banker and the sweet guy, and I had to go to him to place my bet and Lee had to go to another place to place her bet, but they fixed the fight so they would win and so that's when I put the get up on with the blond wig and cracked the gum, and went in there and made the bet. I must tell you that when I was at the screening for that movie (laughter) and I came on screen, cracking the gum with that wig on and that--those big boobs, Sidney was sitting right here and Bill was sitting right here and the audience started--and I think they started to laugh the way they did because they only had seen me on 'Room 222,' being this little school teacher person and then all of a sudden this gum is just (makes noise) (laughter) just going and these things and this hair, it was hysterical and so Bill Cosby looked at me and he said, "You got a funny bone girl." So I said, "Yeah, yeah a little bit, little bit." So it was great, great. Speaker 1: So was that, now how long did that take to shoot? Speaker 2: I think we had two months. I think we had two months. Story_ID: 466136 Speaker 1: And then now, you also then were--and I don't know if this the same year but let- let's--it was 'Mr. Ricco'-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --and then a year later I think it was one year later, one year or two years later, 'A Piece of the Action.' Speaker 2: 'A Piece of the Action' was two years later I think, and that was with, with Bill [Bill Cosby] and Sidney [Sidney Poitier] again and [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, Hope Clarke, let's see-- Speaker 1: Tracy-- Speaker 2: Tracy Reed, right. Speaker 1: Titos Vandis, Frances Foster-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Kenneth [ph.]-- Speaker 2: 'Mr. Ricco' was with Dean Martin and what's his name from 'Miami Vice'? Speaker 1: Oh, Philip Michael Thomas. Speaker 2: Philip Michael Thomas was like my brother. Speaker 1: Before he was Philip Michael Thomas? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We shot that in Oakland [California]. Um-hm. That, that movie just did a nosedive (laughter), never did anything, it wasn't a bad film, but it just never got promoted. Story_ID: 466137 Speaker 1: Until very recently, and I'm not so sure it's not still going on, there were often times two pay scales for black and white celib- stars in Hollywood. I don't know if that gap has, has closed but certainly that was the case in the early '70s [1970s]. So. Speaker 2: So were you aware of that being the case? Speaker 1: Not then, no. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was--I learned that later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Let--I wanna go back to the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] just for a little bit (cough) because I'd like to better establish because all I was--everything I was saying was wrong, so (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) No it wasn't. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was like, wasn't it [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis? No. (Laughter) I wanna go back though and really, if you could give some anecdotes about that 'cause it was really a year you were with them, right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 2: Right, the first--before you got with whisked off. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Can you give some anecdotes about sort of times together? Things that you know if you were altogether sort of shooting the bull that you would-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --you know sort of talk about what you remember when? Speaker 1: Well let's see we, we were together, about to, about to go on stage when we got word that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been assassinated and I remember, and I'll never forget we were--all the performers, all the actors were backstage. Michael Schultz [HistoryMaker Michael A. Schultz] was the director. I think we were doing the 'Song of the Lusitania Bogey' ['Song of the Lusitanian Bogey,' Peter Weiss] and of course some of us wanted to cancel the performance because we were so distraught, but it was decided, and we all came to agree, that we should perform and that it should be with his life and his death in mind. So we did. But that was one of those, one of those moments, like everybody remembers where they were when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed and we certainly will always remember, black people will remember where they were when Martin Luther King was killed. So, so we were in the Negro Ensemble Company. There were some funny things during the same play, we were supposed to all prepare for at least one other actor's part because it wasn't a linear play and one of the actors got sick but this actor who got sick was a singer and so I was supposed to cover--I was in the play, but I was also supposed to cover her part, and of course I can't carry a tune in a bucket, so I had to to do her part and it was a total, total disaster. I mean I was off key. I forgot words. It was like such a stress that I was doing not only my role, but covering her, her part as well and I thought when I went back to intermission, I'm completely up on the lines. The whole company went up on the lines. We were all standing on the stage with these blank looks on our faces and usually when that happens, when an actor goes up like that, somebody on stage throws them a cue or something that triggers their response again. Nobody had anything (laughter). It was just like we were all like blank. So I went backstage at intermission and I was crying--was in my dressing room. I had my head down on the table. I'm never going back out on the stage again. I'll never live this down. It was on me and I, and I didn't you know I failed. That was the night I got an agent because Michael Schultz and [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward they came back stage 'cause I was just falling apart. You have to go back; you have to finish the second act, you can't quit. And so I went back out there and I did the second act and it went really well and that's the night that IFA [International Famous Agency; International Creative Management] signed me. It was very strange but I mean it was one of those moments you just, I was just paralyzed and I was, I thought oh, it's over. I'm never gonna have a career, never, never, never. How can you go out on stage and forget. You know it wasn't my role, but that's--the agency came back and said we wanna sign you. And I guess it had to do with the recovery you know. It had to do with--they saw me falling apart and they saw me come back out with, with some, with some energy and commitment. So I guess they figured I was--I had the metal for the business because she certainly can beat up enough and you have to keep coming, you have to keep coming, keep coming. Speaker 2: Did they ever tell you, was that the reason? I mean did--what did they see in you? Speaker 1: They never said that, I just assumed. I assumed it because, I don't know it just seemed like that was the case. Story_ID: 466138 Speaker 1: What show did you feel that you as an ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company] sort of jelled, the ensemble group jelled? Speaker 2: In the very first production, the 'Song of the Lusitanian Bogey' [Peter Weiss] because of, because of the style of theater that it was, it was an ensemble piece and it was a piece that required that we not only rehearse the individual characters that we were each assigned to, we also had to do an extraordinary amount of research and study on the Portuguese and the English and so forth in South Africa and Mozambique and Angola. So we basically went through a southern Africa history class together to get the references and the nuances that were in this piece, which was so very political. It had everything to do with colonialism in Africa. So I--it required tumbling, it required singing and dancing. It was a mixture of things, so it really pulled us together as a group. It really pulled us together. Story_ID: 466139 Speaker 1: Now, how was it working with Michael Schultz [HistoryMaker Michael A. Schultz] and [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward and they had--were they always on the same page you know in terms of you know creativity versus management? That's-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure that they were. I can only surmised based on the, the presentation and the taste and style of each, of each person. Michael Schultz' style, especially exhibited in that piece the 'Lusitanian Bogey' ['Song of the Lusitanian Bogey,' Peter Weiss] was more avant-garde and--which is what that piece required. So Doug was more traditional and he's older, he was older so it made sense. I'm not sure what went on behind the scenes but Michael's direction of that play was brilliant, it was absolutely brilliant and all of the newspapers noted it so. Speaker 1: And Michael Schultz went on to what? Can you comment on? Speaker 2: Well, he's a pretty busy television and sometimes film director. He does a lot episodic television. I'm not sure all the shows and he has done a number of films of course none of which I have in my brain that we can check on (laughter), we can Google him. But he's had a good career and he's still working I'm sure. Speaker 1: So he went west and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --Douglas Turner Ward stayed east? Speaker 2: East, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Now Douglas Turner Ward, do you have any stories about him and his approach or any sort of anecdote stories about? Speaker 2: Well, he was the one who told me I had to, to let go, that I couldn't stay with the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] if I signed a contract to do 'Room 222,' so we went through a period, a long period of, of barely speaking because I was, I was hurt. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So I didn't--Douglas Turner Ward and I were at odds and on the outs for quite a while. I never, you know I don't know--I had a good career regardless of the Negro Ensemble Company, but it seemed that his decision, his decision had a definite impact on my creative life and I, I didn't take it lightly so. Anyway. Speaker 1: You mean in terms of the options you could have preserved for yourself? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, that you would have had a theater base while having a TV base, you could have been bicoastal? Speaker 2: Yes, that's what I wanted, that's what I wanted. So. Speaker 1: And, and I think what you're also addressing is that there weren't a lot of other--there were no other Negro ensemble companies that you could have gotten--said, okay well I'll go and take my marbles and play over here? Speaker 2: That's right. That was it. I mean there were other theaters (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: --of course there was a theater uptown in Harlem [New York, New York], there was and there was at that time there was some other regional black, small black theaters. There was no other Negro ensemble company and there hasn't been since. So-- Story_ID: 466140 Speaker 1: You were doing this off camera, but who were some of the other people who came, you know who came out of the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Company. Speaker 1: And why--the other question I have, why did it not last? You know, I mean it lasted, but why is it not thriving and alive today? Speaker 2: Well, I think there were a number of reasons. I think most of those reasons, from what I know about it, had to do with a breakdown in management, the financial aspects of it, the management aspects, plus the cutbacks that began to happen in this country in terms of funding arts institutions and black theaters in particular. We went through a kind of a heyday in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] and as the '70s [1970s] went on that started to wane, which is where we are now really. So but while it was there, it was, it was a rich experience. They did European tours, they--I wasn't there then. But later Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] came through there. Denzel Washington came through NEC. Remember that the 'Play of Soldiers' [sic. 'A Soldier's Play,' Charles Fuller] play was developed at the Negro Ensemble Company, went to Broadway. 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men' [Lonne Elder III] was developed via the Negro Ensemble Company and went to television, and 'Home' by Samm-Art Williams. So this was, this was not just a place for actors, it was a place for writers and I think that was as important if not more important than the, than the acting thrust of it. So you know we--I remember back in, in that first year, the discussions about audience development, the discussions about reaching, bringing black people into that theater from all, all the boroughs of New York [New York] and, and whites as well so it was, it was so exciting then, you know and it, it and it did bring people out and people did support it. But when I got upset with, with Doug's [HistoryMaker Douglas Turner Ward] decision, I turned my back on it, so I didn't pay a whole lot of attention to it for a while because it was too painful, but you know all of a sudden I looked up one day and everybody and their mother had been in the Negro Ensemble Company (laughter). I mean I was in California by then and, and having a reasonably good television career and I'd read these resumes and bios of people and I said well when were they there (laughter), I didn't know they were there. It was like everybody had been in the Negro Ensemble Company so you know that's--it was, it was great. Story_ID: 466141 Speaker 1: Those early discussions about, you know audience development, were there discussions about what kind of you know productions to bring, you know what were worthy and what were not worthy and, and what kind of message you know--were you, were you a black cast still wanting to do, wanting to do black--what I'm--black theater. You were defining in many ways black theaters what it would be right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well I think to a degree. I mean we were, we were like the 'Summer of the Seventeenth Doll' [Ray Lawler] is not a black play, we did it in the first, the first season. Speaker 1: But see that's even a discussion about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. We--those discussions were ongoing. Speaker 1: And what were the, can you just over what were the discussions just so-- Speaker 2: Well just briefly to the degree that I can because a lot of that wasn't shared with the actors. Unlike the Free Southern Theater where at a certain point after the formation of the theater every--we had group meetings and so everybody was discussing, discussing constantly at the Free Southern Theater. That was not the case at the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. This was a theater run by three executive directors in a sense, an artistic director, administrative director and so they made those decisions and sort of defined the image that this theater was going to have in the community and the theater community in New York [New York]. So I think they--but they--I do remember this, there was always an emphasis on developing black playwrights, that was very, very important and there were a lot of people who were not brought into the Negro Ensemble Company, playwrights and actors as well and there were people who, who were very upset and very hurt that they weren't, they weren't chosen, they weren't selected. So the decisions as to what plays were done, what writers were nurtured, those decisions were made by Doug [HistoryMaker Douglas Turner Ward] and Jerry [Gerald Krone] and [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks. Speaker 1: Now what, what was [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards? I read that you also studied with him during this time period, this period in New York, is that correct? Speaker 2: No, I never studied with Lloyd Richards, although he did I think be- and I think maybe not that first year, but maybe the second year take over the acting training program of the Negro Ensemble Company, but while I was there that first season, it was Paul Mann who worked with the professional company. Speaker 1: Okay. See because I was wondering 'cause he's also from Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Speaker 2: And he knew, he knew my dad [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh he did? Speaker 2: Yeah, they went to Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan], so yeah. Story_ID: 466142 Speaker 1: Was there any story though you can tell me about 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men' [Lonne Elder III]? That's probably, you know of the plays that you know is, is better known-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in today's world. Do-- Speaker 2: Well, I can't really because I was gone by the time that (simulations)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh you were gone? I wasn't thinking. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah by the time that production was mounted I was gone. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Okay, okay. Let's, okay, I wanna go back to 'Room 222'-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, just for a little more clarification. You talked about it being a five-day work week and you know you talked about it being ten to twelve hour, you know days. Can you talk more about the transition you know when you talked about the fact that you you know you look at your old air shows, you know like screaming or whatever trying to make a point. But can you talk a little bit more about really adjusting your style, what actually happens on the set-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know how do you know you have it right? I know in film you have something called dailies, I'm wondering you know when you know you have it right and-- Speaker 2: Well you have to, you really do have to take, to take the word of the director because he's going to print a take when he feels it's right. Now if you are in a reasonably good relationship with the director you could always ask for another take, that you're not satisfied with it and generally if, unless time pressures are really bearing down on he director, which can have a devastating effect on his next job if he's not, if he's not bringing in the show on time and on budget, they will give you another opportunity to do a scene again if you're not happy with it. It's, it's so different from working in the theater because first of all nothing is done in sequence. Things are done, things are--scenes are scheduled to shoot to be shot based on the location, based on time, based on setups, if you had location shots on a particular episode, we would go do those shots first but they were completely out of sequence and then we would come back to the studio and do the interiors. So you do the exteriors then you do interiors and you had to study differently because you really should hold the whole, the whole script, you had to hold the whole script in your head to know how to modulate your performance because you're shooting out of sequence, you're acting out of sequence so you can't overstep in something that's going to be shot early and then put yourself in a bind for, for the continuation of that scene that may be shot later. So you have to work on, you have to figure those logistics out for yourself because nobody really helps you with that. As far as the performance technique itself, they, I think the word is or the way people describe it, you should be doing same kind of preparation but the performance level is what's different because the camera is right there in your face and the microphone is so close so everything is small even though it still needs to be full. So just, you know you learn how to cut it down, cut it in half. You know it takes some, it takes a little attention to, to to the technique. Story_ID: 466143 Speaker 1: How did you find that satisfactory as an actress? And the reason I say that is there's the audience when you're in live theater and many an actor will tell you there's nothing like that audience when you fell in step with them, so what is satisfying you besides the paycheck or you know the reviews or the I mean what? Speaker 2: It's a difficult--that's a very good question and it's a difficult thing to determine. I mean you have to, you have to be able to visualize or think you can visualize the finished product and your finished performance once it's edited together so that you can get that enjoyment from the, from the work that you would get doing everything in sequence in front of a live audience whose energy you can feel because you really don't feel that, that on a soundstage. It's very, it's a very interesting process. It is in a sense kind of isolated in a, in a vacuum almost in a way. I'm not so sure that for me personally, that's not what eventually began to lessen my enjoyment of the process. It became like going to a factory, you know a kind of hacking out these, these jobs that were not really to me performances any more. They were you know they were like putting a part here on to a part here on and then somebody else was making it into a performance. So in, in that regard it can be less satisfying. I think though if, if you're working on a motion picture with a terrific director, terrific actors, you're gonna also probably get that performance satisfaction again because of a complexity of, of character that's in a good script. Unfortunately so much of television is so thin so it's not just the process, it's also the writing. It's also what the demands are of television. So I think, I think it's a bit of all those things because you can do, you can, you can have a, a rich and good performance in a television work but it's in the writing, I mean it has to be something that's well written and something that, that they have, the producers and directors have time to work with. Usually you're working so fast because the money consideration is so, so important and so paramount. For 'In the Heat of the Night' we were shooting on a six day schedule, an hour show and usually, well hour shows used to be seven or eight days so they were trying to keep the show on the air, they had to cut the budget so it started to get just like this (snaps fingers), and it was rough. I mean you just felt like you were in a--being ground down to a (makes sound), so they have what you call for example forced calls. You're supposed to have a twelve-hour turnaround by union rules. And we were working so fast sometimes you wouldn't get a twelve-hour turnaround. You wouldn't be able to go home for twelve hours before you had to be back to work so they would give you what's called a forced call which gives you a bump in pay. But your face looks like forty miles of bad road because you haven't, you haven't rested and the camera is right on you. So as you get older, all of this stuff, especially for women, starts to be kind of devastating, so we on 'In the Heat of the Night' that last two, two seasons, we had lots of forced calls where you were just you know, you don't even know how you were saying the lines you were so tired. But you know Carroll O'Connor wanted to keep the show on the air and the network [CBS] was wanting to get rid of it by that point. So they cut the budget and pushed us and pushed us and pushed us. Story_ID: 466144 Speaker 1: Let's talk about 'In the Heat of the Night,' how that had, you know how that came into being really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know because up to that point you hadn't really been on a series for many years. Speaker 2: Not since 'Room 222.' Speaker 1: And that would have been how many, that would have been? Let's see '74 [1974] to eighty- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty, twenty something years. Speaker 1: Um-hm, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. So tell me how this all came about? Speaker 2: Well my agents called me and said that the series 'In the Heat of the Night,' which was already on the air when my character joined the cast, was putting on a casting call for a [HistoryMaker] Denise Nicholas look alike (laughter). And I said, "Well I'm here. I'm still here." And they said, "Well do you wanna go in on it?" I said, "Yeah why not?" So I know it just boggles your mind things that come up in that business, but anyway so I went in to audition and I auditioned for, let's see for Carroll O'Connor first and because he knew what he was going to do with this character of Harriet DeLong. He knew, he had plotted it out. Now Carroll was really the head writer on that show. He wrote under a pseudonym Matt Harris, so he had a lot of power, a lot of control over that show as it turns out. So he knew that he wanted to develop, to develop a love relationship between his character and this character, Harriet DeLong, and he wanted to ease that into the show and keep his audience, his Carroll O'Connor/Archie Bunker/Sheriff Gillespie [William Gillespie] audience so I went in to read, he liked the performance but he called me in and he said, I can't hire you because at that time, he said you look too young next to me on screen and I wanna do that. And I said, well I can, you know same thing I'm begging, I can you know I'm an actress, I can look however within certain you know boundaries. And so he decided to go with it, to go with me to give me a shot on the show. And they kind of frumped me up a little bit, not much 'cause I was frumping fast anyway. So it worked out. It worked out. Speaker 1: Now you came--you went in what year? You started in what-- Speaker 2: I think the first, I think the very first episode that I did was 1989, '90 [1990] that season and then the next season I did a few more episodes and then a few more and then I wrote some episodes. So I never was in every episode of that show. Speaker 1: But the show was on the air for how long? 'Til ni-- Speaker 2: I think it was on all total for seven years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 466145 Speaker 1: So you went back to school in between you know and earned your B.A.-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in drama. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Why did you choose drama when you had, I mean you could have written a book on it? Speaker 2: It was easy. I just wanted to get it done, you know it was easy for me. Two of the theaters that I worked in were in the theater history books in the classes that I took at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. It was incredible. I was like (laughter)--I was doing talks to the classes about the Free Southern Theater and the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. I was a part of theater history so it was fun. You know the kids were like, she's in the book. (Laughter) So, Grandma Moses, she's in the book. So it was fun. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So how much, how much did you have to--well you had-- Speaker 2: I had two years at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and two--basically two years at SC. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Picked up my science classes at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in summer school. Story_ID: 466146 Speaker 1: So, now what did you like about 'In the Heat of the Night' though? What was--what did you like about your character [Harriet DeLong] or what did you like about the--? Speaker 2: Well I loved the beginnings of this character because as it was told to me at the very beginning she was going to be, A, a lawyer and a city council person. And I'm interested in professional women. You know I'm interested in jobs as an actress playing professional black, black professional women and so that was the fascinating thing to me. How are they gonna, how was he gonna, how was Carroll [Carroll O'Connor] going to drive his--what we're gonna do to drive this character and make her interesting and ya da, ya da. Well, then changes happened so it was--she was gonna be a city council woman or she wasn't gonna be a lawyer. And I was like, oh, I was getting depressed. So I liked, I liked the fact that it was--that she was an interesting woman in the sense that she was southern but not from Mississippi. He had written it that she was originally from Louisiana, but she had come into this small town, she was a city council person, I loved all that and the relationship with Carroll I thought interesting. But you know I'm not--the best part of it for me, in time, became the fact that I got an opportunity to write, that I pitched some ideas to Carroll O'Connor and he started to buy stuff that I was coming up with. So that was the direction I wanted to go in any way and I didn't know when I went in to talk to him if he was going to hear me. You know but I said I wanna, I wanna write and it's what I've always wanted to do and you know this is the first idea I'm gonna pitch you a story idea and you laugh me out of the room or you talk to me and deal with me as a person who wants to change direction. Now Carroll was very open to that because he is--he was a writer. And, and had a great respect for books and people who, who liked learning and education and literature and all these things and politics. He was very political. So in a sense we were very much alike, although of different generations, so when I pitched him the first idea, he, he bought it on the spot. I never even walked out of the office. So then I asked him who he was going to assign of his writers, his staff of writers, he was gonna write the story that I had submitted to him, and he said you'll write it and I'll help you. So that's how I got started writing and that's, I mean really writing for for as a job not just as a hobby. And then I pitched other ideas to him and then I wrote one script with him, the two of us. So, that experience gave me the confidence to pursue this thing that I always wanted to do and that's finally to write long form fiction. It taught, it taught me that I am really not a very good scriptwriter, that I'm interested in books. I'm interested in historical fiction primarily, and I don't, as much as I love movies and I really love movies, I'm not a good movie scriptwriter. This is--it's an art form of the camera, it's a visual medium. Story_ID: 466147 Speaker 1: How was Carroll O'Connor able to get the deal that he did? I'm just wondering-- Speaker 2: Well you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause his-- Speaker 2: --know he's coming off of 'All in the Family,' 'Archie Bunker's Place,' so there was a long stretch of years when he was on television, not always as 'All in the Family,' but that segued in those next series. He was working constantly and he had some ownership so-- Speaker 1: In 'In the Heat of the Night'? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh definitely. Speaker 1: Not, not in-- Speaker 2: Well in 'Archie Bunker's Place' too, and I'm not sure what his deal was on 'All in the Family' as the time went by and it became such a hot show, but I would imagine he would have negotiated some piece of the action for himself. Speaker 1: Now was it around this time that you realize that black, there was a difference in pay scale? Do you think at this point in time you're aware of that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think--oh yeah, oh absolutely. Speaker 1: Now what was he like as a person? Can you talk about him? 'Cause you paint him as sort of a nurturing you know person and you know I don't think the public--all we would think of is Archie [Archie Bunker], you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was in real life the anti-Archie (laughter) so he was nurturing and not you know well people say well you were his friend. Well yeah I was friend to him, to him and to his wife, Nancy [Nancy Fields O'Connor], but what I noticed was that he was that way with a lot of creative people, you know younger people. He was, he was interested in, in theater and music and literature and that's the world he created for himself to live in and he tried--and politics. He was very much a union person, very interested in unions, so at least personally. Of course as a producer, he might not have been (laughter) so interested in unions because it you know it dictates the dynamic of the budget but he was nurturing and he was for example with Howard Rollins, who he worshiped because he thought he was so, so gifted as an actor, so gifted that when Howard was having so many troubles and so many problems, Carroll hung with him and tried to protect him and to take care of him while he was going through all these difficult times. And he stood with Howard until the network said no, you have to let this man go because he's, he's costing us too much money so--and too much bad press. But Carroll would have been--he would have, he would have hung with Howard right to the bitter end because he loved his talent so much. Speaker 1: Can you talk about Howard Rollins' problem? Speaker 2: Well I can't talk too much about it because I don't like to talk about other people's problems. I can talk about my own but he had issues (laughter). He had some drug--I can talk about the things that were already in the press. He had issues with drugs and I guess issues with homosexuality, problems dealing with himself, so. Story_ID: 466148 Speaker 1: So talk about the shows that you wrote? What were your ideas that you pitched him and you know, and was there that ability to, well yes because you can just have a show it doesn't have to be in sequence, it's not like a soap opera. But, so tell me what your ideas that you pitched to him? Speaker 2: Well, you know I'm an Afrocentric person so generally speaking I was gonna come in there with ideas that had to do with black people and I had to to push myself to not do that every time I walked in with an idea and I did. I was able to do that, but the two most successful things that I wrote, the first was about the first black woman to try to register to vote in the fictional town of Spartan, Mississippi [sic. Sparta, Mississippi], where the show takes place and that's kind of pinching off my favorite topic, which is the '60s [1960s]. But Carroll [Carroll O'Connor] loved the idea of us developing a script on that--with that subject matter. That was the first one I did for him. Another one that I did was called, I think was--the title it ended up with was "Legacy," and that was based on the fact that I began to hear stories about black people in the South losing their land because of all kinds of chicaneries going on the justice system and that there were people who had been bequeathed parcels of land way back and they were losing this land because the heirs and these wealthy white families were conveniently losing documents and the courts were helping them to do this and I heard a story of it happening in a branch of my own family. So I tried to, to work that into a script idea and he bought it. But you know, these are, these are tricky things to try to do on television but anyway. It was, it was okay. It wasn't that successful but it opened up the subjects as far as I was concerned. Speaker 1: Now when you say, like you have a successful series and you're saying it wasn't that successful, how is that judged? I'm just, I mean I'm just trying to--I know that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's me. That's Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Nicholas] looking at the works saying, I didn't quite pull that off. It was, it's a bigger and deeper story than I could get to in forty-five minutes of screen time on 'In the Heat of the Night.' It's a huge story. I mean and there's a whole, there's a whole story and the Sea Islands about black people losing land so I was, I'm interested in that kind of, that kind of information. It's dramatic to me. Well it is dramatic when people lose their land and they lose their legacy. Speaker 1: Now you talked also about what was difficult about the process that you, you know you decide you were a TV writer-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But what was the process you went through? What you presented, did it have to be cut down or was it in the process of writing that you found it frustrating you know realizing what was required? Speaker 2: Well the other, see the other thing about writing for a series that's already set, is that you have to use by contract certain characters because it's in their deal that they have to appear in X number of episodes. So all these things have to be worked into your script and you have to make it work. So you have to use people, you have to find a place for them because they are the co-stars of the show. So that was hard. That was very different--it was not like sitting down writing a novel and me, you know me creating the world and people in the world with people I wanna put in it. That's, that was part of the difficulty. And the other part of the difficulty at that time was that I was also acting in the show as I was trying to do this way--trying to get myself ready to write. So I was working too hard, you know that was a big part of it. Story_ID: 466149 Speaker 1: You know at the end [of 'In the Heat of the Night'] you end up marrying him [William Gillespie] and what--how was that received? This is 19--I mean still that seems a little, you know you have to be careful even today, I mean maybe less so but still? But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well. I guess they got some hate mail. He only showed me a couple of letters that they received from people who were upset. I got some response from black people who were upset, which I shared with Carroll [Carroll O'Connor] and we were just sitting there looking at each other like you know what is this? Where are we in the world? I was at Union Station in Washington, D.C. and I walked up to get ticket to go to New York [New York] and there's a black guy behind the counter and he said, "How could you? How could you marry Archie Bunker (laughter)?" And I said first of all I didn't really marry him, it's pretend and second of all he's not Archie Bunker, it's just, it's just--but you know in a, in a way I understood the--I understood that what he was saying was much more profound than the joke of it. You know that he was--because it was an image that was being cast out there and that's really what he was talking about that a person that he, he--'cause I understand that he had always admired me because I never did things to embarrass black people and then all of a sudden I jump up and marry Archie Bunker. So I understood what he was saying. Speaker 1: He was talking about the symbol? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Like you were almost marrying Strom Thurmond? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Oh god, (laughter) which is worse. At least Archie people liked. But Strom Thurman had a black daughter (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So I should do that story. She lives in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] doesn't--oh she lives in L.A. Speaker 2: I don't know. I thought--I think that book has been optioned. Speaker 1: Oh, really? Speaker 2: I think-- Story_ID: 466150 Speaker 1: Let me also ask you though, you've been married to three really significant men, I just wanna say. Speaker 2: Um-hm (laughter). Speaker 1: I mean you know significant, I mean they're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes seriously significant, yeah. Speaker 1: Seriously significant 'cause there's Gilbert Moses, you know who was-- Speaker 2: Brilliant. Speaker 1: Brilliant and talented. Speaker 2: Crazy brilliant (laughter). Yes. Speaker 1: And then Bill Withers. Speaker 2: Brilliant. Speaker 1: Okay, song writer (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Crazy (laughter). No, no, they're all creative. They're all so creative. Speaker 1: But isn't that--doesn't [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant manage Bill Withers? Speaker 2: He did. I don't know if he does now. He used to years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. And I think he still does. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: And then Jim Hill. Speaker 2: Um-hm, sportscaster. Speaker 1: And he's, he's your current--is he current? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm divorced. I've been single since 1987. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm done. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: My dad [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] said before he died three strikes you're out, let's leave that alone so. You do a lot of things well, that's not one of them. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well okay, that's okay. You know [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll she was talking about being married four (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she's-- Speaker 1: --but she also had two other very significant relationships so it really should be six. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: 'Cause she had Sidney [Sidney Poitier], she had-- Speaker 2: Long, long time. Yes. Speaker 1: Right, long time and she-- Speaker 2: So I'm not in this by myself. Speaker 1: Right, and then she had Frost [David Frost]. They-- Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: That's right so I'm just-- Speaker 2: Major. Speaker 1: So you don't have to be. I just want to, okay so you can feel the difference. Speaker 2: Okay, thank you, make me feel better (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. And I think Elizabeth Taylor has all you beat. Speaker 2: Oh, please. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there's a few others out there that do too. Speaker 1: So but let's talk about the role they sort of played in your life and career and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know and yeah that's what you know--what attracted to you? What your life was like with them you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean we know, we've heard already about Gil you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because that was, you were very young then you know you described that he was this attractive, very--you know he had traveled you know. Speaker 2: He was a man of the world. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 466151 Speaker 1: But how did you meet Bill Withers? And where were you 'cause (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I met him at a performance at, at a club in Los Angeles [California], he was performing and somebody, I don't remember who it was, wanted me to meet him. And so I went to see him perform and I, I loved his music and but we had very volatile relationship, very destructive for both of us I think and I don't know all the reasons, but you know the other--there's something about southern people that I'm attracted to and I, I don't know if it's the kind of quiet that they, they seem to have. And I think that he had that on the surface. You know the interior, there's a kind of interior quality, there's a depth. Speaker 1: There's also a genteelness I think with people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Treating women you know-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: There's the manners. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and those things were attractive to me. But so we met and we started going out and then eventually we married. We didn't stay married very long. Speaker 1: How long? Speaker 2: I think it was about three years. Speaker 1: Where was he in his musical career at the time you met him? Speaker 2: He had just had a big, big first record 'Ain't No Sunshine'-- Speaker 1: 'Ain't No Sunshine.' Speaker 2: --was already, you know it was already out, it was big and I loved it too, so I think that's--you know I was listening to his music because he's a writer. He tells stories and that's attractive to me. At that time anyway I was you know I don't know if--Gilbert [Gilbert Moses] was also a writer, a theater person, but he was a writer. And he was very demanding about, about writing that, I don't know how to say this, that thing of mastery of language and his ability to tell stories and, and speak and write in images has always been like a lure for me because I'm just--I don't know that it wasn't because I wanted, I wanted to learn more, I wanted to be inside of that and I knew that they had something to teach me and they did. There's no question that they did about language and storytelling and imagery and poetry. So probably been a lot less wear and tear if I had just taken a class (laughter) but I did it the way I did it so. Speaker 1: But were you--you weren't writing at the time you were-- Speaker 2: I was journaling and writing and wanting to go in that direction from as far back as I can remember. I just didn't, didn't know how to get there. Speaker 1: And so what were the years you were married to Bill Withers? Speaker 2: I think it was, it's so long ago, '70 [1970], let's see I was still doing 'Room 222' during--towards the end of the series, it was I think '72 [1972], '73 [1973], '74 [1974] like that. Speaker 1: Now would you have considered yourself a Hollywood couple then or was he all you know performing all different places? Did you go much on the road (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Our lives were very, very different-- Speaker 1: Very different. Speaker 2: --'cause I was working at 20th Century Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Television] and he was writing songs and going on the road. So I did go on the road once with him, I think once or twice. I went to London [England] and I went with him up into, up into New England on one tour. Story_ID: 466152 Speaker 1: Now then, what attracted then--you to Jim Hill then? Because that, that's you got married to him I think in--that one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-one [1981]. Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981]. Okay. Speaker 2: Well I'm not, not so sure because he's not a creative person in the traditional sense of what I had always been attracted to. But he was very successful and very dashing and very--he, he wooed me (laughter) in sense he piled on the roses, more roses and more roses and I think, I'm not so sure and I say this because I think and I thought about it a lot, my sister was killed in 1980 and I don't know if Michele [Michele Burgen] had not died, if I ever would have married Jim Hill, not because there was anything wrong it's just that I was so unsteady and so fractured by her, her murder. I sometimes think I would have married a lamp post at that point because I was so lost and he's a very stalwart, strong, take charge kind of person and I felt-- Speaker 1: Safe. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: What were the circumstances around her murder? Speaker 2: Well, the crime was never solved. She was working at Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] and Ebony magazine as a journalist and an editor. She was thinking of trying to come to California to start a career on camera and she was found in a car--at a rent-a-car lot at LaGuardia Airport in New York [New York] with a bullet hole in her head. So it was quite something. It doesn't go away you know. It just--it never goes away because it was never, never solved. But I think she'd gotten involved with some people that were-- Speaker 1: Not good. Speaker 2: Not good. She was beautiful, she was very smart, very well educated and very productive, but I think there was a fascination with a certain lifestyle that a lot of young pretty women seem to have when they come to big cities. Speaker 1: So she was, Michele was nine--was it--she was nine (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nine years younger. Speaker 1: Nine years younger, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Story_ID: 466153 Speaker 1: So do you think after your last marriage [to Jim Hill] you start getting more into your wri- you know-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know sort of deciding that you were gonna take writing seriously. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can we talk about the process? Speaker 2: Sure. Sure. Speaker 1: You know what, how you came to making the decision, why you know you made the decision, what was the process? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: 'Cause you know I had originally asked had you been in writing classes and you know workshops-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know the things that people do. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did all of that. After working with Carroll [Carroll O'Connor] on the scripts [for 'In the Heat of the Night'] that gave me a little bit more confidence that I could perhaps do this. Now this idea to do a fictional book on the civil rights something--some little crumb of the Civil Rights Movement have been with me for a long time and I had thirty maybe fif- between twenty to thirty pages of something that tried to get into that when I started seriously taking classes. And the first classes that I took were at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] at a professional writing program and then I was alerted to the fact that Janet Fitch who wrote 'White Oleander' and her latest book 'Paint it Black' was conducting a private writing workshop out of her home in Silver Lake in California in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And I heard the book, the workshop was really a good workshop, so I submitted sample writing to her and she accepted me into her workshop and that began the process that lead to 'Freshwater Road' [Denise Nicholas]. In, in between there I also went to Squaw Valley writers' workshop, Natalie Goldberg's workshop in Taos, New Mexico, and took other writing classes you know anytime I could, but during the first two years I was also still doing acting jobs as I was trying to figure out what this book, even if I had a book you know in me, after two years of trying to do both I gave up, I said I can't do both. The book started to take shape, then it started to take over, but it did it almost naturally. It was becoming what I thought it should be and what I wanted it to be and I knew that I was going to have to let everything else go to really focus on this work to do a commendable job, to do a job that people who had been in the Civil Rights Movement would be proud of too, that it was very important to me that I not put something out there that diminished that moment in our history that instead it had to do the opposite, it had to illuminate it and make people more interested in it. So I had to give myself over to it and then with Janet Fitch's help I was able to do that. Speaker 1: Now what did she--how was she helpful to you? Speaker 2: You know, there's some people who are geniuses at teaching. I don't know where she gets this. She was a history major in college. She's a terrific writer, but she's a teacher. And I don't know, I don't know (laughter), how she did this. I know she had taken lots of writing workshops herself with different people over the years and she brought her passion for writing for the craft to this workshop and she was taskmaster. She was--it was not touchy feely you know nonsense, it was work, it was really hard work. She was very demanding. There were eight of us in that class. I was in that class for five years. We met every other Saturday for four or five hours and you could bring up to eight pages at a time and everybody had to critique, everybody had to bring pages. You could not work on anything but long form fiction; well you could do short stories but no memoirs and no scripts. Speaker 1: So what did you learn about yourself in the process because you know what--it's one thing to sort of think that you want to do something and it's another to do it. Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And remember I think you had mentioned something about--didn't you say about having your own voice in there you know, I mean so but it is a--because you know at first I thought was--well how much is based on her life, how much isn't? Did her mother [Louise Jones Burgen] go running off to New Mexico (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) No, no, no. I didn't know--my mother raised me, not my dad [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] so (laughter), no it's fiction. It--I think for me though I was one of the older people in the class, I was the youngest writer in the class. So the other people in the class were working, had been working having doing this work for a long time. They were--they may not have been published but this wasn't their first time trying to write a novel, so I had to find my voice. I had to unload my fear and I had to take charge of it and it took, it took every bit of that five years to do it. Story_ID: 466154 Speaker 1: So how did the title come? Speaker 2: I have a board, chalkboard in my office and I really don't know when it clicked in, but I had a number of possible titles on the board over the writing, during the writing process and--before you miss this train--all kind of long drawn out things, and 'Freshwater Road' [Denise Nicholas] was one of them because I knew that I wanted that lady, older woman that the main character [Celeste Tyree] woman lives with in Pineville to be on Freshwater Road but I didn't know that was gonna be the title of the book and the reason it was Freshwater Road because there was no fresh water on the road anywhere. It was pumped or it was in a spigot but there was no indoor plumbing so water was an issue. And then as time passed I just kept crossing out the other ideas and 'Freshwater Road' was the only thing that stayed for the whole time. Speaker 1: Now you published--it first was published-- Speaker 2: By Agate Publishing in Evanston, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that was you said a year and a half? Speaker 2: That was August '05 [2005] the hardback came out. Speaker 1: Okay now was it a more difficult process finding a publisher, getting that than you had anticipated? Speaker 2: Pretty much, yeah. We got rejected by all the major publishers in New York [New York]. I have an agent. Janet Fitch put me with her agent in New York, John Hawkins and Associates [John Hawkins and Associates, Inc.] was a very small prestigious agency and they submitted it and we got nowhere. They wanted it to be bluesier, more street, more ghetto (gesture) lit whatever, but I couldn't do that. I couldn't change it. And finally a friend of mine in Los Angeles [California] who's a--who was a producer at HBO said I have a friend who has a small publishing house in Evanston, why don't you send it to him? She gave me the contact and I had the agent send it to him and he wanted the book. So, and then Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.] bought the paperback rights last year. Story_ID: 466155 Speaker 1: So you, you successfully transitioned then as far as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what people are telling me (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So how does that feel though in many ways because you know, how does it--you say it's said it's something you always wanted to do. You're at a time when maybe some of your friends are retiring right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well I think work wise, I'm doing the work that I most, most wanted to do. It's the most comfortable place I've ever been in terms of my creative life. I don't--there isn't anything I would rather be doing than what I'm doing right now. I'm about to start work on my second novel. Actually I've started work on it. It's the work that I think uses more of me than acting ever did. Not so much because acting can't use, but because as a black woman, there wasn't a segue or an evolution or a growth into a more complex characters because they were not being done. I'm sure they're being written but nobody produces them. So this work uses the Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Nicholas] that acting never used. It uses my intellectual self. It uses the passion that I feel for certain issues and people and things and feelings. I can put all that in a book. I can create the world. So it's comfortable. Story_ID: 466156 Speaker 1: Would he [Nicholas' father, Otto Nicholas, Sr.] have been tickled by, by his longing for his ex-wife [Louise Jones Burgen] you think (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well, I don't think all that part would have been tickling to him (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Unclear). Speaker 2: No, that's, that's just story (laughter), but that kind of, you know the kind of character that I was trying to illuminate I think the two, the two black male characters in the book ['Freshwater Road,' Denise Nicholas] of, of, that are really special have to do with something about black people and the Ed Jolivette character to me was the birth--signifies the birth of a different kind of young black man in the '60s [1960s] born at the time, born, not born in terms of birthing, but come into being as a result of the Civil Rights Movement and it's a very different kind of man than it was before and the Shuck character, the older generation, is that man that was so important in black communities around the country who was living one step outside of the law and one step in but who was, who was nurturing as you have used that word and who loved, so loved black people. Loved himself for sure but was totally Afrocentric in his, in his aspect and in his way of being in the world and, and loved our culture and loved our people and lived within in that without any discomfort at all. So it was important for me to grasp or at least to try to go--to, to go grasp those two characters, try to give them that. Speaker 1: So your father was a race man? Speaker 2: He was a race man. Speaker 1: He was a race man. So what do you want to with your work? Would you describe your, your niche as civil rights historical narrative? Speaker 2: I don't think so because the next book is gonna be 1950 you know. Now I had this passion about doing this civil rights thing for a long, long time because I had been there blah, blah, blah, but I think the real passion that's gonna feed whatever I write is just the love I have of black people and our history in this country and I don't--so that's so much a part of who I am that was never allowed play as an actress so that, that's another reason why I'm so comfortable in this work because it is, it is all over me. It's all in me. It's what I believe. That we are the most extraordinary people with all of our warts to have been on this journey that we've been on in this country from, from day one 'til now is amazing what, what we've done, it's amazing. Story_ID: 466157 Speaker 1: So speaking of that, let's--just what are your hopes and concerns for, for the black race? For the Afri- I mean the, yeah black race, for black people? Speaker 2: Well I think that right now my concern is a self-destruction because I see it 'cause I'm traveling around a lot. I'm, I'm deeply frightened for what is happening to our young people and I don't know all the reasons why people so young are so self-destructive. But the violence, black on black violence, the denigration of our culture, the lack of knowledge and understanding of our history, the inability to embrace ourselves is like, it's like an alarm bell sounding in my head that we are right at the precipice of, of disappearing in a sense, of becoming something else because we're not honoring and not holding on to who we are and pushing forward, we seem to be pushing back. So I mean those are, those are things I'm thinking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hopes? Hope? Speaker 2: Well we were talking earlier and you said that you see hope and there is hope there but there is a lot of despair. There's always been a lot of despair. The difference is it was always balanced with hope. I don't see what you see right now. I don't see quite so much hope. I'm seeing young people, sixteen and seventeen years old who seem to have no hope and I don't understand how you can be so young and have no no hope at all to, to be dismissive of your own culture and your own history at seventeen and eighteen years old is shocking to me. Now I've been off doing my thing and not paying attention as a lot of us have been and now we have this thing you know. These kids a lot of them, far too many of them, disdain education, they're anti-intellectual, they are--they don't wanna know anything except what they already know or what they're learning from somebody who is their own age. I remember looking up to, admiring people. They don't look up to anybody. I remember meeting James Baldwin and, and very nearly just falling down. I mean I was just like, oh my god I'm sitting at a dinner table with James Baldwin? I'm in New York [New York]? I'm, I'm at El Faro [El Faro Restaurant, New York, New York], I'm sitting here (laughter). And James Baldwin is across the table from me or when I met Toni Morrison briefly. I mean this--you have to have people you look up to. You have to have I hate to use that word heroes but you have to have grand, great people that you admire that you want to be like, that you want to replicate or even do more. You know I saw Duke Ellington once before he died and I thought I was just you know this is magnificent. And I saw John Coltrane and I met Count Basie and I know, you know I just don't understand what these kids have in their heads. Story_ID: 466158 Speaker 1: Now if you were advising someone coming along like you did who wanted a career in TV-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or you know film or theater, what would you advise them now? Speaker 2: Well I would caution them, but you know, you don't wanna--I wouldn't wanna be involved in diminishing anybody's dreams. I think it's an overwrought profession. It's overplayed. It's--there're too many people for the work that's there. It's, it doesn't, it doesn't give back what it takes from you. But if it's your dream you have to, you have to go for it. You have to give it; you have to give it a go. But I mean you know, there're no black kids in medical school any more, in professional schools. Everybody wants to be on television. Everybody wants to be a celebrity. It's not that they even want to be actors, they really don't wanna, they just wanna be celebrities. Because the work of acting can be grueling and, and very difficult. But you know they don't know that part of it. They just wanna be on TV so I mean, that's the, that's the culture as a whole. That's everybody not just black people. Story_ID: 466159 Speaker 1: Now what do you want your legacy to be and I want you to think of the question in terms of your mother [Louise Jones Burgen] and your father [Otto Nicholas, Sr.] and your, you know your rich sort of family history you know you spoke of. What do you want it to be? Speaker 2: Well I think because I made a decision to not have children early on that there--at this point two pieces to it. That what career I did have as an actress, I tried very hard not to do things that were demeaning to myself or to to us as a people, to people period, to humanity. Now the piece of that that has to do with black people has very much a lot to do with my father. Because he would say do not, he would say, "Do not let me walk into a movie theater with my friends and see you up on the screen doing something that would embarrass me." And I mean he said--he would say this to me. And he'd say you know you could always find something else to do. You don't have to do this. So that's a part of my legacy. The other part, the child part of it is writing because the books are my children and that's what I'm leaving the world. So far, I have one child ['Freshwater Road,' Denise Nicholas] but I have another in the hopper (laughter), so I'm pregnant with book. So hopefully I'll get this second book out and you know take a break. Sit down and rest for a bit. Story_ID: 466160 Speaker 1: This is a photograph from the PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] special project, 'And the Children Shall Lead,' 1985 with [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover and me playing husband and wife. Actually it's a civil rights story. It was. I can't tell you much else about it. I don't remember. Speaker 2: This is from 'Ghost Dad,' 1990 with Bill Cosby and me playing his--I was playing his girlfriend who lived next door. And Sidney Poitier, (pronunciation) Sidney Poitier, Sidney Poitier directed it. Speaker 1: This photograph is from 'The Paper Chase' and that is the veteran actor/director John Houseman and this was in February 1979 and the episode was entitled "A Matter of Anger." It's about affirmative action. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is from 'Baby...I'm Back!' with Demond Wilson, 1978, CBS comedy series that we had for one season. Speaker 2: How do you spell Demond? Speaker 1: Demond is, D-E-S-M-O-N-D [sic.]. Speaker 2: This is 1977, 'A Piece of the Action' with Bill Cosby, directed also by Sidney Poitier. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: 'Police Story,' 1976. I don't know anything else about it. "A Company of Victims" [sic. "A Community of Victims"] that was the name of it. Speaker 1: Oh, it was? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I played--Cleavon Little was my husband, police officer that got killed. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: And that's from 'The Soul of Nigger Charley,' 1973. That photograph is outside of, let's see that's in Arizona, Tucson, it's in Tucson. It's the only western I ever did. Had to be tied onto the horse I was such a dreadful-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Let's see, I don't know that actor's name, oh god, I've forgotten his name. I know him. I'm really sorry. This is--Fred Williamson was the lead and me. I don't know the little boy's name. Speaker 2: And this is my favorite. 'Let's Do It Again,' 1975 with my getup, my blonde hair and my big boobs (laughter). Oh, that one was really going back. Speaker 1: Oh this was 'Night Gallery' and this is a fan. I never sent it back to him. Oh god, that's so terrible Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Nicholas]. This had to be 1969 just before 'Room 222' started, Rod Sterling's 'Night Gallery.' I think Brock Peters was in that with me. Yeah, here's the one from 'Let's Do It Again' with the blonde wig. Speaker 2: That's 'Room 222' and that looks like that had to be '69 [1969] or '70 [1970] with Michael Constantine, Karen Valentine, myself, Lloyd Haynes and I can't remember the little boy's name. It might be, it might be written on the back, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I went right to left. Not on the back, okay well, that'll be on the IMDb [Internet Movie Database] too, original cast because he was a reoccurring character. Speaker 1: And this is an episode ["Where Is It Written?"] of 'Room 222' that Aretha Franklin did and this is the two of us working with the dialogue coach to help her with her lines because she hadn't really any acting jobs I think at that point. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I don't have a year for that but it had to be. Well you know those, those episodes are listed and I think her, her appearance had to be 1970 or '71 [sic. 1972]. Speaker 2: This is 'Sophisticated Gents' ['The Sophisticated Gents'], 1981 with, oh dear I'm having a senior moment. You can find that online now I think. 'Sophisticated Gents,' the actor who was terrific who died. I can't remember his name-- Speaker 1: That's 'Sophisticated Gents' as well, the cast picture. Oh there's Rosalind Cash was in there, [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks is in there, [HistoryMaker] Bernie Casey is in there, Dick Anthony Williams. Oh my god, (unclear). This is incredible. Speaker 2: So what year was this? Speaker 1: This was '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: Okay. So it was a reunion of sorts? Speaker 1: It was kind of, yeah. That'll certainly be listed online. It had a huge cast. Speaker 2: And this is back in the day, the Free Southern Theater, Mississippi, 1964 and that's John--I should go right? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay so the guitarist is Stu House, not sure the next actor's name. I think that's Eric Weinberger, then me, Denise Nicholas, and Gil Moses [Gilbert Moses] with the glasses and John O'Neal on the end. Speaker 1: And that's me. I think we were in rehearsal here for 'In White America' [Martin Duberman]. I think this is Lester Galt, I'm not sure I can check though if you need that. You may not be able to find that online but I have it in a book in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Oh they have those on the back of that. I see it the post-it. It is Lester Galt, Eric Weinberger, myself, Susan, Susan Tabor, oh there's the little face right there, I didn't see her, Susan Tabor, Gil and John okay. So that's me and Lester Galt. Speaker 2: This is on the right of my right, that's Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], 'Daddy Goodness' [Richard Wright and Louis Sapin] with Moses Gunn, Rosalind Cash, Judyann Johnson [Judyann Elder] at the time and myself. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, this-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: --that's the first script that I wrote for 'In the Heat of the Night' that's why I have those. Those are the credits. Yeah I need to get that framed. So do they have the other one with the name of the script? Yeah there it is "Odessa." There you go. Written by, is the second one. Yeah. You got that? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, cool. Speaker 2: And that's me at about four. Speaker 1: And this is PBS special called 'Voices of my People: In Celebration of Black Poetry' [sic. 'Voices of Our People: In Celebration of Black Poetry'] that I also co-produced with left, Janet MacLachlan [HistoryMaker Janet Angel MacLachlan], Charles Johnson [HistoryMaker Charles F. Johnson], who's a TV producer now, myself, Robert Hooks, the lady, the other lady is I can't think of her name and Brock Peters, the late Brock Peters. I'll remember her name at home but I'll give it to you if you need that. Can't remember her name-- Speaker 2: Right here (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, at this very moment I can't remember her name. Janet MacLachlan, Charles, Denise, Robert and, and Brock, can't remember her name--is it on there? Speaker 2: No--oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Tracy Lyles. Speaker 1: Tracy Lyles, there you go, thank you...