 Story_ID: 638751 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, it's Matthew Hickey. Speaker 1: Oh it sure is, it's Matthew Hickey. Why did I say Scott? We'll it's certainly the great Matthew Hickey. I'm in Virginia, not New York (laughter). So, ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Cassandra Lynn Newby-Alexander [HistoryMaker Cassandra Newby-Alexander]. And it's C-A-S-S-A-N-D-R-A, the middle name is Lynn, L-Y-N-N, and the last name is hyphenated, Newby, N-E-W-B-Y hyphen, Alexander, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your place of birth and date of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on December 30th, 1957, in Great Lakes, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: (Laughter) What is today's date? I have no idea. What is it? May 10th, okay. It's May 10th, 2010. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the Harrison B. Wilson Archives [Harrison B. Wilson Archives and Art Gallery] on the campus of Norfolk State University in Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: All right, and ma'am what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am an associate professor of history here at Norfolk State. Story_ID: 638752 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five, lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels us to ask of everyone-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Shrimp, anything with shrimp in it. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't know if black is a fav- is a color, but certainly it's a shade, but I love black. Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I would say this is my favorite time of the year when the weather is still a little coolish and a little warm in the sixties and seventies and the flowers are out, all the spring flowers. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It's my grandfather's favorite saying, my paternal grandfather [James Newby, Sr.], that a contented person is a disciplined person. Story_ID: 638753 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Newby, Jr.] side, but we'll ask about your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yeah her name is Claytea Baker Newby. C-L-A-Y-T-E-A, Baker, B-A-K-E-R, and then N-E-W-B-Y. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born on March 5th, 1930, in Enfield, North Carolina. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: How do you spell Enfield? Speaker 1: E-N-F-I-E-L-D, it's on [U.S.] Route 301. Speaker 2: Enfield, North Carolina okay. Is that, is that the town that, Enfield maybe I don't know it so--there's a famous book, 'Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl' [Harriet Jacobs] that takes place in North Carolina in a town that I don't know I always-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not really sure. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm very familiar with the book, but I can't remember. But Enfield is located between Roanoke Rapids [North Carolina] and Rocky Mount [North Carolina], just about halfway between the two of them. Speaker 2: Okay, all right now, well what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 1: I can actually trace them back to about the 1730s on my maternal, maternal side and paternal side actually. My, my grandfather, whose name was Osie Baker, O-S-I-E, he came from a farming family, but apparently his ancestors were--and it really was women, women and children, they were, they appeared in the 1830 census as free blacks living in the household of the white Bakers with the same last name. And I later would find out that they were related to these Bakers, that the women would have children by the white Bakers. They did that for at least three generations, and my grandfather's family was the first that married then actually other blacks and had children. And, and they were actually from Littleton, North Carolina. In fact the plantation that was owned by the Bakers, the white Bakers was called Little Town, and then it became known as Littleton. And Littleton, you know everyone is related to everyone in these little towns, and Littleton is the birth place of Plummer B. Young [Plummer B. Young, Sr.], P.B. Young who became the publisher of the Journal and Guide. And the Journal and Guide was published here in Norfolk [Virginia], and it was the--it had one of the largest circulations in the country. In fact, the newspaper was the only black newspaper allowed to cover the Scottsboro Boys trial. It's still operating under the ownership and editorship of Brenda, Brenda Andrews [Brenda H. Andrews]. But-- Speaker 2: Yeah the Norfolk Journal and Guide [New Journal and Guide] the famous (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 2: --black paper and anybody doing research comes across the Norfolk Journal and Guide. Speaker 1: Yes, in fact the Afro-American published in Baltimore [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] and the Journal and Guide often published articles, not only about what was going in, on in Baltimore [Maryland], what was going on in this area, but they exchanged a lot of articles, so they published each other's materials. But, but P.B. Young is part of the Young family, and their family is connected with ours as well on my mother's side. Story_ID: 638754 Speaker 1: There are groups of, of free blacks in North Carolina who intermarried with each other for generations, and that was the case with my mother's [Claytea Baker Newby] side of the family, both her father [Osie Baker] and mother side because North Carolina had a law that said that if you were a free black and you owned land that you forfeited that land if you owned, if you married a slave. And so for generations, for about, I don't know six generations, they continued to marry other free blacks who typically were intermixed with whites and Indians [Native American] and that was the case with my mother's side. And, but my mother comes from land owning families that go back several generations on her, on her, on her mother's side. Their last name was Rudd, R-U-D-D. And, and they were the ones who had a lot of black, white, and Cherokee, and I can trace them back to the 1790 census, the first U.S. census that was done. Supposedly, they originated from Virginia and were given land down in North Carolina, in the eastern part of North Carolina, which at that time was actually still considered an extension of Virginia, and that they ended up in Nash County [North Carolina], which is right next to Halifax County [North Carolina], and Halifax County is the county that Enfield, North Carolina is located. So that's my mother's side. She's one of nine children, and her, her mother's name was Carrie Rudd Baker. Speaker 2: C-A-R-R-I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) C-A-R-R-I-E. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Are there any stories passed down in the family that are, would be of interest to us about what life was like in those days? Speaker 1: The, the communities down there, the black and white communities obviously knew each other and in many cases related to each other, although they were very, very strict lines of, you know who you were. My mother went to school, she went--the school she went to it was interesting because a lot of the people there were able to get their race changed in the 1960s to Indian, because many of the, the blacks in that area, they were so intermixed, and like Virginia, North Carolina had this rule that if you were an Indian and you were not living on a plan- on a reservation, then you were considered mulatto. And so it made the lines of who was black and who was white, who was Indian, who was not very, very diffused, and that was especially true for the Indians. And so a lot of the Indians then intermarried with blacks and that was true of a lot of the families that, that were part of our family group. And I haven't--I think the only way to figure it out is through a DNA test, but that's if you can actually get Indians who have not intermingled, which I would say would be very difficult on the East Coast, especially in North Carolina. But, but that's sort of the kind of odd thing about that side of the family. I would look in the census records and marriage records and sometimes they would be listed as black, sometimes as mulatto, sometimes as white. Interestingly, I've never seen them listed as Indian, because they were never living on a plantation--excuse me I keep saying plantation. Speaker 2: Reservation (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were never living on a reservation. Story_ID: 638755 Speaker 1: The interesting thing about, I guess, about that community is that the blacks, when they could go to school, you know, that was the era where they had a one room schoolhouse. And my mother [Claytea Baker Newby] received her education in a one room schoolhouse. And like a lot of families, the families were very, very attentive to their children and made sure that, that they, they were brought to school especially on snowy days. And she remembers being driven to the schoolhouse, and this was in the 1940s, in a wagon, a mule drawn wagon, just because of course the roads, many of the roads were dirt roads and so that was the best way to get around, but she was unusual. She and her, one of her older sisters, went to college. She, they both graduated from Shaw University in Raleigh [North Carolina], and they both went into teaching. In fact, my mother was a third grade teacher, and my aunt was a fourth grade teacher and--but their mother [Carrie Rudd Baker] only had I think it was a fifth grade level education and my grandfather [Osie Baker] about the same, but they really valued education and pushed their children if they could to get an education. So my mother was one of the few. And like a lot of black teachers who were underpaid, she came to Norfolk [Virginia] or to the Norfolk area to work during the summer. It's interesting that in that time period of the 1940s and '50s [1950s] the majority of the black teachers were desperately looking for work over the summer because these school systems they had, the, the way that it worked was that the, the school board would actually appoint each of the individual teachers and would usually only appoint one or two to teach summer school. So the majority of teachers were always looking for work in the summer. And my mother found a job through my aunt working at the beach, Croatan Beach in Virginia Beach [Virginia]. This was a black owned beach at the time. She had a job working down there, and that's where she met my father [James Newby, Jr.] who was-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --a Norfolk native. Speaker 2: So this is Croatan Beach you said. Speaker 1: Croatan Beach. Speaker 2: Croatan. Speaker 1: C-R-O-A-T-A-N. Speaker 2: Okay and this is in Virginia Beach? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay it's like, most likely Inkwell in Martha's Vineyard [Town Beach, Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts] or something-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --black resort be- part of the beach there. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 638756 Speaker 1: Well, give us your father's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: His name was James Edward Newby, Jr. [James Newby, Jr.]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born on July 1st, 1929. Speaker 1: All right and where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Norfolk, Virginia. Actually he was delivered at home and there was a man by the name of Francis, Dr. Francis, who delivered him. And Dr. Francis was an early president of the National Medical Association. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, Norfolk had two pres- two men who served as president of the National Medical Association. Speaker 1: Now National Medical Association is the black medication association. Speaker 2: Is the, it's the black medical, right. His name was J.W., J.W. Francis [sic. G. Hamilton Francis]. The other one was David Byrd [David Wellington Byrd], D.W. Byrd, B-Y-R-D who served as the president first. Both of them in the--let me see I think Byrd was in the late '20s [1920s], and Francis was in the early '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, just for the record they couldn't join the American Medical Association, so (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, yes and that was why the National Medical Association was created as well as the National Bar Association because the courts actually ruled at the end of the 1890s that you could actually discriminate with these associations yes. And that's also why Carter G. Woodson started the national Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History] because the American Me- excuse me, the American Historical Association refused to admit black historians as members. And, and what's ironic is this area then was the starting point of what we, some of the earliest blacks who were considered historians like Joseph T. Wilson who was actually a journalist, but he wrote the first book on black soldiers in the Civil War called 'The Black Phalanx' and he was a north native who escaped through the Underground Railroad in 1854, and then returned after serving in the 54th Massachusetts Regiment [54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment] and eventually joined the Grand Army of the Republic and became a colonel and it was part of his task to collect all the stories of the blacks who served in the [U.S.] military and that's what he did-- Speaker 1: So it's-- Speaker 2: --in addition to-- Speaker 1: It's-- Speaker 2: --publishing a bunch of newspapers. Speaker 1: --interesting I know that in Chicago [Illinois] there's a Civil War archive in the library and they have pictures of when the GAR met there in 18--I mean nine, 1895 I guess it was and they had a big meeting in Chicago and William Carney [William H. Carney] and other black soldiers were there. So, the GAR really didn't discriminate against the black soldiers that they-- Speaker 2: Right, that's true. Speaker 1: --(unclear)-- Speaker 2: There was discrimination, but it wasn't--in fact that was you know really before the cult of the Lost Cause got really, really big. There was an effort to have this, you know, the blue and the gray, you know to have this, this collective agency. But you know once the cult got really big--(cough) excuse me I'm sorry--once it got really big that's when you started to see the discrimination occur and blacks were essentially pushed out. And the agency not died out, but a lot of that--(cough) excuse me--a lot of that cohesiveness died out. And you would see all these blue and gray organizations throughout the nation and, and they just went out of existence by the, by the 1920s, 1930s. Speaker 1: Yeah the Ken Burns in the last part of 'The Civil War' shows these reunions of blue and gray, you know, but did those reunions include many black soldiers? I know we're getting way off the point here, but I, I know blacks were part of the GAR, but--the Grand Army of the Republic though. Speaker 2: Right, not, not really, not really. There were some in the earlier years, but then it became really a matter of uniting whites together. It became that kind of agency as opposed to an agency commemorating the service of, of all men in the military. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638757 Speaker 1: Tell you a little bit about my father [James Newby, Jr.] and his family. Speaker 2: Yes uh-huh. Speaker 1: My father actually comes from--I, I guess we could kind of trace our family, part of the family back to the 1790s on his mother's [Emma Amos Newby] side. Their last name was Amos, and reportedly--this is family lore--his great-great-grandfather was the son of James Madison [President James Madison, Jr.]. He was given his freedom, so he was actually on the Ma- Madison plantation in Montpelier [Montpelier Station, Virginia]. He was given his freedom, and left the area and went to Pennsylvania and eventually, I believe it was his gre- his two of his grandson they were in the first class to graduate from Ashmun college [Ashmun Institute] in 1858 before it became Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. They were Presbyterians. They had joined the Presbyterian church at least the generation before, and the two sons went over to Liberia as missionaries. And this was part of an American colonization effort to get blacks to become missionaries and teachers because they believed that blacks could much more easily convert Africans than whites could. Ironically, my great-great-grandfather died of malaria while he was there, and my great-grandfather was born in Liberia and he and his mother had a difficult time returning to the United States. They finally returned in the 1870s, because the nation did not want blacks to return to this country if they immigrated outward, even though they weren't there to immigrate they were there just as missionaries. Speaker 2: So they still--so they, they left and went, when did they leave or about what time did they go? Speaker 1: I'm not sure of the exact year, but it was some time in the 1870s that they returned to this country. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: And this was-- Speaker 2: --were they there before the Civil War or--? Speaker 1: They were there before. They left, well actually my great-grandfather was born in Liberia. His father and mother left in 1858 right after my grandfath- my great-great-grandfather graduated from Ashmun college. And there's an area in Monrovia [Liberia] that is, that actually has named a street after the Amos brothers. There are a lot of Amoses in, in Liberia or least there were before how many civil wars have they had (laughter). Speaker 2: They've had quite a few since-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --since Samuel Doe I guess in the ninth, early, in the late '70s [1970s] I guess. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 638758 Speaker 1: My great-grand- my [paternal] great-grandfather was, he married a woman [Ida Amos] who was also a teacher, and so he continued the family tradition and was both a minister and a teacher. And he and his wife moved down to this little town called Abbeville, A-B-B-E-Y-V-I-L-L-E [sic.], Abbeville, South Carolina. And, and this--my grandmother was born in 1902 down there. Her name was Emma Amos Newby, and my grandmother told me the story of her, of what she remembered in Abbeville after I returned from Abbeville not knowing that that was the birthplace of my grandmother. After finishing college [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], I didn't really know what I wanted to do. I didn't know if I wanted law, and I was able to get a job with the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law in Washington, D.C. as a paralegal. And the first place they sent us was Abbeville, South Carolina, and when I returned and my grandmother began telling the stories that she remembered, I was shocked because I realized it hadn't changed that much and I was there in 1980. It was a backwater place that was extremely repressive and racist, and she talked about when she was five years old, so this was in 1907, that her parents had started a school for blacks in that area, because the state refused to support schools for blacks, especially in some of these smaller towns and they had purchased and imported some radiators for the school, which was you know a really important addition. Most of the other black schools (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a lot of-- Speaker 1: --had potbelly stoves, so this was technically advanced. And the whites didn't know what it was, and according to my grandmother they thought it was some sort of weapon. And her two brothers, who would later become physicians, were taken into a tobacco warehouse by some of the whites of the town and in the warehouse were two black men they had just lynched and they pointed to them and told them, "Your family will join them soon." And a couple of days later in the middle of the night a white minister, a white Methodist minister, came to their door in the middle of the night and told them, "Get out of the house now, get in my wagon I will drive you to the next town. They're coming to get you." And so she remembers fleeing the house in the middle of the night being taken to the next town and put on a train and basically never returning back again because they were going to lynch the whole family. And I don't think it had much to do with the radiators. I think that was their excuse. This was the time period in America where lynching was common, and they used all kinds of excuses because blacks threatened them both economically and educationally. And they were fearful that if, if you educated people you would make them discontented with their situation and their--the school was a source of discontent as far as the whites were concerned. So my grandmother had this attitude about the South and, and actually grew up mostly in Pennsylvania. Story_ID: 638759 Speaker 1: And she [Newby-Alexander's paternal grandmother, Emma Amos Newby] met my grandfather [James Newby, Sr.] because both of them actually attended Hampton Institute [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. They married in 1927, and I have this wonderful picture of them while on their honeymoon visiting Carter's Grove [Williamsburg, Virginia] in 1927. My grandfather attended Hampton, because his mother was actually a graduate, I believe an 1896 graduate of Hampton. I find it interesting that because, that my grandmother actually graduated from Hampton because she had kind of a negative attitude about the South, but I guess Virginia wasn't really south south as far as she was concerned. But she was at Hampton because it had an excellent educational program. She was a teacher and like her, her family, her, her mother [Ida Amos] and father and, but it was at a time when if a woman got married she couldn't teach in the public schools. So my grandmother actually started the kindergarten program at Bank Street Baptist Church [Bank Street Memorial Baptist Church] here in Norfolk [Virginia] that I understand continues to this day. And I had the, the pleasure of being taught by my grandmother. So you know when I was in kindergarten there was nothing I could do that did not get back to my parents [Claytea Baker Newby and James Newby, Jr.] (laughter) because of my grandmother. But she, she started that program in the 1940s, and it continues to this day. She was also a member of a number of women's organization including the Women's Interracial Council [Women's Council for Interracial Cooperation] that was an important, and that was in the '50s [1950s]. It was an important organization that, that really, you know, tried to--it tried to get around the political situation of blacks and whites in Norfolk you know with the white politicians stopping efforts by blacks to advance, instead going through the women, the, the wives of these white politicians to get, to get them interested in helping the community and building alliances that way. And it was very successful. It was started by, well one of the framers of it was Vivian Carter Mason who was a social worker, and she eventually was head of the national colored women's association [National Council of Negro Women]. But getting back to that side of the family, my, my grandmother, my, my father's mother, obviously valued education highly as did my grandfather. Story_ID: 638760 Speaker 1: My [paternal] grandfather's [James Newby, Sr.] family I know that they originally came from Surry County [North Carolina], but he and his mother actually came from South Norfolk [Virginia] what is now the Berkley section of Norfolk [Virginia] and Chesapeake [Virginia]. So they came from that area. They'd been in this area then for at least 100 plus years. My grandfather was born in 1900, and he, he became a carpenter by trade and a teacher and eventually principal of Rosemont Junior High School here in Norfolk. In fact, he was, he was such a, he was such a lover of technology that he designed the, the PA [public address] system at Rosemont, which became one of the first PA systems in the public school systems here in this city. And he was very--he was a very disciplined person, very regimented in a lot of the things. He was an air marshal during the Second World War [World War II, WWII]. He, he was very well known by the city council people, very highly regarded, and when they were renaming some of the libraries in the area they--it was library they renamed from the Brambleton Branch library to the Jordan-Newby library [Jordan-Newby Branch, Norfolk, Virginia], because they were naming it after the first black individual who became a city councilman since Reconstruction in Norfolk, Joe Jordan, who was also a lawyer and a big civil rights advocate. They named it after him and his family and my grandfather and his family. Story_ID: 638761 Speaker 1: I always ask this question and that is did your father [James Newby, Jr.] have any particular stories that were passed down that he told you about growing up? Speaker 2: My father didn't. My father actually died the year I, well a couple of days after I turned thirteen, and my father was actually very civically minded. He was a, he was the first African American to specialize in internal medicine and to be board certified in the area. He was a graduate of Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and of Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. He also, when Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] was the Norfolk division of Virginia State College he--and it was a two year school, he attended Norfolk State and then finished his degree at Lincoln. And then he went on to do his, his internship at the Homer G. Phillips Hospital in St. Louis [Missouri], and then because he was in medical school, graduated in 1953 and he was in medical school during the Korean War. I understand that all medical school students had to enlist in the [U.S.] military and then serve out their time later and that's what he did. He entered the [U.S.] Navy being from a Navy town here in Norfolk [Virginia]. He joined the Navy and, and went in after his internship as a lieutenant, and he was based in Great Lakes, Illinois [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois]; that's why I was born there. And then the family left in 1959 and returned here to Norfolk and that's where he began to practice medicine. And, and I, I remember my father just being, he was, he had a lot of characteristics of the family in terms of being very disciplined in what he did. He was very civically minded, being--he was very much involved with the civic groups and was the first African American in 1965 to be appointed to the city planning commission. His, his goal before it was interrupted with a disease, he died of very rare heart, heart cancer. He was actually planning on entering politics, but that was, as I said, that was interrupted. And like a lot of physicians, he was a very business minded individual. He invested in, in the construction of one of the first medical buildings in the area for blacks. It's not then surprising that my younger brother had--he's about to open up this new, the most technologically advanced medical building for physicians in Norfolk, actually in the whole Hampton Roads [Virginia] area. So he's--both my brothers actually followed in my father's footsteps in going into medicine. Speaker 1: And they're both younger brothers (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they're-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I, I'm the--me, the knee baby. So, my older brother, James Newby III, he went into family medicine. He was born in 1955, and my younger brother, Keith Howard Newby, Sr. [Keith Newby, Sr.], he was born in 1963, he went into cardiology. And those are the two areas that my father actually went into. He sub-specialized in cardiology, so I think it's kind of ironic that, I don't know if it was intentional or not, but they went into the same field essentially that my father went into. But, but my father I guess just in- imbued in me a love of, of knowledge. He would, every evening he would sit down and read the dictionary for about an hour. He loved crossword puzzles. He loved expanding his vocabulary, and he, he, he instilled in each and every one of the three of us in my family my, my two brothers and myself a love of science fiction and so I'm a big science fiction reader even now. My mother [Claytea Baker Newby]-- Speaker 1: Did he have a favorite work of science fiction that? Speaker 2: I think he was more of a Heinlein [Robert A. Heinlein] fan. I became a fan though of Arthur C. Clarke and Isaac Asimov. Speaker 1: So he was reading 'Stranger in a Strange Land' [Robert A. Heinlein] and that sort of thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes all of those. I mean and, but he was diverse in, in what he read. Story_ID: 638762 Speaker 1: Our household was filled with books, and puzzles and all kinds of things and, and my mother [Claytea Baker Newby] being a retired teacher--she, she left teaching after she had my brother, but that didn't mean she didn't teach because we were her students. We, we had flashcards for math, science, reading, vocabulary building, everything. So, we were constantly being taught by both of our parents and, and instilled with this idea of not pursuing any one particular area. You would think that, that we were encouraged to go into either teaching or medicine because that seemed to have been the family trade so to speak, but our parents just encouraged us to do whatever we wanted to do. They didn't care what we wanted to do. They didn't care what we became as long as we fulfilled our unique destiny and that seem to be the, the thing that I remember the most about my father [James Newby, Jr.] and, and my mother who is still alive that's what I remember with her that she was, they were both always there, always very supportive. My father coached Little League and my younger brother [Keith Newby, Sr.], excuse me my older brother [James Newby III] does the same thing. He's dedicated to helping young kids and to mentoring them. My father was as well. So, somehow in between all the organizations he was a member of and all these things that he did he managed to also give quite a bit to the children in the community. Story_ID: 638763 Speaker 1: Just to go back to--you said they, they met at Virginia Beach [Virginia] at Croatan. Speaker 2: Croatan Beach. Speaker 1: Croatan Beach. Is there a story about how they met that they passed down or what happened when they met? Speaker 2: I just remembered that my father [James Newby, Jr.] during the summer, because he, he paid his way through medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], he used to drive a cab and, and I think he was just visiting the beach with some friends because he knew someone who knew my aunt and so it was through mutual friends that my parents were, that they met each other. And my mother [Claytea Baker Newby] said that on their first date she was stood up (laughter), because my father had to work that night, and so she was through with him, but somehow his charm overcame that and they went out on a second date and by the end of the summer they were engaged and the following year on June 21st, 1953, they were married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was the same year that my father graduated from medical school. Story_ID: 638764 Speaker 1: Now when you consider your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I'm a little of both, even though I'm told I resemble my mother [Claytea Baker Newby] quite a bit. I think I have--I share both of their qualities. Both of my parents were very, very disciplined. My mother could get blood from a rock. She was very, very disciplined with how she used her money, what she did with her time. She, she was very civically involved. She was--she worked with the women's auxiliary of the medical society [National Medical Association]. She, she was a member of a lot of different organizations. She worked the polls. She did all kinds of things, and she managed to go to every single program that we had. And even after finished my Ph.D. [at the College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], and I began working at the college level, but actually even in high, when I was a high school teacher if I was asked to make a speech, my mother was there and I'm in my thirties and she's going to these kinds of programs. I'm in my forties, and she's still going to every single program, every event that she could go to. And she did that for all of us; it wasn't just for me. And, and so learned the importance and the value of being supportive for her and of, of doing my very best. From my father [James Newby, Jr.], he has a--he was brought up with the love of music. His, his father played about five different instruments and so did he, and all of them learned how to play the piano in the family and he made sure that we all learned how to play the piano. He was a very disciplined person in his studies, and we've always been very disciplined in our studies as well. And I share his love of technology. He was what I call a technocrat or a gadget-holic and he passed that on to all three of us. I'm probably about the same as my younger brother [Keith Newby, Sr.]. We are extreme technocrats when it you know, there's a new gadget we would like to at least to get it. My younger brother can afford it much better than I can, but, but we're both--we both love technology and we know that that came from grandfather, his father and passed down onto my father. I think, though, that my sense of justice because I, I guess I if I have a theme song it would be 'The Impossible Dream,' "To fight the unbeatable foe, to bear with unbearable sorrow, to go where the brave dare not go." I've always believed that, that justice comes with a price, and you have to if you really want justice you have to be willing to pay that price. And I grew up during the Civil Rights Movement. I grew up at a time when people were told that if you're going to make a difference you have to be willing to sacrifice something for something good to happen. My grandparents [Emma Amos Newby and James Newby, Sr.] on my, on my father's side would tell me about some of their struggles with regards to segregation and discrimination. I grew up knowing that we were here for a reason and that we should make our mark. And I, I when Norfolk [Virginia] was going to commit to bussing in 1969, they put it off as long as they could, and so they decided to have a test group. They were taking forty students from elementary school, from junior high, and from high school and they were selecting different schools for them to go into and I was part of that group coming out of Lindenwood Elementary School [Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay now I wanna, I don't wanna go too far too fast too far-- Speaker 2: Okay, sure. Speaker 1: --but let me, let me go back to when you were growing up and we'll catch up with that story 'cause that's important. Story_ID: 638765 Speaker 1: When you were--can you describe for us your first childhood memory? Do you have a first childhood memory? Speaker 2: I was a year and a half. We had just moved to Norfolk [Virginia], and we were staying at my [paternal] grandparents' house while my parents [Claytea Baker Newby and James Newby, Jr.] were looking for a home and they eventually found a home at 2712 Leo Street. And I remember it was the fall of the year, it was late fall maybe even, no it was late fall it was in November and I remember waking up, it was about four o'clock in the afternoon. Now how I knew what time it was a year and a half years old I don't know. And I remember hearing everyone downstairs laughing and having a good time, and I wanted to join them and I got up, I knew I had been taking a nap and I got up to try to go downstairs to join them, but the steps were too big, and this was before they had gates up for the kids, and I took a few steps and went tumbling down. I don't remember hitting the bottom. I would later only remember that as a dream. It was a reoccurring dream until years later my mother heard me telling this, the story of this reoccurring dream and she told me, "That's not a dream that's a memory and how did you know what time it was and when it was, what time of year; no one told you this." But, I remembered all of that. So, that was one of my earliest memories (laughter), a traumatic event. Speaker 1: A natural historian I guess you remember the exact time. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I remembered some of the details, and I remembered what I was thinking, and I wasn't angry. I just, I remembered these things and so somehow in my mind I guess this idea of, of observing and, and of wanting to be a part of what I considered something important or something interesting, probably was part of my personality, but that was my earliest memory. Story_ID: 638766 Speaker 1: Some of my early memories: travelling to--back to Chicago [Illinois] my parents [Claytea Baker Newby and James Newby, Jr.], because Great Lakes [Illinois] is north Chicago, my parents were visiting friends that were still there, and I was about two and a half at that time. I remember choosing to go see 'The Music Man' when we were visiting Chicago because I thought I liked the design of the marquee (laughter). And I chose that, that particular film and that started actually my love of musicals. And I know that's, you only asked for my earliest memory; that's my second earliest memory. But, I, I re- I, I don't know I just had a, in my early years, I noticed details. I knew that most adults thought children were stupid or not aware of things, and I remember looking at adults and thinking you know I'm not the dumb one, you are (laughter) I--as a three year old. There's a certain look that a child will have where they're looking at you like, you are really stupid, and I remember that look because I had that look and I remembered what I was thinking. And I know recently they just found out that babies know far more than we realize, that their cognitive skills are far more developed than we ever imagined. Well, I didn't need a scientist to tell me that, I remembered how I was thinking as a little child, as a little, not--as a little baby, not a nine month old but certainly a year and a half. And so I suppose I've always noticed a lot of details. I, I remembered the Life magazine in 1963 that was published after John F. Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] death, and I was watching the news when they made the announcement that Kennedy was shot. And I remembered feeling such incredible sorrow because I knew that when they were telling me he was shot I knew he was dead. I don't know--I was five years old at the time, I don't know why I had that perception, but I did and I told my mother. Speaker 2: Did you, did you ki- were you aware that he was the president of the United--? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I, I had more of, of a perspective as an adult as opposed to a child when it came to understanding events. I knew about the Civil Rights Movement and, and the bombing of the Birmingham church [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]. I was quite aware that, that we had to make a mark, and when I was in elementary school that's what the teachers would tell us that you have, you have a destiny. When I was in the first grade, we had a mock election, this was 1964, and I remember most of the students were standing up and saying they would, you know if they could vote they would vote for Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]. And this one student stood up and said, "Well, I'd vote for Barry Goldwater." And I remembered turning around to this student and saying, "Are you insane? Do you know what he stands for? He's a bigot." And I'm going on and on and on as a first grader because in our family this is what we were taught to really have an understanding of politics, and even though it may have been at a very obviously elementary level, it was still far more sophisticated than what I see young people thinking and, and perceiving today. Speaker 2: There was, I guess there were only a few TV stations and they were the network stations. I mean there seems to be a more concentration of information in those days. I don't know, do you think that's true? I mean you couldn't avoid watching say the Republican Convention [Republican National Convention] if you turned on the TV when it was going on, it was on all the stations. Speaker 1: I don't know. I, I don't, I think sometimes that in that period the parents talked a little bit more to their children than they do now. I think also that kids were in the household and listening more than they are now, that even when they're in the household now there are so many distractions that they've learned to tune people out. Children at that time didn't tune out anyone. They listened to everything, which is why parents started spelling words and then they realized their kids knew how to spell (laughter), and that didn't work. Speaker 2: Some of that's still going on now. Story_ID: 638767 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question in this way too, can you describe the neighborhood you lived in and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I grew up in, at least until 1969, I grew up in this neighborhood called Villa Heights [Norfolk, Virginia]. It--part of the neighborhood was originally built for whites. It was built in the early 1920s, and the other part of the neighborhood was built--it was developed by blacks. And our house was just a very unusual house in that the ceiling had these contours that always lent itself to, for me, imagining what it would be like to walk on the ceiling because it had these, the, the, I don't know beams that crisscrossed into these blocks, so it made this very beautiful and unusual design. You just wouldn't see houses built that way, had a huge front porch. I remember when we first moved in my parents [Claytea Baker Newby and James Newby, Jr.] renovated the house. They enclosed the top porch. It had a back porch, so they actually enclosed that, expanded the bathroom, put in plumbing because these houses were built with, some of them, were built with minimal plumbing. And, and so I, I remember the, the house really being renovated and it became, you know, our playground for everything. Our backyard was the sight of the many world wars that we would have as our playtime. We would, it would be jungle, you know, as we pretended to be Tarzan. It was a camping site; it was a spaceship. It was everything. Children don't have those particular challenges you know where, where parents encourage them to imagining all kinds of things, and you know sure we had toys, you know we had the knapsacks and all of that, you know that children would have if they were playing war or playing being a soldier. But, we had a lot of imagination. Our parents encouraged us to use our imagination, and to read and to watch documentaries. One of my favorite documentaries was the National Geographic one on the animals and then you had Mutual of Omaha's 'Wild Kingdom' and those were things that we saw every single week. Listening to the music; they all had theme songs and usually they were fully orchestrated and so we, from a very early age we were encouraged, even though in Norfolk [Virginia] I grew up in segre- segregation at least the, the first part of my childhood where you weren't allowed to go to the oceanfront of Virginia Beach [Virginia]. If you went to Ocean View [Virginia], that really wasn't until maybe '66 [1966], '67 [1967] where blacks could really go to that area. It was after the '64 [1964] sixty--'64 Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed, but it took some time before they really opened up some of these public facilities to blacks. Speaker 1: Were you aware of the Norfolk 17 experiment going on at time (unclear)? Speaker 2: No because that was in the '50s [1950s], and I was born-- Speaker 1: Yeah '59 [1959], yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you were only two, yeah when that was going on. Speaker 2: Right and, and we hadn't, we were just coming back into the area, so I wasn't aware of that. But I was aware that, I was aware that for the most part blacks went to all black schools. But the neighborhood I grew up in it was a very close knit neighborhood. It was the kind of neighborhood if, if you're riding on So and So's grass on the other side of the block that by the time you got around to your house, they had called your mother to report that you were doing something wrong. The people watched out for each other's children, and, and made sure that the neighborhood was as safe as possible. I remembered and this had to have been maybe '65 [1965], '66 [1966] that we had an iceman who would come through the neighborhood because there were still people who didn't have refrigerators and freezers, instead they had iceboxes and so I remember these huge chunks of ice that he would sometimes give those of us who were outside playing. And, but by the end of the '60s [1960s] of course there were no more icemen coming through the city. Story_ID: 638768 Speaker 1: I remember every other day the delivery of the milk bottles, and, and playing hopscotch, you know taking a piece of, of rock and drawing the lines on the, on the sidewalks. And I also remember one of my favorite things to do was to play outside just before it would rain. The, the air would smell very sweet and it would get very still. And I remember playing hopscotch or jumping around in front of the, the house--I was about maybe six years old at the time--and I was going to run and jump as far as I could to see if I could get to the middle of the street. And I was at a full run and something just stopped me as I got to the edge of the street and moments later a bolt of lightning came down. It was, it was like this slither that came down in front of me. And it didn't touch, it was only a few inches off the ground. It didn't touch the street, but I could feel the heat from the lightning. And I knew I had been saved from getting hit because had I not just suddenly stopped at that corner I would have been right there. And ever since then, that kind of--I don't think I'm on borrowed time, but I believe that my life has a certain purpose and, and it changed how I perceive things. Of course, my parents [Claytea Baker Newby and James Newby, Jr.] didn't believe that that actually happened to me. They thought oh you just thought you saw something. No, I saw a lightning bolt come down, and I know that people get killed from lightning. In fact, my mother had a classmate who was hit by lightning, not quite the same situation, but those kinds of things have happened. But that, that really kind of framed my life and my perspective. Story_ID: 638769 Speaker 1: Now, well tell me about school. Where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started kindergarten at Bank Street Baptist Church [Bank Street Memorial Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia], the kindergarten that was run by my [paternal] grandmother [Emma Amos Newby], and I attended that for two years. And what they used to do, because you know this was a private kindergarten is the parents paid a woman to pick up all of their kids and they would pile us into this huge car. It was, I can't even remember what kind of car it was, but you know those, those, it was a '50s [1950s] car, and they would have, they would have something like seven kids in the backseat. We're all sitting on each other, and we would all get there in the morning and then come back sometime in the early afternoon. And of course we, we learned all the basics. I--well I already knew my alphabets, but we learned more than that so that by the time we got to first grade, we were already reading. And this was, this was in the early '60s [1960s] before the Great Society program and Head Start. And then I went to Lindenwood Elementary School [Norfolk, Virginia] until nineteen six--well until 1970. I was in the sixth grade when they initiated this trial busing in Norfolk [Virginia]. And, and I knew all the teachers and, and the principal. This woman by the name of Kathryn Bibbins [Kathryn Brown Bibbins], who's still alive I believe, she is, she has to be 100 by now, and she was one of those who helped to found the Phyllis Wheatley YWCA [YWCA South Hampton Roads] here in Norfolk. But she was, she was our principal and I remember interviewing her about ten years ago and she talked about how--because Lindenwood Elementary was sitting right there on the Lafayette River--she talked about how worried she was that the children would have an accident and fall into the river and die. And she lobbied the city for years to put a fence up. Not until they initiated busing and they brought white children in there did the city find the money to put a fence up. But what they did was that they warned us not to even remotely go close to that water, and that was almost a daily drill, because of the city's refusal to protect those children in that school. But I remember we had some fabulous teachers who, who hammered into us this idea that we had to be the best. And there were forty of us from Lindenwood who were taken to two white schools in 1970, Sherwood Forest Elementary [Sherwood Forest Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia] and Coleman Place [Coleman Place Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia]. I went to Sher- Sherwood Forest. So, there were twenty of us that went to each of the schools. And we were taught by our teachers that we would have to do twice as much to get half of the credit, and that if you, that even though that was the case don't ever let someone beat you down, don't let anyone tell you that you're not worth something, that you're making a mark for your race and that was, that was hammered into us as they prepared us for, for this particular situation. And, and I mean we really didn't know whether we would face a lot of racism, but we were--the teachers tried to prepare us to face that kind of racism. Story_ID: 638770 Speaker 1: In 1970, you were part of forty African American kids that were part of an integration experiment, right. This is another, the second one we've had today. We talked about the Norfolk 17 earlier today, but what was this one? Speaker 2: This, this one was part of an ongoing effort by African Americans locally as well as nationwide to find a way to really integrate the schools. Norfolk [Virginia] had, had, been forced to do it in a haphazard way with the Norfolk 17, and then in the 1960s they passed a law that said, well we will give people the freedom of choice to choose what schools they wanted to attend, but even then, it was--there was still quite a bit of interference from school officials to keep blacks from attending predominantly white schools, even though they might have lived right next door to them. In 1970, though, after a long fight, the schools were forced to integrate through busing. And the school system tried to find all kinds of ways that claiming you know that they didn't have enough buses, that the students would have to pay for the city bus fare in order to go, you know, to, to the, to their school, their assigned school and all of that. But this experiment before the, the citywide busing occurring was just in case there would be outbreaks of facial violence. Let's, let's see what would happen. And so they took blacks from middle class schools. Lindenwood [Lindenwood Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia] was considered the best elementary school for blacks in the city, and many of the parents were middle, upper middle class and you know from, from two family homes and so forth, very stable environment. And the two schools they chose to put the elementary, the black elementary school students in were lower middle income white schools, Coleman Place [Coleman Place Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia] and Sherwood Forest [Sherwood Forest Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia]. And I was sent to Sherwood Forest and our first day, I had been going to school with some of my classmates since the first grade and three of us competed constantly to see who would get the highest grade. And all three of us were still in the same class when we were sent to Sherwood Forest, and I remember the teacher speckled us around the room. She, she made sure that all of us were in the back of the classroom, but not in the same row and not near each other in any way, which was a rather intimidating environment to, to set kids up in. But, at the same time, I guess she didn't know us because I, I've always been a, a rebel. I've never done exactly what people told me to do, and somehow the five of us managed to end up sitting right next to each other, even though the teacher tried to speckle us around and, and divide us. And we also got to be quite friendly with a lot of the, the kids in the school and, and especially in our class. And I suppose they found out that we weren't as different as they were told. Story_ID: 638771 Speaker 1: And about maybe three or four months into that school year [at Sherwood Forest Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia], there was a kid who, who transferred in from Tennessee, a little white kid, lower middle class, and it was I would say probably in, it had to have been in April maybe that this event occurred. It was starting to get warm. And it was during recess and several of us were sitting in the classroom and we were talking, and these were black kids and white kids all in the classroom talking, and we had a substitute teacher that day and this one little kid had made sure that everyone knew he couldn't stand black people. And he was about that big (demonstrates), no he wasn't quite that, he was the shortest thing in the classroom and we were all sixth graders and like most sixth graders, you know girls grow faster than boys, and so two of us were the tallest. I was maybe an inch shorter than the teacher. The teacher was 5'7", I was 5'6", you know, which is pretty tall for a twelve year old, and we were also taught how to speak to adults. You don't--you, you're, you're respectful, but you look them in the eye and you tell them what you think, and our teacher didn't like that, especially not coming from black kids. Because she never acknowledged that, that two of us in particular always made the highest scores in the class. She never acknowledged that. In fact, I'll, I'll never forget the one girl she always bragged about, it was the little white girl who was in the class making the highest scores before we came along. And she would constantly talk about this child being the brightest student, and the three of us we're looking at her like wait a minute our scores are higher than hers, and then we would start mumbling out loud about how this is a racist thing. And so the teacher really could not stand us because you know we were outspoken. And I think that was really pretty much the byproduct of the times, because this was the, this was when the Black Power movement was really rolling in and, and we were I would say more of the Black Power movement babies than we were the civil rights babies. We would stand up for our rights. We would open doors, and we would be very vocal about our position. And so this, at the time the substitute teacher, she was an older woman. In fact, she couldn't pronounce the word Negro. That was the term used at that time. Speaker 2: Did she--what did she say? Speaker 1: She would say Negras, which the more she said it the closer it sounded like it was nigger, and, and so we would stop her at a certain point because it was getting a little too uncomfortable. Story_ID: 638772 Speaker 1: Well, one of the five black students in this class [at Sherwood Forest Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia] was a girl by the name of Monique [ph.], and she was very athletic. She played all the sports; she was stronger than most of the boys. She was one of those young girls who was just built as if she was just one big muscle. And this little boy who was the Tennessee bigot was talking to one of the, the little white kids in the class who was a good friend of ours, and he was standing up by the chalkboard saying, "Well this school was all right 'til them niggers came." And we couldn't figure out what he was talking about because we got there before he got there, but you know he, he was, he was saying this, and I'm sure he was expressing what he was hearing at home, and the, the boy he was talking to looked a little uncomfortable when he said that and he signaled this girl Monique so that she could hear exactly what he was saying. And he got a little loud and so Monique looked at him and he said, "If you see a nigger, you hit a nigger." And this little boy actually hit her, and all of a sudden the entire room just got quiet, because no one messed with Monique, no one, not, not one boy, not even the male teachers picked on Monique because she could take them down. And all of a sudden we just saw her fist ball up and she took the little boy by the scruff of his neck and punched him and he had to have slammed into the chalkboard after flying about six feet. Then she took his head and slammed it into, you know the little shelf where you hold the chalk, then she grabbed him off the floor and punched him and he went flying out of the room and hit the wall on the other side of the hallway and then she started beating him up. It took about three burly male teachers to get her off of him. We never saw that little boy again because his parents withdrew him from the school. And I remember the teacher just standing there and you know saying, you know, "Stop that children, stop that," you know we were like, "This, this boy is toast. This child is going to kill him." And what was the mo- I guess the most amazing thing was the little boy that this Tennessee kid was talking to jumped up when Monique hit him, jumped up on top of the desk and hollered out, "Get him Monique, get him." Because he couldn't stand the little boy any more than any of the rest of us. And for the first time I realized you know kids after a while even with the racism that they're taught, they don't really see color because they build relationships with each other. But I remember after that situation all the black kids got together and we started talking tough to one another saying they better not expel her because it was this little boy's fault, and you know we weren't going to tolerate this. And you know all the tough talking that you hear from kids who were involved in the Black Power movement. It was that kind of tough talking. They didn't expel her interestingly. Now, they would today, because they have this zero tolerance, and that zero tolerance really came out of racism. Because there were a number of incidences that happened in the 1970s between black and white kids, and our school system never would expel a white kid for hitting a black student. And so then, they initiated this sort of zero tolerance idea that we're not going to even, you know, try to balance anything out, we'll just expel both of them regardless. And so that's what, that's what we saw. But, at that time, the situation was probably pretty dicey, and they knew that since this little kid had started a lot of stuff, it just kind of went quiet. Story_ID: 638773 Speaker 1: There were a few other incidences that happened. Our, our teacher really had problems with the black kids in the classroom, and she tried to find ways to intimidate us, but as I said fortunately I was tall and I was taught how to speak up for myself. And the teacher really tried to intimate us, but it didn't work and I think that frustrated her. But, unlike what happened in the '50s [1950s] where you had actual acts of violence against blacks you just didn't see it, not, not in the--not in, not in 1970. I think part of it was because the nation had gone through quite a bit in those twenty years and-- Speaker 2: I know earlier today [HistoryMaker] Andrew Heidelberg was saying that he thought that there came a recognition when he was a senior he thinks on the part of most whites around here that this wasn't gonna go away. So it was--change was gonna happen and even though they didn't like they could, they knew it was gonna happen anyway. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, I think the whole idea shifted to, to making blacks feel worthless as opposed to intimidating them. Because in junior high school, I went to Willard Junior High School [Norfolk, Virginia], which doesn't exist anymore, they, they tore down the school and they built a new one called Lafayette - Winona [Lafayette - Winona Middle School; Academy for Discovery at Lakewood, Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 2: So, well just tell me like how many years were you at Sherwood Forest [Sherwood Forest Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia]? How long where you at Sherwood Forest? Speaker 1: Oh, it was just for six months. Speaker 2: For six months, okay. Speaker 1: And then they initiated the, the busing, the citywide busing. But, because my family had moved to a predominantly white neighborhood in 1969 called La- it was Winona, W-I-N-O-N-A, because of that I went to Willard Junior High School and so I didn't have to go someplace else to be a part of mixing of a school. I was already living in, and, and we were actually the first black family on our street, and so we integrated that neighborhood. And we had some neighbors who were very nasty to us, and some neighbors who were very kind to us. But, we were, you know we, we, we had a social world anyway that we were a part of in, in the Hampton Roads [Virginia] community. So, I, I didn't need necessarily to have that interaction. Speaker 2: Now, now when you were at Sherwood Forest though did you, did you feel that the level of education you were getting was the same as the one you were getting at Lindenwood [Lindenwood Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia] or did you feel like it was a drop down or up or? Speaker 1: In my entire elementary school career until I went to Sherwood Forest, I never had a new book, and there were never enough textbooks for all the students. And even though occasionally I could take a lot of my textbooks home when I was at Lindenwood, we always got hand me downs. They even gave more food in the cafeteria to the kids at Sherwood Forest than they did for those of us at Lindenwood, and I can only imagine at the more premiere elementary schools in the city how much more they were getting. If this was a lower, lower middle income school for whites, and they had new textbooks and they had new desks, how much more were the more elite schools getting? So, I never really got a chance to see what they were getting. I just knew that it was significantly more at a lower middle income white school than at a middle to upper middle income black school. So even in the '60s [1960s]--late '60s [1960s]--there was still considerable disparity in how much they were allocating for black schools versus white schools. And I would say it continues today. Of course, you know, they've been basing it on, they as in all the cities, based how much money a school gets based on the, the property values surrounding that school. Now how they justify that with, with busing I don't know, but they continued to do that. And they did that so that there would be unequal funding, both for the upper middle class white schools and the lower middle class white schools. Story_ID: 638774 Speaker 1: And then, of course, we know that Virginia took money from the black schools to give to the white schools, so regardless of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is something, this is something that we were discussing before we started the interview. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Tell us about that historically. Speaker 1: Well in the nineteen--yeah in the 1940s the Journal and Guide [Norfolk Journal and Guide; New Journal and Guide] did an investigation of the, the schools, and this, this investigation would go throughout the '40s [1940s] and it would really lay the groundwork for the, for some, one, one of the Virginia cases that would be part of the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. And one of the things that they found out was that tax dollars that were supposed to go to black schools were being redirected systemically to the white schools. So, in essence, they were stealing money from the black parents, anywhere from two thousand to thirty thousand dollars a year for each of these school districts they were redirecting money. So that's why you had some schools in which the school was a one room school house. The table that all the kids sat around--they didn't even have desks, they had a table--it looked like it was made of driftwood and the benches, you know, I mean it, it was some of the most insanely rugged, it, it, it was like, it was the kind of thing you would expect in the home of Daniel Boone when he was out in the wilderness. To see the conditions of some of these schools, pot, a potbelly stove in the middle of a cla- of a schoolhouse. Speaker 2: So, this is the kind of thing that Barbara Johns-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) protested against and they-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --led the student strike about in Farmville [Virginia] yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. It existed throughout Virginia, worse in the rural communities than in the urban communities, but in the urban communities--to give you an example, Cumberland Street School, which was later renamed Armstrong elementary school [Samuel C. Armstrong School] named after Samuel Armstrong from Hampton [Virginia], this school was built with some public funds. It was actually don- the money was actually donated from I believe the Rosenwalds, I think it was the Rosenwalds. But ten thousand dollars was given to the city to build the school. It would be the first public school built for blacks in the City of Norfolk [Virginia]. The other schools were either old worn out school buildings that whites had abandoned or they were schoolhouses made up in spa- spare rooms in churches. But this school was built right beside a railroad track with no signs to protect the children, nothing, you know so it was built right by railroad track. Anyway, there was twelve thousand dollars initially allocated to build the school, but because it was only ten thousand dollars, then the city took the additional two thousand dollars and purchased new desks and textbooks and so forth for the kids in the white school, and then took those old desks and textbooks and put them into this new school that was built for blacks. So, that's an example of what I grew up seeing. And the, the, the differences between a black school and a poor white school were dramatic. And so this is what the Journal and Guide was pointing out existed throughout all of Virginia. And, and saying that it's not just because blacks are earning less money, rather it's because there's a systematic effort being made by officials to redirect money away from the black schools that are, by law, supposed to go to those schools. Well, Virginia then got caught. It was kind of an, "Oops," and then supposedly corrected the problem, but there was no correction which is why the lawsuit actually went forward, and it was won. But the issue is really that those disparities were never redressed. And, and I'm making a difference between redressed and addressed. It was addressed in terms of okay we're going to eliminate segregation, but it wasn't redressed in terms of all of these generations of people not being educated properly. The, the disparity and the provision of, of, of educational opportunities and job opportunities resulted in, in generations of blacks not having the earning power that they could have had and, and you can see that here. Story_ID: 638775 Speaker 1: Even in the 1930s during the--when the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] was hiring blacks, there were women who were taken out of the hospital program and put to dig out what became Azalea Gardens, which is now the Norfolk Botanical Gardens [Norfolk Botanical Garden, Norfolk, Virginia]. This was in 1938. And then on top of building a beautiful garden out of a swamp, blacks weren't allowed to even go into the gardens until the 1960s, because they were segregated, which is a euphemism for they were excluded from enjoying what they had worked hard to create. In fact I, I heard some stories from the women talking about every day, they killed water moccasins and, and on top of that, on top of having you work in that swamp, women had to wear dresses or skirts every day in the cold as well as in the heat and-- Speaker 2: It was a WPA project. Speaker 1: This was one of the WPA projects. So, that kind of thing hasn't been redressed yet. I'm, I'm waiting to, to see one of these young people coming up who will take up the, the task that Ogletree had started in trying to redress some of these wrongs. Speaker 2: You're referring to [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --the Harvard attorney who's-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes, the Harvard attorney who-- Speaker 2: Yeah, for reparations, yeah. Speaker 1: --who has been talking about reparations. And, and while the, the focus has been only on slave reparations in the media, he's actually also talking about during the time of segregation. Speaker 2: Now, now white people have and others, even people like Ward Connerly and other people, have argued that well those times have passed and why would you try to make this people pay for something that they didn't even do, their ancestors did it, you know, and if it's an individual you know, payment (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, racism has been institutionalized in our country since the time when, when colonies and then states adopted laws that put into place institutionalized racism. And that then has an impact in all areas of life, economic, political, social. And then on top of that even though the Fifteenth Amendment and then Nineteenth Amendments were passed, blacks were systemically excluded from being able to vote, so then they couldn't protect their economic interest. They couldn't be there making the decisions that would, for example here in Norfolk [Virginia] there was an area they used to call Atlantic City [Norfolk, Virginia], which is actually where the Norfolk Sentara General Hospital [Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, Norfolk, Virginia] is located. This would have been the first area in the 1950s that would have been integrated because that neighborhood was actually integrated, even though they had sections that were all black and all white, but it was, it was an integrated area. Norfolk made sure that the area wouldn't be integrated by destroying it completely. They obliterated the entire community with the exception of a few houses in the areas on the fringes, but other than that they obliterated the entire area and industrialized it. So now when you go into that area that used to be Atlantic City, you see businesses and industries, you don't see homes and it was for that reason. In fact, one of our city councilman, Paul Riddick, used to live in Atlantic City and he had to move when they were destroying that area in the '50s [1950s] to keep integration from occurring. And so there are a lot of things that, that haven't been redressed in our area and in the nation that should be. Story_ID: 638776 Speaker 1: But having seen this, these differences in funding, accommodations, what you can get--when I went to high school, I went to Maury High School [Matthew Fontaine Maury High School, Norfolk, Virginia]. And this was a high school that was seen as the premiere high school. It was started, it was actually built in 1901 and is the oldest high school in the city. And the reason it's the oldest in the city is because there was a high school for blacks, it was a private school started by the Presbyterian church in the 1880s. It was called Norfolk Mission College [Norfolk, Virginia], and the city would purchase that and it would eventually become Booker T. Washington High School [Norfolk, Virginia]. And when they built the new Booker T. Washington High School, new at that time in the 1920s, they--the city decided to tear down this beautiful edifice instead of renovating it and making sure that it continued to survive. And then they rebuilt Booker T. Washington High School pretty much on the same location it is, but they still haven't done to Booker T. in terms of the landscaping, the, the way that they've done many of the predominately white schools or the original white schools in the city. So, there's still the, the disparity even though we have black superintendents, and we've had three of them, it still hasn't changed the way that, that funding seems to be parsed out in the area. But I remember when I went to Maury High School, and there were just you know books and supplies and all kinds of things that you didn't see even at that time if you went to Booker T. Washington High School, and this was during busing. Speaker 2: So Maury, was that considered one of the black high schools in the city (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, Maury was the premiere white-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --high school. This is where the elite whites went. But, of course, by the time the '70s [1970s], I went there from '74 [1974] to '76 [1976], by the time, oh I'm sorry '73 [1973] to '76 [1976]. By the time that, that era came along, a lot of the upper middle class whites were leaving the city or were going to private schools. Story_ID: 638777 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in school, were you, were you thinking about becoming a historian? I mean did it, at, at any point during your grade school or high school time did you ever think I'd like to be an historian or I--? Speaker 2: You know I've always seemed to have a love of history. But, I actually thought about three things. I loved the ocean and I, at one point I thought about becoming an oceanographer that lasted a half a second (laughter). And--but I, I always, and I put it out of my mind for a while, but I always wanted to go into teaching in some, in some capacity. I loved politics. In fact, I'd even put down that I wanted to get a Ph.D. in political science. I talked about going into history, and then I talked about, because of my civic activism, I talked about law. But, but it had to be a particular type of law. I couldn't be you know personal injury or the defense law. I wanted to be there working with civil rights if I went into law. And so when I went to college I went to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] in 1976, I, I had law, law school on my mind, but by the time I, I was in my senior year I then put question marks. I wasn't really sure what I wanted. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638778 Speaker 1: Now, before we get you to college [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], I just want to go back to high school [Matthew Fontaine Maury High School, Norfolk, Virginia] a little bit. Did you--were you active in high school in clubs and (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was actually active much more in junior high school [Willard Junior High School, Norfolk, Virginia], although I continued to be active in high school. In junior high, I was the class SGA [student government association] president. I did a lot to help promote the school spirit, and, and this was the school spirit for both blacks and whites. I, I didn't differentiate. I had best friends from both groups. In, in high school, I was, I was--I didn't get involved so much in student government, but I did get involved in a lot of different groups. I was still very politically oriented. In fact, going back to junior high school, I remember I was in the ninth grade and one of the teachers was going to run a mock election, but he couldn't find anybody in the class who was willing to support George McGovern and, and this was when Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and George McGovern were running. Speaker 1: This is '72 [1972] yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. And he said well you know, he knew that I, I didn't choose to go into his accelerated history class or social studies class because it conflicted with an orchestra class that I was taking. And, and I wasn't too particular about him anyway because I kind of saw him as a bit of a bigot, and I just tried to avoid certain teachers because I knew I would clash with them. And so I, I went, and I agreed to run the election for McGovern and I pulled all the, all of my friends in and said, "Okay I need you to help me do this and that." And every day, I missed my lunch hour so I could go to the different study halls and campaign for McGovern. And he was so sure that this was a shoo in for Nixon that the students just didn't do that much. And when the election tallies came in, the students voted overwhelmingly for McGovern (laughter), and we lost only by one vote among the teachers. So, we had gone from, "Oh this is you know just no, no chance of McGovern winning," to having a mock election that did not reflect society's decision at all. And so that, that kind of told me a lot about you know the politics that I was interested in, and what I could do, and so I continued doing some of that in high school as well, really being very politically active. Story_ID: 638779 Speaker 1: And then I, I took this absolutely wonderful class. It was an ethnic history class taught by a man by the name of Robert Davenport. He was a graduate of Norfolk State University when it was Norfolk State College [Norfolk, Virginia], and he became my all time favorite teacher. He inspired me. He taught me about history. He introduced me to historical works that resulted in me sitting down, because they had a social studies resource center that you could go to, and I would go in there and I would actually sit there and read history books, I mean, just read them and read them and read them. And that's when I was first introduced to [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett's 'Before the Mayflower' ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America'] and Carter G. Woodson's book and, and 'From Slavery to Freedom' ['From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans,' John Hope Franklin]. Speaker 2: So, so was Robert Davenport a black teacher? Right, okay, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was a black teacher and he had two sons that I had the pleasure of teaching because he sent them here to Norfolk State, and they were both history majors and became lawyers. And so they--I, I was able to I guess return the favor so to speak to try to inspire them as he had inspired me. I read more books in that year in his class, and I'm, I'm not talking about just you know books for fun, because I--we read all the time growing up, but you know historical works. I read more in that one year than I would say I did probably in college [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], you know reading history books. I have lost track of how many I read. And, and of course a lot of biographies. I just fell in love with the subject, and he was such a disciplined, organized, and inspiring teacher that when I first started teaching at the high school level after--when I was working on my dissertation, I decided I wanted to teach during that interim period. I was nominated for a first year teaching award that was sponsored by the Sallie Mae foundation [Sallie Mae Fund], and he was my teacher who inspired me, and I actually won that award. But he was, you know he was just, he was the guiding force for me, how to deliver this information to teach- to students, what to pull out, what to emphasize. He was the one who introduced me to [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni's poetry and to Eldridge Cleaver's 'Soul on Ice' and the whole controversy about whether he did or didn't write the book. He got me into a lot of local history as well because it was in his class that I learned about Lord Dunmore's Ethiopian Regiment. And in 1975 when they were having a bicentennial contest I entered it creating this play, this short play about the, the Ethiopian Regiment soldiers and what happened. And in fact, Tommy Bogger [Tommy L. Bogger] who is a professor of history here at Norfolk State and an archivist was actually on the committee I later found out that reviewed that particular entry. And he told me years later that no one believed that there was ever an Ethiopian Regiment. They thought I had fictionalized the whole thing, and he had to actually educate them that she knew exactly what she was talking about. Here I was this high school student writing about this. So, that kind of was my first taste into local history, and it's been my passion ever since, but it all started with Robert Davenport in high school [Matthew Fontaine Maury High School, Norfolk, Virginia]. Story_ID: 638780 Speaker 1: We were just saying off camera how--what a strange feeling it is to learn things that you thought did not exist and, and how strange you might feel you know, knowing things that most adults don't know or people never thought about. Speaker 2: Well, the, the wonderful thing about my family was that they were so seeped in history that, that while some details were new to them they knew there was so much history; there were so many accomplishments that had been hidden really from, from blacks. Because the school curriculum was limiting. The libraries limited the kinds of books that you could get or the numbers of books that you could get. But that was part of what this kind of community village was all about is that you then had people in that community who knew about these things and who helped to, to start it. Not too far from Lindenwood Elementary School [Norfolk, Virginia] there was a church, Mount Olive Baptist Church [Norfolk, Virginia], and this church, even though it wasn't my family's church, but this particular church was the first to have a black Boy Scout troop that, that was formed in the early 1920s. And the pastor of that church would then go to Portsmouth [Virginia] and, and start another group of Boy Scouts in the church that he pastored also. And this was after a hard fought fight with the, with the American Boy Scout association, because they didn't want black Boy Scouts. They wanted it to continue to be exclusively white. And so our, our, our community was really seeped in this idea that there are many firsts out there and that there are many accomplishments and you know and to learn about it. Speaker 1: About year, what, yeah about what year was that, sorry to interrupt you? Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-five [1925] I believe. Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-five [1925]. Speaker 2: And so you know, so I was, I was raised around that kind of history and knowing about it, but you know like most kids you don't pay any attention until sometimes years later when it begins to affect you, when you then realize that the things that you now remember is someone else's history. So then, then it had, then it takes on more meaning, and then you begin to pay attention to some of the stories that people would tell you. I remember in high school [Matthew Fontaine Maury High School, Norfolk, Virginia] when I was applying for colleges there was a guidance counselor who told me even though I would eventually be ranked seventeenth in my class, and the only reason why it was that low was because of this class called analysis. It was a math class that just kicked my butt. I was so--I got frustrated trying to, trying to take that class, but eventually I, I succeeded. I got my A out of the class, but it was a hard fight to get there. But, but the guidance counselor was telling me that I needed to apply to a school that I could guarantee--that it would guarantee I would get into it, and of course in his mind all those schools were HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]. And, and I had made up in my mind well I'm going to go into law and so I wanna go to the two schools that the majority of lawyers in Virginia graduated from: either University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] or the College of William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia]. And so even though he gave me this advice I ignored him and applied to those schools and got accepted. And when I told him about my acceptance, he just, basically he said, "Oh okay. That's fine." There was no enthusiasm, and it really told me what he was about, that he just didn't believe and didn't want to believe that a black student could get into these schools. And also what upset him was that some of his favorites who were white students didn't get into either of those schools, so that was upsetting to him. But, you know I was determined I was going to, to make a mark and went up to UVA and, and for the first time realized what racism was all about. Story_ID: 638781 Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --founded by [President] Thomas Jefferson back in what eighteen or seventeen something, I don't know. Speaker 2: I don't remember the exact, I should. That's a bad Wahoo apparently, but (laughter). I, it was in the 1780s I think-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I'm, I'm not sure what year it was founded. But yes Thomas Jefferson university and, and I learned to--you know I learned to appreciate Thomas Jefferson over the years, but during those four years I hated Thomas Jefferson because he represented all the bigotry and the sexism that I encountered there. I remember my first day of class, I didn't see any black people the entire day until I returned to my college dorm where there were about three or four blacks in that dorm. I was stunned, because I thought growing up in integrated schools at least part of the time, that I was used to being around a wide variety of people. What I wasn't used to being around was an exclusive environment. And while most of the people kind of ignored you, there was the, I would say the nasty secret things that people would do that, that I, I, I learned to steel myself against by my third, fourth year and that is that when you're walking down the hallway you know everyone is juggling past you and so you know you're bumping into people, but there would be some people who would pass by you and they would hit you with their shoulder, sometimes hard enough to knock you back, and I would get a lot of that. And so that was the, the kind of, you know it wasn't, it wasn't stabbings that some of the Norfolk 17 experienced, but you know it was, it was that nasty kind of racism. There were times that if you were--sometimes there would be two or three of us who were black walking down the street and people would pass by in the cars calling you nigger, nigger, nigger, throwing water balloons at you, that kind of thing. Story_ID: 638782 Speaker 1: There was one teacher who was a psychology teacher, and I had him my first year for a semester. His name was Dr. Lovelace [Eugene A. Lovelace], and so we you know ha, ha, you know must be the father of Linda Lovelace, the porn actress, but he was known for, for being a bigot and I got, that, that I found out after I got into his class. And his reputation was that he would cross the street whenever two or more black students were walking down the street and so two of us--no there were three black, three of us were black walking down the street and we saw him like a block and a half away and we decided to test that theory and so we crossed the street. And sure enough he crossed to the other side. So we said, "Well maybe that was just by chance. Let's try this again." Speaker 2: This is scientific now, scientist. Speaker 1: So he was about a block away and we crossed the street again. He ended up walking down the middle of the street and so we said okay this is true. One time in class, and this was close to, close to the end of the semester, he was talking about how, you know, when you're conducting experiments how the experimenter himself or herself could bias an experiment. He said, "For example what if you were walking down the street and this black guy with a big Afro and a dashiki walked up to you and said, 'Hey man I wanna interview you.' You'd be all nervous and scared and it would totally mess up the results." And my jaw dropped to the floor. I was so flabbergasted. But because I was intimidated by the size of this classroom, there were about 100 students in the classroom, I never opened up my mouth and I made it a point of saying at the end of that class, never again. I would never, ever be intimated by the size of the room, by the numbers of people. If it was wrong it was wrong, and I was gonna stand up and I was gonna say and I was gonna confront that situation. After that, I even confronted the president of the university [Frank L. Hereford, Jr.], because I was part of the Black Student Alliance, and it was the beginning of my third year--no, no it was the beginning of my fourth year that I launched into this campaign about the, the few numbers of black faculty who were at the university and how that was impacting black retention. And I gave an example of it in my class, even though I think I exaggerated the numbers saying that only out of--we had the largest class of black students. There were 176 black students out of a total of two thousand students who entered in 1976, and by the time we got to near graduation period only maybe about maybe a 100 were actually going to graduate, but not even on time. Only about maybe sixty were going to graduate on time, and we made the presentation to the Board of Visitors and it just created this huge ruckus, all these different meetings and so forth about that issue. What eventually happened was the creation of the Carter G. Woodson Institute at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and that would be a couple of years after I graduated that they would actually form that institute. But they still suffered from the whole problem of black faculty, and I remember right before I graduated we had a meeting with the dean of students, no not the dean of students, the dean of faculty, man by the name of Dr. Floyd [Edwin E. Floyd], I don't remember his last name, excuse me his first name, but his last name was Floyd. And, and he, he, he, he was talking to myself and the president of the, of the stu- of the black student government and he said, you know, "I've watched you all for a year, I've heard what you said, I understand, but you know what the bottom line is there's nothing you can do to make me hire more black faculty, and I'm not gonna do it." And I remember saying, "Okay, this is the problem." And I knew there was nothing we could do to change that mindset. The only thing we could do was publicly embarrass the school. And I remember my mother [Claytea Baker Newby] calling me up one day during that year and asking me why I was on the front page of her newspaper marching across a bridge when I should have been in class (laughter) and, and I, you know and I thought you know this is what you all have, have raised me to do is to be true to myself and I really believe that it was important that that institution change what it held so dear, which was white supremacy. Story_ID: 638783 Speaker 1: And you know, I mean when I entered in 1976 they had only started admitting women into UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] a few years before that, so they were both racist and sexist (laughter). And while the school has changed to some degree, the, the most recent murder of that young lacrosse student [Yeardley Love] is an example of how there's still quite a bit of sexism. This still goes on and quite a bit of violence against women. Speaker 2: This happened last weekend I believe it was-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: --former boyfriend of a top women's lacrosse player at University of Virginia was murdered by him as-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I mean when I was there they used to celebrate Easter weekend, which was a weekend of hard drinking. And I'll never forget seeing this girl being dragged through the mud, she was drunk, just totally drunk, but being dragged through the mud by her hair caveman style and she was laughing. Well, the guy ended up breaking her neck. Fortunately, she didn't get paralyzed or die, but that's the kind of crazy stuff that, that I would see at that institution. But I did have the opportunity, because I was, I wasn't a history major, I was an American government major, I had the opportunity to have as my mentor Larry Sabato [Larry J. Sabato] who was the nation's preeminent specialist on campaigns and elections. And I think it was in his second book ['The Rise of Political Consultants: New Ways of Winning Elections,' Larry J. Sabato] that he actually mentions me and a couple of other students thanking us for our work. He invited me to be a part of his--because he would select students for his seminar classes, senior seminar class, and it was a wonderful experience. But he, he was, he was and is a fabulous mentor and instructor and introduced me along with Chuck Perdue [Charles L. Perdue] who is a folk- he just recently died this year. He's a folklorist who introduced me to African American folklore and culture, and, and both of those divergent fields have helped me in framing my understanding of American history and in particular African American history and I've often gone back and looked at, looked at things from the perspective that they taught me in, so it's been--even though there were some interesting things that happened, challenging things that happened in college, I also got introduced to some incredible, incredible professors who really helped to frame my perspective. Story_ID: 638784 Speaker 1: You had a double major in undergraduate school? Speaker 2: Yes I was--I majored in American government and African American studies. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they actually had an African American studies major? Speaker 2: Yes, and, and, and this was something that they created I think my first year of college because I probably would have gone straight into that. I think I would have been much more interested in that. But it was somewhat of an unstable program in that the person who was in charge of it was a sociologist who was an untenured faculty member, and many of the professors that they had, because they didn't have a lot of black professors or professors who specialized in African American history or politics or whatever, they had a lot of visiting professors. So it, it, it didn't have any stability until they established the Carter G. Woodson center [Carter G. Woodson Institute, Charlottesville, Virginia]. And so some of the faculty that I had they were only there for a year or two and you know really hadn't established themselves to really become a good mentor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because if you're just a faculty member coming in--it's public- publish or perish and you don't have a lot of time to try to mentor students. But, I had an opportunity to take a jazz class where I was introduced to the whole--I was always, I grew up listening to, loving jazz because my father [James Newby, Jr.] was a jazz aficionado. But, but that class was interesting because it introduced me to the more intellectual and academic side of jazz, and the, the, the politics and the social influences that brought about these, these particular music forms. And that also played into how I view history and you know these, these movements that come in and, and, and change and alter how people perform music, how they integrate their politics into the presentation. Speaker 1: Okay, now I don't want to skip anything. Now you graduated from University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] in--? Speaker 2: In 1980. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980]. Story_ID: 638785 Speaker 1: So what did you do? Did you immediately go to graduate school? Speaker 2: No, I, I really didn't know what I wanted to do. Up until that period, I thought I really wanted law school, but by the end I wasn't too sure and I didn't want to apply to law school, devote all that time and attention to a field that I wasn't interested in, and so I decided I wanted to try to get a job as a paralegal. Norfolk [Virginia] didn't hire any blacks to work in any of the majority law firms, period. They didn't even hire blacks to be secretaries in these firms. And, and a friend of mine who graduated at the same time had a job as a paralegal up in Washington, D.C., and so she encouraged me to apply and I heard about the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law and I really wanted to work with that agency and was able to get a temporary job. It lasted a year and half, and by the end of that, I realized that law wasn't what I wanted. I still wasn't sure, came back home and decided to kind of try my hand at a diff- a variety of things. And my mother [Claytea Baker Newby] said, "Well you know while you're trying to figure it out, why don't you just substitute teach?" And that first day that did me in. I knew teaching was what I wanted, even though I tried to avoid it because there were too many teachers in my family and I wanted to be different. And so I, I returned to school to get certified to teach and came actually here to Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] to get my certification and then went on to--entered the graduate program in history, master's program at ODU and then went on-- Speaker 1: That's Old Dominion University [Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Old Dominion University and then went on to the College of William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia] to get my Ph.D. in American history. Speaker 1: Now this is almost a tour de force of the Virginia schools (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes it is (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: A Virginian-- Speaker 1: Old Dominion. Speaker 2: --not, not born Virginian, but basically (laughter) a Virginian through and through. Speaker 1: Old Dominion University it sounds like you know prestigious Virginia university, I don't know. Speaker 2: Well, Old Dominion was actually a branch of the College of William and Mary and then it became an independent university in the 1960s. And, and in many ways it's kind of the, the, the white sister city, not sister city, but white sister school to Norfolk State. Story_ID: 638786 Speaker 1: Now, so you had a chance to study at Exeter College in, in Oxford [England] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, in fact a couple of professors here at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] encouraged me to apply for this graduate summer program because they knew I wanted to travel and to have a different kind of educational experience. And so I, I went to Tolkien's college, you know J.R.R. Tolkien went to Exeter College and, and, and, and I was very familiar with 'The Lord of the Rings' and, and was thrilled to be at this international summer program and had a chance to meet people from about fifteen, sixteen different countries and took advantage of every tour I could while I was taking the history political science classes, looking at American and British foreign policy. And that was interesting as well because they had a professor who was our tutor who was considered their most liberal professor, and he, he wanted to have a little party for all of his students. And he was telling people oh you know we were all asking what can we bring and he said, "Okay you can bring this, you can bring that." Then he looked at me, and I'm the only black student in his group, he says, "And you can sing some old Negro slave songs." And I looked at him; I was in total shock and I knew at that moment he knew he had stuck his foot in his mouth. And I walked away with each step getting angrier and angrier. And I went to the, the president [Norman Crowther Hunt] of, of the college and talked with him. I was furious, and he said, "Well, this is so amazing because he's the most liberal, you know, of all of them." And I said, "If he's the most liberal, you all are in trouble." And, and he gave the famous line about well you know I thought we were all past all of this. And I said, "That's part of the problem; you thought it was all passed. So rather than dealing with the problem, you know you just threw it to the side." And, and then of course a few years later, England erupted in racial violence because they were all past it (laughter), and it took them quite some time before they were over it. They still have a ways to go, but it--they're light years still ahead of the United States in terms of our racial issues. But I did talk with the professor, made him feel quite uncomfortable, because I told him how uncomfortable he made me feel and how, how isolated his--isolating his words made me fell. But I think it perhaps brought about an epiphany for him because he had never had a student to actually sit down with him and tell him basically that he was a bigot, because he was feeling pretty liberal. And, and then to talk to him in a very moderated, not angry, but very moderated tone to say you know this is really a horrible thing. This is what you said. This is how you made me feel. This is how you isolated me at a time when I thought I was part of the group, and you made it a point of, of making sure that I didn't feel a part of the group. Instead, you decided instead of treating me as a student, you treated me as a black student. And, and for me it was an epiphany, because that was the first time I ever actually confronted a professor in that way and, and as an adult, not as just a rabble rouser, which had been my college days or college approach to things. So I, I knew I was transforming, and, and, and it helped me to, to recognize when I needed to speak up and not to wait. Story_ID: 638787 Speaker 1: What was your thesis about at, at Old Dominion [sic.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At William? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, you know I was going to write about blacks in England and then the, the chair of the department persuaded me that I would not be successful, and then I got frustrated. And so rather than finishing the master's program I just continued with the Ph.D. program since I got admitted to the College of William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia], which was sort of an interesting situation in and of itself. Because I really confused the date of when I was supposed to apply to that program and I, when I realized that it was past the application date period, I went and talked with the professor who was in charge of the graduate program in the history department. His name was Jim Wittenberg [ph.], and, and he told me well you know, "We, we, you know we gone through the application process, we've accepted all the students." And I said, "But what if I got in my application to you tomorrow, would you at least consider it?" And he said, "Well even if I thought about it, we just don't have any more money. We've used it all up." And while I was at Old Dominion [Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia] I worked as a graduate assistant in the Office of Research and Graduate Studies and I knew that every Virginia school that had a graduate program had monies allocated to encourage black students to enter that program and so I said, "Well, but William and Mary is--has access to this kind of money." And he says, "Yeah." I said, "Well have you ever had a chance to use it?" He thought for a second, he said, "No." Said, "So here's your opportunity." So, if I got the application, and so I started just twisting his arm, and after a while I guess he didn't know what happened to him, but after a while he said okay I'll review it. I got it in the next day and ended up getting accepted into the program. Then I found out that I was the second African American to get a Ph.D. in history from William and Mary. The first one about twenty years before me and-- Speaker 1: Who was that? Do you know the name? Speaker 2: I don't remember the woman's name, but interestingly my husband who's also a professor--his name is William Alexander, and he, he's in French intellectual history--he actually knew this woman and actually recruited her when he was teaching at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. (Laughter) So, he ended up knowing the first one and marrying the second one who graduated from the College of William and Mary. Story_ID: 638788 Speaker 1: And I was determined after I graduated, and I actually finished the dissertation in '92 [1992] and was hooded that year that I wouldn't be the last African American to leave there with a Ph.D. in history. There was one other in the class, a couple, couple of years before, I mean after me. But, I worked with the dean, Bob Scholnick [Robert Scholnick] who was the dean of graduate studies at the time, and I worked with him to create a summer pregr- a pre-graduate summer program in historical research. And as a result, they ended up getting I guess about five or six, at least, five or six students to enter into their graduate program. We've had a student finish, at last two of those students finished in history with a Ph.D. A couple of them went to law school. Some of them went to their education program. So, we've had a lot of students actually go to William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] and other places who went through that school. One student who went through the program, Quincy Stewart [Quincy Thomas Stewart], is one of a handful of blacks to have a Ph.D. in demography in this country, and so-- Speaker 2: Demography, so this is about how resources are distributed in populations? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he speciali- he's one of the few African Americans who specializes in demography. Speaker 2: Now does he work for the Urban League now? That would be a natural approach, but I don't know-- Speaker 1: No, no he's a professor at, he's a tenured professor I believe at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So, he's, he's, he's an incredible young man. But, but we've, we've had, the program ran for about six years, and we had tremendous success with the students who went through that program, at least 70 percent went on to graduate or professional school. Story_ID: 638789 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your dissertation. Speaker 2: My dissertation was entitled, 'All the World was Before Them: The African American Community in Norfolk, Virginia,' looking from 1861 to 1884 ['The World was All Before Them: A Study of the Black Community in Norfolk, Virginia, 1861 - 1864,' Cassandra Newby]. And that really kind of culminated, I suppose, my interest that began in high school [Matthew Fontaine Maury High School, Norfolk, Virginia], perhaps even in, in elementary school about local African American history. It looked at the, the, the development of a community once people were freed. And it included, of course, the free blacks, those who were freed before the Thirteenth Amendment was passed and those who were free afterwards and, and it was probably the hardest thing I've ever done in my life (laughter), to discipline myself to write this dissertation while I was teaching high school full time and being very much involved in sponsoring clubs and so forth. It also involved quite a bit of statistical work on my part where I created databases looking at cemetery records, at enlistment records, mustering records, looking at census records, going through census data year after year and compiling this information and programming a system looking at you know who were these people, these unnamed people? Sure I could pull out a handful of names and talk about those individuals, but what about the ten thousand people who were in Norfolk who were listed as black in 1870, what can I tell you about those individuals, the nameless, faceless people who made up this community? Who were these people, what, what can I tell you about how they lived as groups of people? And, and it was from that, that I started seeing names of children living in black households who had different names than anyone in the household and some of those children were orphans and so that, that told me that there was no orphanage that would--that opened their doors to black children. And so, you had then black adults who opened up their homes and their lives to children whose parents had passed on. And this was a common thing in the community. Organizations that, that had burial funds where members would put in a little bit of money every week to make sure that their members were properly buried so that they wouldn't be a financial burden on their families. You would, you would see insurance companies forming from these organizations. And what were they trying to do? What kind of community were they trying to build? And, of course, it wasn't as if you had a single archive to go to look through all of this. The material was scattered everywhere from the National Archives [National Archives and Records Administration] and the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] to here at Norfolk State's archives [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] to Old Dominion's archives [Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia], UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] and William and Mary's archives [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], as well as going into the city records and looking at these burial records, the land records and so forth. And I remember the professor who was supervising my work, Boyd Coyner [Martin Boyd Coyner, Jr.], who specialized in the Old South. When I first started, he said, "Well you know check out this book and this book," and he you know just rattled off a list of about thirty books and I'm writing them down. And then I'd come back and he says, "Yeah, that's good, but make sure you look at this and this," and he'd rattle off about twenty more books and I'd write them all down. And I remember toward the end as I was getting to my last few chapters he was rattling off, "Did you check this, this?" And I was going, "Yes, yes, yes, yes," (laughter) and I think he must have rattled off about sixty different titles and I was saying, "Yes, I've looked at all these." And he looked at me almost incredulously and said, "Well, I guess you're about ready to finish up aren't you?" (Laughter) And I thought wow you know I finally made it to this point. And then of course the hardest task was pulling all of that work together, and I made up in my mind by the third year of, of, after teaching that I had to get this dissertation finished. And so for a whole summer for two, two summers all I did was write and write, and write, and write, and write, twelve hours sometimes a day just writing and editing and going through just thousands of pages of material, notes that I collected to pull together this, this story of a community, of the emergence of the community. And, and, and when I look back on what I actually did, I was very surprised with the hundreds and hundreds of different documents and books and articles and so forth that I went through, because the pieces were just scattered everywhere that you had to pull together. It's not like writing about the white community, because so much of the material about blacks is scattered, and it's like little pieces and hints of things. And so, that was an experience for me, but little did I know that it would really frame how I would do my research from that point on. Story_ID: 638790 Speaker 1: Now, I know we interviewed Walter Hill [HistoryMaker Walter Hill, Jr.] a few years ago at the National Archives [National Archives and Records Administration] and he told me, he shared with us the name of a black archivist who was the pioneer of black archivists at the archive and so I guess black folks were just really getting into this detailed, you know, kind of study in forming a community I guess in the '60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s] or so? Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was, it was really part of this French school looking at, instead of looking at the great men or the great women you're looking at the community as a whole. And it's a much more difficult approach to try to uncover the past because there're so many different and disparate elements that you're trying to pull together. And, and, and it's not always the picture that you think it will be when you first start writing it. It ends up coming out somewhat very differently. When you see, for example, in this community that you had blacks who, who are serving in the city council who were, you know who had important federal jobs, this being, this, this wasn't a naval location at the time, but we did have the Gosport navy shipyard that became the Norfolk Naval Shipyard in Newport--excuse me, North Naval Shipyard in Portsmouth [Virginia]. And--but, but because this was a huge port area, there were a number of jobs that blacks had that were federal jobs, but you saw all of that kind of go away toward the end of Reconstruction. It started in 19--excuse me in 1875, but because of this group that would come called the re-adjusters it kind of expanded Reconstruction for at least ten more years past that time and so, by 1890, all the blacks who were serving on city council were voted out of office. And part of that was because of redistricting, but also because of the changes in the voting laws. That's why it's interesting, you know, people talk about the fight over women's suffrage. In the black community, even though you see a lot of chauvinism there, it was never any chauvinism about black women voting, because they all knew that the more blacks who voted the more--the, the greater the possibility that blacks could use their vote to sway politics. So you did not see for the most part black people who were against women voting, black women voting. They encouraged that, they supported that. All the black newspapers promoted that whole idea of, of you've gotta have women voting because this, women voting is good for the black community. And, and so this is what I would start to see as I did my research, and it really helped me to have a better understanding of what the community was like, what happened, how it changed, how when segregation came in it was enforced and, and there were many ways that the vote, the black vote was eliminated, that it really--you know, history is not static. Events don't go just along a linear path, but there are highs and lows and twists and turns and how between the time of the Civil War and Reconstruction and the time of the 1960s and '70s [1970s] when you would see blacks at least in the South reentering politics that a lot of twists and turns had gone on so much so that people had forgotten about that past. Story_ID: 638791 Speaker 1: And so, since then I've tried to reawaken people's attention about the past. And I guess that's why when I had an opportunity to start applying for grants for different projects, whether it's working looking at black hospitals, black owned hospitals--most of them were started by black physicians--to looking at these important government funded communities. There were four first--the first four in the country funded by the federal government were here in Hampton Roads [Virginia]. Speaker 2: What are, what are they? Speaker 1: You had--oh, my mind is going blank here. You had, you had the Truxton--that was the first black one--and it was in Portsmouth [Virginia]. You had Hilton Village in Newport News [Virginia]. You had Aberdeen Gardens, which is now in Hampton [Virginia]; it was in Warwick County [Virginia]. And the very first one is the one that my mind is going blank on, but it is in Portsmouth, and it's the white community. Speaker 2: But what do you mean government funded communities (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well you know in our society people think the government funded communities equals low income housing communities. Speaker 2: The projects, and um-hm. Speaker 1: Right, but in, in, during the First World War [World War I, WWI] there was a tremendous need for housing, especially in the areas like Hampton Roads where you have all these shipyards. There was not enough housing for the people, and so government stepped in, usually with the cooperation of the local governments to create housing for the government workers who would work in the shipyards. And so in Portsmouth in you had two and in Warwick County you had two. And, and that--they were the first four government funded communities. So, I, I talk about those in, in, well I did a project looking at those communities. Story_ID: 638792 Speaker 1: And my most recent project is looking at the Underground Railroad, because there's this myth that the majority of people who escaped through the Underground Railroad did so on foot or on little carts or something when the ac- actually the majority escaped aboard ships. And so my, my intention is to transform our national perception of the Underground Railroad and to really shift it back where it belongs that the majority who escaped did so aboard ship, and in states that were contiguous to northern states. So, when we think about the Underground Railroad you know some people think that we're involving South Carolina and Mississippi and Alabama. Well, you might have had a handful of people who managed to escape from those areas, but the majority: Maryland and Virginia. And Virginia more than Maryland because they had the largest population in the South and the largest black population in the South. And even some who, who escaped from Kentucky, some of those people like John Parker [John P. Parker] actually came from Virginia. So, even those who-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a Virginia heritage in Kentucky and you know. Speaker 1: Yes, a strong one, but I mean he actually was, was sold to a person in Kentucky and then escaped. So, you know this, this huge Virginia connection, and so that's, that's my, my goal and then the most recent project is actually creating an educational simulation, a gaming project based on the lives of two people who escaped through the Underground Railroad from Virginia, George Latimer in 1841 and Henry Box Brown in the 1850s. Speaker 2: Yeah, there are two interesting cases. You may as well go on and tell us a little bit about those two guys. Speaker 1: Those two individuals. Speaker 2: Yeah, those two. I know there's been a book about, written about Anthony Burns we were talking about earlier another escapee on a boat (unclear). Speaker 1: And, and Ruggles did the book on Henry Box Brown ['The Unboxing of Henry Brown,' Jeffrey Ruggles]. George-- Speaker 2: David Ruggles [sic.]? Speaker 1: Yeah. George Latimer he, he and his wife Rebecca [Rebecca Latimer] escaped from Norfolk [Virginia] in 1841. Latimer was white enough to pass or light enough to pass for white. His father was his uncle actu- excuse me his father was, was his, his, well let me back up. His uncle was his owner. That's, that's a better way to put it, and they both--his uncle and his father--worked in the Norfolk navy shipyard [Norfolk Naval Shipyard] in Portsmouth [Virginia]. When his, his owner died and his father died, he was sold to, a couple of times to or, yeah he was sold a couple of times to people in Norfolk and it's from his last owner, James Gray, that he escaped. What prompted his escape was that his wife, Rebecca, was pregnant, and she told him, "I will not have a child born in slavery." And they tried a couple of times to escape and then they finally did. Now while he never talks about exactly how they escaped, what ship they escaped on, exactly what were the mechanics, I suspect that he probably pretended to be the owner and she his slave. Speaker 2: Like the Crafts, the famous story-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --of William [William Craft] and Ellen Craft reversed. Speaker 1: But, flipping yeah in reverse. And the first day they were in Boston [Massachusetts], and they were living in the area. In fact, the Twelfth Street Baptist Church [sic. Twelfth Baptist Church] in Boston on Joy Street I think it is, they were noted for you know protecting and secreting slaves. And he was in that area and that's when he was spotted by a man who had worked for his owner. And so his owner went up there and had him arrested, and the blacks decided they were not going to allow him to be returned and they worked together with white abolitionists and trumped up some charges against the owner, had him arrested, and essentially gave him a choice, stay in here and rot in jail or sell your slave for four hundred dollars. And he whined and complained, but eventually agreed, and it was a black pastor who got the money together to pay for his freedom. Story_ID: 638793 Speaker 1: And he came back here to Norfolk [Virginia], James Gray did, the owner, and whined and complained and tried--and filed a lawsuit and tried to get everything reversed, but he couldn't. Latimer still feared that he, that, that James Gray would send someone up to kidnap him because that was the era when a lot of blacks were kidnapped into slavery. If you figure the famous story of Solomon Northup, his book, 'Twelve Years a Slave,' well he was kidnapped in 1843 out of Washington, D.C. Well, for people reading that book, you know they, he talks about going, getting on a train and, and going to Richmond [Virginia] and then staying for overnight in Norfolk, (cough) excuse me, and he talked about how one of the people--actually there were two people, two blacks, who were kidnapped into slavery as well; one free black in Norfolk who was beaten to a pulp and dragged into the slave pen and then put aboard a ship with him and sent down to New Orleans [Louisiana]. Another black in the northern Virginia area beaten to a pulp and, and you know put onto that, onto that same ship. So, there were three, kidnapped three blacks who were sold into slavery all in the 1840s; so, that was the big time. A lot of people they focus on the 1850s, but it was really, the turning point was the 1840s where blacks were determined they were not going to, to, to be subjected to that kind of thing and free blacks realizing more than ever that their, their lives were at risk. This is what really got a lot of free blacks supporting abolitionism, because prior to that, there were some who were supporting it that you know for a lot of free blacks who were in the North it was far away from them. Why get involved in this political issue? Not until a lot of them started getting kidnapped into slavery did it become an issue, and then of course more and more slaves were escaping and going to the North, and then by the 1850s the majority of them leaving and then going into Canada. And so this story that we're telling about George Latimer is an interesting one. Story_ID: 638794 Speaker 1: As well as you know Henry Box Brown. You know, most people they, they, they remember the iconic image of him coming out of the box that was recreated for, for publication, because you know being on the abolitionist circuit you had to dramatize what was going on. And he actually had a play that dramatized his escape. And, and he, you know he tells the story about how his, his wife [Nancy] and children were sold into slavery even though he tried twice he was swindled out of money that he had raised to free them. He talks about walking four miles holding his wife's hand until she was taken aboard a ship and shipped away from the, the ports of Richmond [Virginia] and, and also seeing one of his children taken away in a similar manner and the heartbreak that he had and the belief that if he, if he could be free, then there's a chance that he could recover them, and you know he'd be able to recapture or rebuild the family. There were so many cases of people who escaped who never did find their families again or if they found their families, it was too late. I, I actually published an article about one man who was from Portsmouth [Virginia]. His name was, his name at the time was Robert Irving, but then he adopted this alias, Sheridan Ford [Sheridan W. Ford], and he, he was married to this woman [Julia Gregory], and they had three children. The house that they were living in, that their--that her owner owned, is still in Portsmouth. It's still a very nice house; people have kept it up. And he talks about how he held out for years after he--he escaped in 1854--how he held out for years hoping to be reunited with his wife and pleading with, with William Still, you know, "Can someone please help me find my family?" He didn't know that when the yellow fever epidemic occurred, actually he escaped in 1855, he ran away at the end of 1854, but during the yellow fever epidemic, her owner to, to keep her from being spirited away by her husband, he put her in the Norfolk city jail and then the yellow fever epidemic happened in Norfolk [Virginia] beginning in June of 1855 and he died during that epidemic. The family then sold her and the three children to, to a relative in Goldsboro, North Carolina, so nobody knew what had happened to her. Eventually, he decided to start a new life in 1863 and two years after that the end of the war [Civil War] occurred, and he found out because his wife returned back to the area that she was still alive. She had remarried as well, and he visited Portsmouth twice before he died and the last time according to her, and this was in a deposition, a court deposition, she said that he told her, "Had I not escaped we would be celebrating our fiftieth wedding anniversary." And then he look at, looked at her and he said, "I can't come back here anymore. It's too hard and it just breaks my heart to know that slavery made me leave my wife and my children," and two years after that he died. And so these are some heart breaking, heart wrenching stories. Speaker 2: Yeah I know that history is replete with all those and they're recorded and about, but people don't know as much about you know. Speaker 1: Well that particular story has, until I wrote that article, it had not been told because the depositions that were taken had been in court records that hadn't seen the light of day (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, it wasn't, yeah it wasn't part of a narrative that was, was written out by anyone. Speaker 1: Right, no, no-- Story_ID: 638795 Speaker 1: I stumbled upon it because I found out that there was a supreme court [Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court], a Massachusetts supreme court case because the, the surviving son of his first marriage had this--he, he was supposed to be one of the inheritors to the property. His, his, when his father remarried, he had two children by the second wife who was also from Portsmouth [Virginia] and both of their stories were talked about in, in William Still's narrative ['The Underground Railroad: Authentic Narratives and First Hand Accounts']. And so she, so the children by the second marriage were supposed to share in the property of the parents because he--they left quite a bit when, when they both died. They not only owned two houses, but they had something like $2,500 in the bank, they owned a piano, I mean you know they, they, that was big money for the late 1890s. And the--but the, the, the son and daughter by the second marriage did not share the estate with the first son. So, he filed a lawsuit, and the case ended up going to the Massachusetts supreme court and making--creating a precedence that would be followed by all the other states in the nation, and that precedence was that because Massachusetts did not recognize the institution of slavery that any marriages that occurred while a person was enslaved were not valid. Whereas, Virginia had, had actually passed a law saying that all the slave marriages were valid, because they did recognize slavery. So, that was you know--the other part of that particular family tragedy was that I, I made a pilgrimage last year to New Bedford [Massachusetts] to--because I knew they were buried there and it was a family group. I mean you had her, this woman, the woman he married was Clarissa Davis [Mary D. Armstead]. Her, her brother in law, her sister, and her father all left as well as her two brothers. They were all, they all ended up reuniting in New Bedford and that's where they're all buried. And unfortunately the children in disputing the estate, the children of Sheridan [Robert Irving; Sheridan W. Ford] and Clarissa Ford never put a headstone there for their parents. So you have this huge family plot, you see the father's headstone and others, but theirs is not there. They're just buried somewhere in that family plot. So that's to me the sad thing, but they were extraordinary people too who, who managed to, to make a living in a city that was actually favorably disposed to a lot of free blacks and runaway slaves. New Bedford the big whaling town. So, you know, but that story to me was, was, I'd like to eventually try to do a gaming simulation based on that story. It's not as well known as the other two, but I think it really strikes at the heart of what I want people to understand. Story_ID: 638796 Speaker 1: Let me, now you started teaching at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Public schools, oh-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh, yeah, right. Speaker 2: I, I first started teaching in Norfolk Public Schools in 1988, and I, and then at Norfolk State in 1992. Speaker 1: Okay, and you, so you've been here ever since? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, and now you've been involved in a lot of public education type projects. I know one that really stands out in mind and I saw was a Henrietta Marie story. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about that. Speaker 2: Well, you know that was a slave ship and like a lot of these, these slave ships it, it really tells you the story of the slave trade, not the stereotypes that we have. You know, the stereotype is that you know the whites went over to the--especially West Africa, with beads and they traded beads for slaves. Well, no (laughter) that-- Speaker 1: Your family sold you into slavery, you know or something or-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --or the Africans sold the African Americans into slavery, which is-- Speaker 2: Right and so the, the exhibit really was a teaching lesson. Nauticus [Norfolk, Virginia] was just getting started as a museum, and they were still trying to figure out what they wanted to be at that time. And the, and they, they really needed some assistance in getting this exhibit set up properly, getting docents trained and so forth. And they came over here and they asked us you know, "Can you all be involved?" And so my husband [William Alexander] and I and several other faculty members really kind of went in there and helped them. There was one faculty member who has collected a lot of African art, especially West African art, and he--and in fact some of his collection is here in the archives gallery museum [Harrison B. Wilson Archives and Art Gallery] at Norfolk State. And, and he lent them a number of his artifacts that he had collected to help enhance some of the story, because you know we're talking about a certain area in West Africa. You know, African art isn't just African art, it's, it's whatever ethnic group you're talking about, what era you're talking about, what, what are the influences. Speaker 1: And the symbols that they represent, I mean that art represents. Speaker 2: Yes, and, and what's the meaning of these particular beads? In fact, when the Henrietta Marie was destroyed, and what they found, the different colored beads that they found, were actually the beads that these Africans didn't want, and the beads were only as, kind of a nice little bribe you know it's like let me sweeten the deal as, as we trade. It was usually the iron bars that they traded for slaves and some of the weapons. And it was because iron, while blacks, while the Africans knew how to smelt iron, it was a long arduous process. So, it was much easier and better if they could get the iron bars, then they could create from that iron, from that iron bar whatever tools or weapons they needed. And so that's, that's part of the story that we told and it was a huge success. It really helped to, help Nauticus to get out of debt and, and help them to become the museum that they are. And it was a, it, it got our students involved. It got us really into the community. A lot of people went to the exhibit, and they went to the different programs and then 'Talk of the Nation' came to Norfolk [Virginia] and Suarez was-- Speaker 1: Ray Suarez, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was the, what is it? Speaker 1: The host. Speaker 2: The host of the show at that time, and they invited a couple of other historians from William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], well, one from William and Mary, the other from UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] to come and talk and then they invited me to be on the show. And it was funny because they both said I bet he's going to ask about reparations because that's the book he was working on, and of course he asked that question. And I was the only one willing to, to really talk about that issue and, and talk about it in the context of here we are looking at this particular exhibit and the story of the transatlantic slave trade and why this issue of reparations are so relevant as we look at, at this particular story. And so that was, that was first time that I was on a national program. There have been a few times afterwards I've done a number of, of NPR [National Public Radio] programs. Speaker 1: And that was in, what year was this, this is 19- what? Ninety-? Speaker 2: I think that was '94 [1994]-- Speaker 1: I think it was-- Speaker 2: --that the Henrietta Marie exhibit was here in Norfolk. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638797 Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm going to go onto--and I know the, I don't think we mentioned that Henrietta Marie was sank near Key West, Florida, sank in the water that was being resurrected and they were you know looking through the, well helping interpret this stuff that they brought up. Speaker 2: Yes, in, in fact ours [Nauticus, Norfolk, Virginia] wasn't the first venue, but I think that it became kind of a model because the, there was such community support and there were lots of different organizations that sponsored events, lectures and other things for it. And there was, at the beginning of the event, there was a libation ceremony, and so it really helped to, to pull in the entire community and it became a way of uniting the people in this, in the broader community. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a time period if I, and I remember some of these events, the National Black Holistic Society when they met in Jekyll Island, Georgia, converged on the beach and poured libation with you know maybe five hundred people from all over the country standing there and similar thing happened in New Orleans [Louisiana] when the, one of the ecumenical groups met down there. A friend of mine was there and took pictures of, you know, hundreds of black folks now doing something to hon- to honor their ancestors brought here in, in chains and to, to talk about that period of time, something that we didn't talk about growing up. Speaker 2: Right, I mean, it was really the, the first time that you know many people in the Black Power movement really trying to bring that of. But it wasn't until the discovery of some of these artifacts, you know the, the recovery of these artifacts from these slave ships that, that the attention started going in that direction. People knew about slavery, but they really didn't know that much about the slave trade and there had been such a defensive reaction to, you know, what the slave trade was all about. You know it was it, it kind of vacillated between these you know, well it's your fault. It's your fault too: the story is far more complex than this. It's not an issue of, of you know black people selling other black people into slavery. Therefore, white people are off the hook about it. This was an exploitative system. It was an international system. It was a system that enriched groups of people. In fact, Europe became a wealthy and powerful region of the world because of the slave trade. The Americas became wealthy and powerful because of the slave trade and because of the institution of slavery. And it doesn't matter who all these different groups were who temporarily enriched themselves because most of them were overthrown eventually and became part of the colonial system where you had a different type of enslavement that continues to plague those countries even today. And so the story is far more complex and it allowed us--you know you, you think of these as teaching moments--it, it allowed historians especially to, to begin to talk about this complex story now from a sound bite fashion. You know our society only wants it short, quick, and simple and nothing that people do is short, quick, and simple. Our motivations are complex. Often we do cut our noses off to spite our own faces because we don't think of consequences. We think of immediate gratification, and that's how human beings are. I--in my classes my, I, I teach all of my students remember this, human beings are selfish, evil little buggers and if you don't remember anything else you know this is how, so don't be surprised when human beings do these kinds of things, because it all stems from that selfish, evil nature in humans and they will always do something that benefits themselves, and you have a handful of people who don't. But, but if you understand that then you understand how people can turn on neighbors and massacre them when, when society says it's okay to do that. You can understand that, because people only think about immediate gratification. The selfish part is also the insecure part, when you're jealous of what someone has and you have an opportunity to take it, many people will, especially if society is encouraging you to do that. And so if you see it in that context, then it's not an issue of this ethnic group doing that or this racial group doing that. Rather, it's a part of--it's, it's part of that complex story about human beings. And so I often tell, I, I start off my classes by telling them that so that they don't see this as a black/white thing since many of my classes focus on African American history. I want them to understand that while you have some people who, I guess you would call a hero or a villain, the majority of people are in that gray area in between where they do some villainous things some times, some horrific things and then some moments of, of utter self-sacrifice that, that you can't just eliminate one or the other, that you have to see the total package. Story_ID: 638798 Speaker 1: Now, you know, teaching students here in Virginia, which seems like the heart of so many stories about black folks and about the United, well the United States, I mean so many dramatic stories here. I mean, I just wondered what's that like, you know, to, for the students 'cause there are so many resources I guess to and things to think about, the big contradictions of the [President] George Washingtons and the Madisons and the Jeffersons. There's a massive book about 'The Hemingses of Monticello' ['The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family'] written by Annette Gordon Reed a couple of years ago and you got--there's so much history here and earlier you talked about the, the, what history was and what things were like politically before the cult of the Lost Cause came into be. And I remember seeing an American history magazine a couple of years ago where they were talking about the Civil War and the history com- historical community to re-win the Civil War-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --from the South, from the South. I mean the North actually won it, but the South won it on paper afterwards. Speaker 2: Well, and it's because of how people have chosen to remember that. You know the, the war was never intended to be a war that would divide whites, and it ended up doing that. Even whites who weren't divided on the issue of slavery were actually divided beca- because it started out as, and I mean slavery was always at the, the foundation of this, but it started out as you know well you're, you're vi- you're, you're being a treasonous area. You are, for what, for whatever your motivations are for succeeding you are in rebellion against the nature and therefore were fighting to stop that rebellion, and that was on the Union side. And of course on the Confederate side, you're trying to take slavery from us, you're trying to tell us whether we can and cannot have slavery as we migrate westward. Or you're trying to undermine our slave system. You're part of some national conspiracy to undermine slavery through the Underground Railroad and other, other devices. And so there, you know whenever you have this kind of paranoia and you have this kind of anger and how dare you, you know, try to break this union, how dare you be rebellious, then you're going to have some high emotions. But, those emotions are, are only temporary. What, what re- what really, really made this an intense war was that Emancipation Proclamation that really angered the white southerners because it, it, it brought back up the boogeyman of the slave conspiracy that somehow slaves are going to, to rise up and kill all white people. And, and here, you know when Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected you know one of the first things that, I, I call it the kneejerk bigots of our, of our society did was to say, "Oh Obama is gonna take our guns and then all the black people are gonna kill us," or you know, "We have to defend ourselves." You know, defend yourselves against what? Exactly what are you afraid of? It's not just this, this, this proposed fear of somebody taking your guns, but if you have to arm yourself that you're saying that somebody is gonna come after you, that you have something to fear, and I think it, it went right straight back to, to this society's fear of a slave revolt. Because you cannot mistreat people for four hundred years and believe that they're just gonna forgive and forget. If--even if they do, you don't think they are because you feel, you think, how would I feel if somebody did this to me? And, and so I think that's really at the, the heart of, it was at the, the heart of the Civil War, it's at the heart of a lot of these things that, that, that we see our society grappling with. Story_ID: 638799 Speaker 1: And so, I find it exciting to get students to see that history is-- there's a continuum, that there are connections and that people don't react to things on the moment, on a moment's notice. How we react to things is really the sum total of our lives and our influences from the time we were babies until that particular moment in time. And so, when I was, for example, at UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] and I had people reacting to me because I was black or my perception was that they were reacting to me because I was black in this particular manner, that was because of the sum total of my experiences up to that moment in time. I may not think that way now if I were to go back in time and see that situation because so many years, thirty years has passed since that point in time. But certainly you know it, it, it helps, when you talking with students, when you're talking with the general public and you're talking about people's reactions, you're talking about the complexity of how and why people react the way they do, so much of it has to do with fear, has to do with what you anticipate from other people. It has to do--where you feel like your place is in, in society, and if you feel that your place is insecure. Because you have to also consider that at the time the Civil War broke out that fewer and fewer whites were able to compete against these what I call growing corporate farmers. You know we saw a huge reduction in the number of whites who owned slaves between 1830 and 1860, but yet in that same time period we saw a jump in the number of slaves. And so fewer people were owning slaves, but they were owning a lot of slaves. Speaker 2: The rich were getting richer. Speaker 1: The rich were getting richer. And so the poor whites were feeling already the pinch of this changing system, and they were, of course, very reactive to anything that happened that seemingly threatened their world that was already being threatened by changes. And so, to get students to understand that, and to see those patterns and to see how everything society has its own culture, its own set of triggers. There are certain things that our society gets apoplectic about, and we go into ultra conservative mode. What are those things? What are those circumstances? And training people to see that through history to me is, is one of the most satisfying things. Story_ID: 638800 Speaker 1: How has it--have you noticed--what's the disposition, I guess, of your students here at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]? You got black, more black students for the most part you know. I imagine there might be a few white students and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes I think it's about 15 percent, 20 percent white and Hispanic and Asian students. Speaker 1: Okay, what's their disposition in regards to this history? I think we were talking about the history of the Civil War and black people in this era? Speaker 2: Well you know I, I teach an African American history class in upper level, I teach two upper level classes of the, two 1865 and since 1865 and I always have white and Hispanic students in those classes. And, and actually all these students they, they typically come to me maybe by midterm, but definitely by the end of the year, and they talk about how, how much they learned in that class and how it opened up their eyes to things they just had no clue about. And some of them get upset, you know it's like why wasn't I taught this information in high school; these are black and white students saying this. I get students who are from Africa who are learning this information for the first time, and it's not the, you know they're, they're hearing the, the stuff that's not the stereotype and they're, actually they're angry that they've been miseducated about this history and, and they want to know what they can do to make a difference. I, I, so I would say that a lot of the students black and white, Hispanic and Asian who come to the school they want a difference experience. You know, whether it's, it's by choice or by circumstance. Some of the students are athletes and they, they come in for that reason, but they chose to take the African American history class. And, and I tell them, "When you take this class you will not come out the same as when you came in, that this class is gonna change how you view things and that if you, if you allow it, it will change how you perceive the world." And most of them who come out they tell me that's true. They tell me it's the hardest class they've ever taken (laughter) as well, because it's rigorous. I have them reading excerpts from George Frederickson's book that looks at the proslavery arguments ['The Black Image in the White Mind: The Debate on Afro American Character and Destiny, 1817 - 1914,' George M. Frederickson]. I have them reading about the Hamitic myth and reading about the evolution of these stereotypes with the minstrel shows, but also with the proslavery arguments. And I have them reading some of the abolitionists' arguments and, and some of the stories like the one by Solomon Northup ['Twelve Years a Slave'] and others and you know we, we read the slave petitions from those in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], those in Boston [Massachusetts] and we talk about this, who escaped and we--you know so we look a wide variety of things just in the earlier class and then in a later class we go into the, the black nationalist movement that started in the 1870s and how black nationalism became Pan-Africanism, but continued to have that, that kind of nationalist element, but nationalist element as defined in there's a diaspora mindset that links all people who came out of the African diaspora. It links them all together in a way that is important and let's study this and let's examine this and the people who were part of it. So, it really changes how they view the past and hopefully how they view the present. Most young people--this is just young people--they think everything that happens happened in their lifetime and whatever they're doing is the first time someone's ever done something, so historians really have a challenge because most people are presentists in the perception of things. It's like kids who cheat you know on tests, you know it's not the first time anyone has cheated or used technology to cheat, and you're not the first to do it. Speaker 1: What in your opinion is the most startling revelation I guess for students that take your class? Speaker 2: They had no idea that's usually what they tell me that it, it's like every topic that we discuss they just had no idea. That seems to be the, the running statement. Everything is, is a surprise, it's new. They, they knew about a handful of free blacks, but they had no idea about what the society was like and how repeatedly in American society--there were, there weren't, it wasn't as if things just happened a certain way. There were actual efforts by lawmakers to stop things from happening, to stop blacks from advancing economically and politically. It wasn't just an evolutionary thing. There were efforts made. There were laws put in place. There were enforcements to stop change from happening, and so once students begin to see the--that there were these things that happened that were intentional, then it changes how they view the past and the present. Story_ID: 638801 Speaker 1: Now, you, you launched a website I think in the late '90s [1990s]. What was it called the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it's called Race, Time, and Place: African Americans in Tidewater, Virginia. And, and it really is a website designed to feature some of these topics that I've talked about and to be a place where, where the voices of people who helped to frame our communities can be heard by, by people from, you know from the world. I've had people from different counties who've, who've--you know who were, who had moved to a different country, but they might have been from Virginia or from Hampton Roads [Virginia] who said, you know, "I saw a mention of my great-grandfather," and you know, "Do you have any more information about this person?" Because Hampton Roads and Tidewater [Virginia] in general was a crossroads. You had people from all over the world who seem to pass through this area in some form or fashion, and so these different, these different topics have, have actually helped to educate people. The City of Norfolk [Virginia] got very interested in our Waterways to Freedom project talking about the Underground Railroad and so much so that they, they sponsored the establishment of a website just on that looking, based on my research and looking at where some of these people escaped from and you know telling the story about these individuals who left from Norfolk and from the waterfront of Portsmouth [Virginia]. And, and that was extraordinary that Norfolk would, would actually support something like this. But, it's something that was missing, you know, I mean Norfolk has all of this history. But they didn't publicize it and that's also why the City of Norfolk is sponsoring the publication of this book. It's the first, it will be the first time a city has sponsored the publication of a book focusing on the history of blacks from their city. And so we're hoping that it will be out by next year. Story_ID: 638802 Speaker 1: Now, you consult with American Legacy magazine? Speaker 2: Well, no I don't consult with them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't? Okay. Speaker 2: --but, but they, I, I was, my name was submitted to be one of the teachers at an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] teaching African American history who's selected to be honored and I believe there were five of us in the nation who were selected. And so, American Legacy honored us, not only with a little blurb about our lives and published it in the magazine, but had us come up to New York [New York] to see what, you know some of the things that we're doing. And I know they, they've done a phenomenal job in, in telling some of these important stories that many people don't even know about, about African American history. Story_ID: 638803 Speaker 1: Now, who are some of the, or is there, is there a particular historical work or historian that you admire the most or--? Speaker 2: I've always admired [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin. I, I thought that his story telling abilities, his attention to detail was--and it, well was throughout his life incredible. And he was just the strongest proponent of expan- of taking the work of Carter G. Woodson and of George Washington Williams, and Joseph T. Williams, and taking it to the next level in making it a national story. And, and other historians have added to that, but he really, he really took it to that incredible level, and he impacted the lives of myself and so many other historians. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any personal stories about him or Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] or some of the other people around here that's? Speaker 2: Any personal stories. You know I only had a chance to meet him a couple of times. He, he was--my, my husband [William Alexander] knew him quite well. My husband's father, Lloyd Alexander was one of the early--he was a scientist and, and he was one of the first blacks to get a Ph.D. in biology in the country. And he taught John Hope Franklin; his father taught him. And his--and he stayed in contact with him throughout the years and then so I had a chance to, to meet and talk with him a bit. I just saw him as a very humble gentleman. That's, I guess that's the best way to describe him. And not too many people get to his level and still have both feet on the ground, and he, he to me was that type of person. When you praised him, he looked embarrassed, and yet he had won every accolade there was to win. But he, he seemed to take it all with a grain of salt, always striving to do something better. And, and, and talking about the historians who made a difference in his life. I mean, he wrote the biography of George Washington Williams ['George Washington Williams: A Biography,' John Hope Franklin] and brought him out of obscurity so that people would remember this incredible historian who was very a very early 19th century black historian. And so you know I, I think that, that even though John Hope Franklin is gone that we definitely don't ever want to forget him and what he accomplished. I remember being at an Association for the Study of African American Life and History meeting in Charlotte [North Carolina] where they were honoring him, and he--one of the publishers told the story about how he was given a very short period of time to write the first from, 'From Slavery to Freedom' book ['From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans,' John Hope Franklin] and how he accomplished that task, not only in that short time period, about a year, not only in that short time period, but he actually turned it in ahead of time, which tells you about how disciplined this man was. And so in some ways, it kind of reminded me of my [paternal] grandfather [James Newby, Sr.], this idea of being extremely discipline- disciplined and accomplishing that task. And so his whole manner of being comfortable to me highlights his discipline that, that he's, he's this, he was this very contented person, even with the personal challenges that he faced he was contented because I think he was so disciplined. Story_ID: 638804 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: You know the American Jewish community does something that I think African Americans in their quest to be assimilated have forgotten, and it's that word forget. Blacks, because they haven't written their history for so long and because the defense of slavery hinged on, on talking about the inferiority of blacks and how they deserved to be enslaved and blacks many times bought into that argument, then they've chosen to forget the struggles that made the blacks who they are today, and they've chosen to forget the accomplishments of those who lived during that period as well. And our young people have then forgotten that the world nigger, and it doesn't matter how you spell it or say it, it still has the same negative derogatory meaning, that that is not a celebratory word. It is a word of bondage. It is a word that symbolizes dehumanization. And so, just as the Jews teach their children never to forget the Holocaust and they're constantly bringing that before the attention of the world and it doesn't matter how much people complain and whine and say, "Well, we've heard the story before." It's like, "But you're gonna hear it again and you're gonna hear it again and you're gonna hear it again, because we don't ever want you to forget and we will never forget." And I think that's what African Americans need to do. They need to know that it doesn't matter how much society whines and complains about, "Well we've heard these stories of slavery and we've heard these stories of discrimination over and over again." It doesn't matter. We can't ever forget, because the moment you forget then you don't understand that this historical continuum will continue then to impact our young people, and that's why you see so many black young men who get involved in criminal activities, who end up dying before they're twenty-one years old or who end up in jail by the time they're seventeen or eighteen years old. They don't need to forget who they are and where their families came from. And our communities need to know that there is solidarity. While blacks have, have scattered and they can live wherever they want, you still have black communities in this country, and there's some importance in remembering the history of these communities. Why is it that throughout our nation the only place where you will see a Martin Luther King Boulevard is in the black community? Wasn't he an American? Wasn't he someone who won the Nobel Peace Prize? Why then can't his name be embraced by the total community? Why does it have to be relegated, not only to the black community, but to the poorer black, poorer side of the black community? And no one talks about that. No one highlights that. You know we're still operating as if well he's your hero, he's not our hero. Story_ID: 638805 Speaker 1: And so I think that history is important in teaching us these lessons, helping people, it should be designed to help people to understand the past and understand the legacy of their families. And you know I grew up in my family hearing my father's mother [Emma Amos Newby] tell me about her family, tell me, telling me about her father and how he was born in Liberia and how you know they were missionaries, teachers, and you know and the legacy of the family and how her, her, I mean her, she had three sisters, one of the, one of her sisters died when she was about twelve. The other two were twins, and one became a chemist. Now, my grandmother died in 1983, and she was eighty years old. If you consider that her younger sister was a chemist, a black woman who was a chemist, employed in, I think at DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company], I mean that was very unusual. So, early on I was--it was engrained in me that, that my family had a legacy. My mother [Claytea Baker Newby] always said you know that it never occurred to any of us not to go to college, because it was just a part of who we were, and they didn't care what we became. What they cared about is us fulfilling our unique potential. And, and I think to some degree you know a lot of blacks have so divided where you have the haves and the have nots, and the haves are doing fine, but the have nots are the ones who are really getting left behind. And even though some of them had tremendous legacies to live by, remember, because of the dysfunctionality of, that, that comes from poverty, the dysfunctional families that come as a result of poverty, they forget, they, or if their parents haven't passed on that information. Or maybe their parents didn't know because the grandparents didn't pass on that information. And how can you recover some of that? And, and you know training students how to do genealogical research, training them to understand what the past was really all about. Why is it that most of our textbooks when they talk about the origins of this country and they talk about slavery, they only start with the South when they talk about slavery when slavery existed everywhere in this country? It wasn't just in the South, and it wasn't legal just in the South. And so changing how we view things and changing who we, you know how we perceive ourselves is important, and that's why what Texas did to eliminate the history of Hispanics is a, is a travesty and I'm hoping that the Hispanic community will wake up and not just a few of them, but all the Hispanics will wake up. Because they're the majority in Texas; they just don't know how powerful they can be if they, if they grab a hold of their power as a collective body. But they need to, to wake up and realize that, that their history and training their children to know that they were a participant in history is very important, because it has a deadening effect on soci- on a society of people as it's had on African Americans. I shouldn't have the majority of my students coming in and not knowing anything other than stereotypes about slavery, about the society and culture that emerged starting in 1607. I shouldn't teach them the basics, but that's what's happening now where they don't even, they don't even know that the first permanent settlement was Jamestown [Virginia], and they don't know that there were blacks almost there from the beginning in that pers- first settlement. Story_ID: 638806 Speaker 1: Just briefly, what do black institutions, community institutions like churches and maybe community organizations, what role could they play into making our history more accessible to young people? Because apparently the public schools there's such a political fight about it that you can't really do it. You know you're not, we're not doing what we can do. Speaker 2: Right. You know I have said that the, the true legacy of Booker T. Washington hasn't really been told in the way it should be because you know Booker T. Washington didn't have a whole, have a lot of respect for the ministers, the black ministers because he found that most of them were ignorant, uneducati- uneducated and, and really there to, to train people to support them financially. And he--but at the same time because of his accommodationist philosophies and ideas, regardless of what he did behind the scenes, what he did publicly was he encouraged blacks to financially succeed. Now if that's your focus you know using each other to financially succeed, if that's, if that's your primary focus, then you've left out the altruism and the community building that should come. Instead you're focusing on creating agencies that can make money. But what are you gonna do with that money? Are you gonna give back to the community? Are you, are you going to create then an infrastructure that will have community centers and schools and other things and, and, and that to me is, is where you really see, if you take the collective black community, it, it went in another direction in the 20th century and by the time you get into the 1950s and '60s [1960s], while you still had black churches who were very much an essential part of the Civil Rights Movement, there was also the, the dysfunctionality of the black church where you had the cult of the personality, the minister becoming the most important element of that church. By the time you get into the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], you start seeing more and more ministers who are enriching themselves financially. Now, blacks are the only ones guilty of that; you see a lot of that in the white community as well. But, when you have these huge churches, and I guess Sweet Daddy Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca] is a good example of this. You have a huge church, the majority of people are middle income and poor and the pastor is living like pharaoh-- Speaker 1: Now he's from, from-- Speaker 2: Well, well he's actually Cape Verdean-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Sweet Daddy Grace is, but his first church began in Norfolk [Virginia]. But, you know this, this cult of the personality where it's the pastor and you must enrich the pastor and the pastor then becomes like God in a way. And the money, instead of it going back into the church and into the community, it ends up going to the pastor because it's all about giving back to the pastor. And so that, unless that switches and, we're, we're gonna continue to see these huge megachurches in the middle, in, in some cases of a ghetto where the majority of the young kids in that community are having children out of wedlock, a lot of drug abuse. Where's the outreach to, to the community? Where's the intervention at the point, the prenatal intervention, because that's really where you need to start. Story_ID: 638807 Speaker 1: Is there--have been any venue that you, well, I don't know we, I, I, I guess what I hear you saying is we need a venue for some kind of ongoing cultural education or historical education you know long before people reach college, you know? Speaker 2: Yes, I mean, you know there used to--you know our, the black community used to have--during segregation especially, you had poor blacks and wealthy blacks living all in the same community. I'm not saying that's a good thing, but what that forced people to do was to help one another in that community to pool their resources together. You don't really see that. What you see a lot of middle, upper middle class, especially upper middle class blacks doing is they may have businesses in the poorer section of town, but they live outside of that, so it's not about giving back to that community because they're not getting any direct benefit by helping to build up that community. They're making money from the community, but they're not putting money back into the community, because that's not where they live. That's not where they inhabit except financially. That should change and it needs to change in order for I would say over half of the blacks in this country to be able to move forward. Right now they've been going backward and, and it's not getting any better. And people will try to find a way to make money and to enrich themselves and to become comfortable, whether that way is according to the law or against the law, but they're gonna find a way. And there--because of our dysfunctional and politically charged educational system that's really not--you know the court had a chance, the [U.S.] Supreme Court had a chance I think it was in the 1970s to rule that education was a right, but instead they went out, and they said it wasn't a right and because of that states unequally fund education [San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, 1973]. And so, then you, you know what you have then is a system in our society that is, is broken, and until we recognize that it is supposed to be your right as a citizen to be educated, that the public funds are there, you know we're all in this together, and that the public fund should be used to educate everyone you're going to continue to see especially among the poorest groups, those who are discriminated against historically, you're gonna continue to see the devolution of, of those communities. Can you build walls protecting yourself? For a short while, but then eventually you're gonna have to come from behind those walls. And after a while people are gonna start scaling those walls to get to you. So our society needs to understand that-- Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: --you can't have large numbers of people who are perpetually poor. You can't just drop them from the welfare rolls and say, "You're on your own buddy." They're gonna find a way to make the money, and, and it's usually to society's detriment. With--but if you refocus and you say you know the amount of money that we're spending on prisons, that we're spending on protection, and police protection, if we put a third of that into creating a topnotch educational system, we wouldn't have to export, excuse me, we wouldn't have to import the majority of our scientists. We wouldn't have to import so many people who do the technical things, because our, our educational system is so broken that the majority of people just wanna use a product. They don't know--they don't want to build a product. They don't want to invent a product. So, we've gone from being inventors to be consumers, because we have forgotten that education shouldn't be a privilege it should be a right, and we don't put that money into it and then the black community is impacted even more. When it comes to the churches, I don't see where most of the pastors are doing any more than some of these businesspeople are doing, which is basically raping and pillaging, making as much money as possible and leaving dodge with the money, meaning not living in the communities that they're servicing. And when you don't live in the community that you're servicing, then you don't feel the need to put back in to that community. Instead, it then becomes all about how much money you can pull out for yourself. And, and so I think that, that first are, are the blacks and then secondly, our society needs to readjust how it views what's important. Because you know society wise you know we, we've seen, we're seeing the end of our empire, and an empire that we cannot sustain for maybe more than a num- maybe twenty more years at most. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know and we, we try to think of ourselves as the Roman Empire, but we forget that Rome did fall (laughter). Speaker 1: Hard too (laughter). Story_ID: 638808 Speaker 1: Tell me now, this is another que- quick question we always ask when you look back on everything you've done at this point, what today would you do differently if you could? Speaker 2: What would I do differently? I'm not sure that I would do anything differently, and, and I'm not saying that out of arrogance. I'm thinking that even the mistakes that I've made have been important, important teaching moments for me. And, and I've kind of gone a circuitous route and when I look back I think all these things, all these experiences that I've had have been so important to how I view things now and how I teach and how I approach research topics and those are all really important. I guess if, if I have to pick something I would say I would have read more of the great classics early on, but I'm still alive so I've read a lot of them and there'll be more that I'll be reading. But, and by great classics, I don't mean just European literature, I mean world literature and world history. I think that, that, that we all benefit from knowing how the people have perceived the world in times past, and that helps us to understand that while the wheel keeps getting reinvented over and over and over again and it adds a different dimension, knowing about all these different invented wheels helps your perception of things as well. Story_ID: 638809 Speaker 1: Once again, when you look back on everything you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think a passion that I've had for knowing history and for knowing in particular African American history. My legacy will be that I've inspired other people to begin their journey in learning that as well. And while they will also say that it's probably the hardest classes they've ever had, and it's not just the African American history classes, but I've taught research class and I've taught 20th century American history class, I try to make all of my students especially, whether they're in the classroom or in the general audience, know how important it is to know your history. And not just your personal history, not just the ethnic or racial group that you're associated with, but knowing your history. Because American history is not just a black or white thing. And so, I'm hopeful that, that will be my legacy in encouraging the education of, of, of history, of, of our local and national history in transforming people's perceptions. Story_ID: 638810 Speaker 1: Now, tell us a little bit about your family. Now you were married in '96 [1996] I think to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to William Alexander? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you all worked very closely together on a lot of these projects right? Speaker 2: Yes, in fact when I arrived here in Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] in '92 [1992], I was thirty-five years old and I figured at that point I was never going to get married (laughter). I have never been big on dating, and from the time I was about seven or eight years old I told my mother [Claytea Baker Newby] I wouldn't need to date to know who I was gonna marry, that I would simply know, and I had just given up on that by that time. And I met my husband, who was actually my department chair, which made it a little difficult at that time, but I met him and I knew that he was, that he was the, the one for me, and apparently he knew that as well. And we dated for about four years. He was very careful never to evaluate me for anything, never to be involved in any aspect of that. He worked out a situation with the dean that--and with the department evaluation committee that he had nothing to do with me in supervising me at all while we were dating, and then he resigned as chair once we were married. But yeah, he has been my partner in crime with a lot of projects. He's, he is a brilliant historian. And he's somebody who, and I didn't realize this until my mother said this, you know how they say you always marry your father, women marry their fathers and sons marry, men marry their, their mothers, and that was true. He actually even looks a little bit like my father [James Newby, Jr.]. I--but I think that, that his, he's a kind and generous person and, and he's always willing to help. In fact, the students ac- absolutely adore him, because he will bend over backwards to help them, and he's, he just has this vast knowledge base. He's a Ph.D. from Stanford University [Stanford, California] who was actually a classmate of [HistoryMaker] John Lewis. They both went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. In fact, he was born on Fisk's campus. And so he has had an interesting life, been very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement and the Black Power movement, was in California for a number of years and fortunately made his way to the East Coast and into my life. And he's been an important aspect of and a participant in a lot of the projects. Even though it's not his field, it's become his field. In fact, another colleague of mine here at Norfolk State, Charles Ford, was actually in the Atlantic world history, but he has become a Norfolk [Virginia] historian. He's, he has been pulled into a number of projects as well and has, has really gained a huge knowledge of that whole time period of, of the desegregation of the schools, and you know from the Norfolk 17 up to the present day. So, it's, it's been an interesting journey for me, and for, both on personal level with my, my husband as well as on a professional level. Story_ID: 638811 Speaker 1: Now, I just have one more question, but before I ask that, is there anything I haven't asked that we need to address or talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think I've run my mouth a lot (laughter). Speaker 1: I can think of lots of questions for an historian, but I know our time is limited. But the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As someone who, I would say who perhaps did some impossible things. As I said that song, 'The Impossible Dream,' has, has been my feeling. I've, even as I've studied black history and taught it and lectured about it, you know it seems somewhat impossible to believe that people would hear you and listen and be impacted by the stories that you would tell, by what you're trying to do and, and yet that's happened. I want people to, to know who they are and if, if there's anything that I do, I don't think it's, it's more, I don't think there's anything more important than that when you have inspired someone to know who they are that gives them access to their power. And there's absolutely no amount of money that can buy that. That's something that, it's like a light bulb coming on in your head and whatever your talents and abilities are it's limitless what you can accomplish once you know who you are. And so, all of my experiences have been a journey of me learning about who I am and, and history helps to inform us; our personal history helps to inspire us; and our teachers most especially help to guide us. And so if I'm going to be remembered, I hope to be remembered as a guide, as Sacagawea was a guide for Lewis and Clark [Meriwether Lewis and William Clark]. I'm hoping to be a guide for, for students who come across my path who are looking for their, their destiny, and you know to inspire them through history, to achieving greatness by discovering who they are. Speaker 1: All right well thank you very much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you so much...