 Story_ID: 178871 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Lisa Bass. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Ted, T-E-D, Newman, N-E-W-M-A-N. Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Born July 5, 1934, in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: And sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Retired judge. Speaker 1: All right and you were a judge for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: I served first on the District of Columbia Superior Court for six and a half years and then for fourteen years on the District of Columbia Court of Appeals, which is the highest court of the District of Columbia. Speaker 1: All right now sir what is today's date? Speaker 2: September the 24th, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time and please don't give your address. Speaker 2: We're in my residence in Southwest Washington [D.C.]. Story_ID: 178872 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now before we go into depth there are five People magazine-ish lightweight questions that we are compelled to ask you that only require a short answer. In fact, they don't deserve anything but a short answer, but the first question is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Steak. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Winter in St. Thomas, the U.S. Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: Which is kind of a flip in winter here. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No I don't, Africa. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I live in the Virgin Islands and here, so I don't need to go to the Caribbean for vacation. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Lord being willing and the creek don't rise. Story_ID: 178873 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your family history, as much as you know about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family, but let's start by identifying your mother and father. Can you give us their names and spell them for us and their dates and places of birth. Speaker 2: My father was Theodore Roosevelt Newman. He was born in Henry County, Alabama on April the 8th, 1901. Speaker 1: Okay and your mother? Speaker 2: My mother is Ruth Louise Oliver Newman born September the 15th, 1909 in Montgomery, Alabama. Story_ID: 178874 Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your father's [Theodore Roosevelt Newman] side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: To slavery. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories associated with your family from slavery? Speaker 2: My grandfather [Judge Newman] and his brother were sold at slave auction in South Carolina to some other slave merchants who transported them by boat to Henry County, Alabama where they were sold, where my grandfather was sold to a man by the name of Bob Newman, hence the family name. We don't know what happened to the brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Any other stories about that, that time or how, what they were like during the Civil War. Speaker 2: He, my grandfather [Judge Newman] was just a child at the time he was sold. He and his mother were sold. I never knew my grandfather and know virtually nothing about him other than he died in his early forties. He had thirteen children by his wife, Amy Reynolds Newman, and three or four others that we know about. His first name was Judge, and the family kids me saying that my granddaddy didn't require a nomination by the president and confirmation by the Senate to become a judge he was born as a judge. He was a farmer. He took to alcohol in his mid-forties and in less than three years had thrown away about 500 acres of land, leaving only about 60 acres of land when he died. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: All of his children are now deceased. I knew all but two of them, all but two of my uncles on my daddy's side. I knew uncles and aunts I knew. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they acquired so much land--(unclear)--that much land? Speaker 2: I don't know and I never have thought of asking our family historian, my cousin, Conrad, how uncle Judge, I mean granddaddy Judge got that much land. Speaker 1: Yeah, it makes you wonder, you know, because after slavery I think the object was to keep us from land as possible. Some people got it by association with former masters and so-- Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have no idea, but I'm gonna find out (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If Conrad knows, I'll find out. Speaker 1: 'Cause there's a constantly unfolding story-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that we uncover this history anyway. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But, yeah, okay. Story_ID: 178875 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: On my mother's [Ruth McAlpine Newman] side, the family name, McAlpine was, I am informed by a cousin in Chicago [Illinois], the name of a slave master who gave, who had a child by a slave woman who was a matriarch of the McAlpine family. On my mother's side is one of the founders of Selma University [Selma, Alabama], one of the founders of the National Baptist Convention, Dr. William McAlpine. He also pastored Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any other stories about your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Was, was your ancestor Dr. William McAlpine, was he, he--when was he the pastor of Dexter? Speaker 2: I don't know. I, I have it in a book upstairs. It's in those boxes that I mentioned before we went on camera. Speaker 1: Okay, all right that's-- Speaker 2: I have a history of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church that makes reference to him. Story_ID: 178876 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your father [Theodore Roosevelt Newman], you know, what, what kind of person was he, what did he do and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was-- Speaker 1: --did he have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: My father was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal Church] preacher. He attended first Selma University [Selma, Alabama] and then Daniel Payne College in Birmingham, Alabama, from which he graduated. He spent his entire adult life in the itinerant ministry of the A.M.E church. He retired as a presiding elder in his late seventies, and he died when he was eighty-four. He pastored churches in Alabama. He was pastoring in Birmingham when I was born. We lived there for a year and a half and he was transferred then to a church in Prattville, Alabama, and after a year in Prattville he was transferred to Tuskegee [Alabama] where he pastored Washington Chapel A.M.E. Church for twelve, twelve to fourteen years something like that until he became a presiding elder and remained a presiding elder until his, until he retired. Story_ID: 178877 Speaker 1: Okay now do, do you know anything about the history of Washing[ton] Chapel A.M.E. [Church, Tuskegee, Alabama]? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Washington Chapel was named after Booker T. Washington, of course. It was founded by a basically people associated with Tuskegee Institute [later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] at the time as well as a family led by a man Collins Powell. It was a very small church when my father went there and a new edifice was built while my father [Theodore Roosevelt Newman] was pastoring there. It--the church now has moved into a new sanctuary where it presently is located. My daddy was there for twelve or fourteen years, yeah. Speaker 1: That's a pretty long time-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: -for A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] preacher. Speaker 2: That was before the eight year limitation which was in effect, which is why he had to leave and the eight year limitation was repealed about eight years later as to preachers, but not as to bishops. Bishops still can only be on a district for eight years. Story_ID: 178878 Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Ruth McAlpine Newman]. What was she like and what did she do? Speaker 2: My mother was a school teacher all of her life. Graduated from Selma University [Selma, Alabama] and got a master's [degree] from Tuskegee Institute, now Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama]. She taught in the public schools in Tuskegee and in the public schools in Auburn, Alabama, until she retired. Her real life was in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church working with my father [Theodore Newman], and she died in January of this year [2003] at the age of ninety-three. Speaker 1: Okay, now you mentioned Selma University [Selma, Alabama] a couple of times. What--Selma University I think is a black-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: college-- Speaker 2: In Selma, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's still there. Speaker 1: All right and is it--what's the origin of Selma do you know? Speaker 2: All I know is that Selma University was founded by in part my great-grandfather, William McAlpine, and that's why momma was there. Story_ID: 178879 Speaker 1: So it [Selma University, Selma, Alabama] may have been a Baptist, had a Baptist origin. Speaker 2: Oh, no question. No question it's Baptist. My mother's [Ruth McAlpine Newman] family is a Baptist family, no question. She was a, she was the pariah by going off and marrying an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] preacher [Newman's father, Theodore Newman] who was penniless. Speaker 1: So you have--(unclear)--preacher and no money. Speaker 2: (Laughter) yes. Speaker 1: I'm, I'm reinforcing stereotypes here. I shouldn't-- Speaker 2: That was after, that was their perception though. Mother, my mother's mother died when mother was young, and her father remarried and mother went to live with Eunice Johnson's mother, Ethel and Nathaniel Walker, Dr. Walker and his wife, Ethel, and was raised with Eunice Johnson of Johnson Publishing and they were of the elite of black Alabama, at least the Walkers were and they did not take kindly, I'm told by my father, to their niece taking up with an A.M.E. preacher, but she did--had to wait until she finished school. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: They met in high school in Selma [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so they were high school sweethearts? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 178880 Speaker 1: Okay now tell us about growing up. Tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: I grew up in Tuskegee [Alabama], which although southern, was unique place in the South. It was a self-contained community because the money in the county was "controlled" by blacks. Two sources of employment were the college, Tuskegee Institute [later, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and the Veterans Administration Hospital, which was one of the largest Veterans Administration Hospitals in the United States and was primarily staffed professionally by blacks. As a consequence, there was a substantial black middle class economically viable and it was only when you left the confines of our surroundings that you ran into the reality of racisms. We went to the movies on a college campus. Our sports were connected with the schools or with Tuskegee Institute. Plays were on the college campus. It was a college town, a black college town as we would have said in those days either colored or later Negro. So, it was an oasis, and it was sheltered. Speaker 1: Okay and so even, I know there are whites who live in Tuskegee. Speaker 2: No question. Speaker 1: And they also had to--they were employed by the two major or mostly by the two major--(unclear)--. Speaker 2: No, they were employed in the farming industry, mercantile industries, the university, and the Veterans Hospital were almost entirely black staffed. Speaker 1: I never heard it explained this way before, but it really sheds another light on how Tuskegee was able to thrive and prosper over the years. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So, yeah. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: This major federal facility was, was this a product of the political activities of--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know how the VA Hospital got situated at Tuskegee. It very well may have been, but I don't know the story on that. Speaker 1: Do you know when it actually came to Tuskegee. Speaker 2: No, it was there when I, I came to realize (laughter)--my first recollection it was already there. Speaker 1: I just wanted if it predated the university or-- Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. There was nothing in Tuskegee before-- Speaker 1: It's speculated that Booker T. [Washington] had something to do with--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It very well, it very well may, yeah. Speaker 1: Probably the only one from the region-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who had-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --access to the White House-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it very well may have. No, it was not there when Tuskegee Normal was founded by Booker T. Speaker 1: This is a tidbit of interest for anybody, I think-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1881 or so, yeah. Story_ID: 178881 Speaker 1: So, well, what else about growing up? Now what were the smells and sounds and so forth-- Speaker 2: Well as I say it was a sheltered environment. The public education for African Americans was probably better than for whites because of the quality of the faculty, not the equipment or supplies, but because of the quality of the faculty. The student body once you got to high school level was an economically mixed student body because there was only one black high school in the county, so all the blacks, basically all the blacks--there were two, but basically all the blacks in the surrounding farm community of Tuskegee [Alabama] came to Tuskegee Institute High School [Tuskegee, Alabama]. So, we had the poor people and the middle class people, and there was--I don't recall any sense of meaningful class division. There may have been some color division more than class division. Speaker 1: Was it, I mean, did, did you see that evidence of that kind of thing-- Speaker 2: Oh sure. Speaker 1: --coming up. Speaker 2: Sure and still do. Yeah. It, but all in all it was an environment that encouraged you to believe you could, expectations that you would. None of the sense of since you are black you can't accomplish. There were certain limiters. The expectation was that you would be educated at certain institutions. I'm told that I saying when I was still in grammar school that I was going to an Ivy League college and Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and people thought I was crazy I'm told by my parents [Ruth McAlpine Newman and Theodore Newman]. I wasn't sure where Harvard was I am sure, but I'd heard it was the best and I decided that's where I wanted to go and I finally ran into a teacher in the tenth grade, T. C. Williams who brainwashed me with his phrase, don't be afraid to dare. You can if you want to. And he persuaded me along with my parents who were telling me that every day that you can if you want to, and to the surprise of some of those who were seeking to put limits, yeah wanted to get the college education, wanting you to become a lawyer, but having some notion that as to the path you should take to get there and what institutions you should be educated by. To the surprise of some of the doubters, I was able to get into an Ivy League college and graduate with honors and to Harvard Law School and get out of there with no difficulty. Story_ID: 178882 Speaker 1: Okay, now we're gonna trace you through that, but I just wanted to get back to when you were a little kid and what were the major influences on you when you were growing up were they people or media? I mean what kind of-- Speaker 2: Major influences were my parents. Major influences were my parents. I spent whole time in church. That was not a choice, that was you did. Reverend Newman, his wife, and his son went to church. Went to Sunday school, went to church, went to Allen Christian and--(unclear)--in the afternoon, so in the afternoon did the whole ten yards. My parents [Ruth McAlpine Newman and Theodore Roosevelt Newman]-- Speaker 1: Do you have any siblings. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So you're an only child? Speaker 2: I'm an only child. Speaker 1: You were the minister's son. I know from experience-- Speaker 2: I know where you're going. Speaker 1: Puts a lot of pressure on-- Speaker 2: I know where you're going. I don't, I deny that preachers kids are any worse than anybody else. It's just that the expectations are that they will be little saints and when they aren't, then they are deemed to be devils. Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't do any of that stuff- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no I fit the mold, I fit the mold fully. If there was devilment to get in, I was in it. Speaker 1: Now why is that? Do you have any idea why this is true that, that-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: --people will have that expectation; its human life. Speaker 2: For me, I have always, I've always been venturesome. I always wanted, wanna know what this is, what that is. If other people were involved in it, I wanted to be involved in it too, within limits. I never, I never crossed over meaningfully to illegality. I got caught stealing a watermelon when I was fourteen years old, and the punishment arising therefrom taught me to stay on the correct side of the law. Story_ID: 178883 Speaker 1: So you've gotta a little mischief in you? Speaker 2: Oh, I recall in my later years sitting around my parents' [Rose McAlpine Newman and Theodore Roosevelt Newman] living room with my mother and father regaling my then wife about my foibles and headaches that I gave them when I was growing up. And my mother said to my father, Newman, I never understood why you weren't nearly as worried about him as I was. And my father turned to her and said Louise because he hadn't done nearly half as much at his age as I had when I was his age, and I turned out all right, so I was confident that he would too. No, I was, I was a hell raiser. I was put out of nursery school, out of second grade. They skipped me through first grade, so I didn't get put out there. I was only in first grade for about ten days. I was put out of third grade. I wasn't put out of fourth grade. I got along well with that teacher. I was put out of fifth grade. I was put out of sixth grade, seventh grade, eighth grade. They tried to put me out of ninth, tenth, and eleventh unsuccessfully. Speaker 1: Now, when you were put out of a grade, I mean, what, what, where did you go? Speaker 2: Back, back to the class the next day. Speaker 1: I see, so it was, it was a suspension. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Put out of the second grade for fighting with Harold Carter under the table, out of the third grade for refusing to take a shot--(unclear)--I hate needles to this day. Fifth grade for refusing to salute the American Flag in sympathy with the Jehovah's Witnesses who were being prosecuted during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] for refusing to salute the flag. The [U.S.] Supreme Court had upheld the statute per- permitting them to be prosecuted. Later overturned that decision about four or five years later. I was a civil libertarian even in those days. Speaker 1: Now, you knew about that case-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as a fifth grader? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you -- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --had the conscience to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 178884 Speaker 1: Tuskegee [Alabama] had among other things a strong civil rights activity. C. G. Gomillion, the Tuskegee Civic Association, my father [Theodore Roosevelt Newman] actively involved in all of that. Ultimately the Tuskegee boycott. Tuskegee was a hot bed of civil liberties and civil rights activity, and my father was very, very active in it. So, yeah I knew about it. Speaker 2: Now, it sounds like you do a lot of reading. Did your family receive most of the black newspapers or any of-- Speaker 1: Pittsburgh Courier and the Afro-American, and the Chicago Defender were accessible, yeah. Speaker 2: Those being the three main ones--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: In that era, yeah. Didn't get the Am-- didn't see the Amsterdam News until I got out of Tuskegee. Story_ID: 178885 Speaker 1: What did you do for fun when you weren't getting in trouble? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The trouble was the fun. Sports basically. Speaker 1: Okay, baseball, football, basketball? Speaker 2: Football. Speaker 1: Foot-- football. Speaker 2: Football, football, football. I didn't-- Speaker 1: Football was the main one. Speaker 2: I wasn't a baseball player and didn't have the coordination to be a basketball player. Speaker 1: Okay, so football was it. Speaker 2: And I'm too short to be a basketball player anyway. Speaker 1: Well, not necessarily. Speaker 2: I'm not Spud Webb (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Alright, okay-- Story_ID: 178886 Speaker 1: How did you do in school? Were you a good student? Speaker 2: Yes, I was an excellent student and part of my trouble, particularly in high school [Tuskegee Institute High School, Tuskegee, Alabama]. I was educated at home by my mother [Rose McAlpine Newman] who is a school teacher, who was bound and determined that the limits of the education system in the State of Alabama were not gonna limit her son. So, I was generally a year to two ahead of what course work I had done under my momma at home than we were doing in class. As a consequence, I was bored stiff, and you let this youngster be bored and he gonna find something to get into. Speaker 1: That's it. Okay. Speaker 2: But in all my years in the public schools in Tuskegee [Alabama] I was basically number two in my class, and the person who was number one is a retired physician here in Washington now, formerly the head of the Department of Physical Medicine at Howard University Medical School [Washington, D.C.], Dr. Alicia Hastings. She's the only person out of Tuskegee that I will acknowledge as significantly smarter than me. Speaker 1: Dr. Alicia-- Speaker 2: Hastings. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: I went by her house one day to visit and found her reading the Encyclopedia Britannica for light reading on a Sunday afternoon (laughter). Story_ID: 178887 Speaker 1: Sir, who were some of the personalities around the Tuskegee [Alabama] community that are memorable? I know there are plenty of them. Speaker 2: The one that I came into contact with the earliest was George Washington Carver. I had the pleasure of hanging around his lab with him one summer. I'm told that, by my father [Theodore Roosevelt Newman], that Dr. Carver told him that we were out in a potato field that summer and he picked a beetle off of a potato plant, a sweet potato plant and showed me the beetle, and I asked him where the beetle's eyes were and he didn't know and had never thought to look and see where the beetle's eyes were. And then he took the beetle back to the lab and examined him under the microscope until he could find his eyes and he said to my father it took a youngster who had a fresh clear mind to ask an obvious question, "Where are his eyes?" I took piano lessons from Booker T. Washington's oldest daughter, Portia Washington Pittman. Other people who had impact on my life were people like Mrs. Guzman with the Civic Association. C. G. Gomillion with the Civic Association, W.P. Mitchell also with the Civic Association. Of course, the clergy of the community that I was subjected to, influenced by through contact through my father, teachers, one who was memorable and a difference in my life I've mentioned before T.C. Williams who taught me in the tenth grade as a substitute teacher. It was a fortuitous act of faith or act of God the teacher who would have taught me was out for a year either ill or on sabbatical or something. T. C. Williams had been the principal of the first integrated high school in the state of New Jersey, first black principal to an integrated high school in New Jersey. He was a classmate of Theodore Roosevelt's, I mean, excuse me Franklin Roosevelt at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and he had retired and come to Tuskegee and married the woman who was pharmacist of the hospital on the college campus, Ms. Calloway. And when G. W. A. Scott had to take the year off he was then pressed into teaching history to the tenth grade class, and I came under his influence. He was the reinforcement to my parents that you can do. He got me into a variety of activities. The one that stands out most is an essay, an international essay contest, the society for promotion of friendship between Switzerland and the United States, and we had to write an essay about the relationships between Switzerland and the United States, which meant I had to do a bunch of research 'cause I didn't know anything about Switzerland and its relationship with the United States. I submitted my essay, and I won one of probably a thousand Benrus watches that were awarded as second prizes. But, T. C. Williams more than anybody other than my parents in Tuskegee was a life-changing, had a life-changing impact on me by reinforcing by a neutral person where I couldn't put it off as just parental, you know, pride, etc. Here was an outsider who was saying to me you've got all the qualifications to do whatever you want to do and it was, and it was a man who had done it himself. He had gone to Harvard when it was much more difficult than it was gonna be for me and he had made it, and he was saying to me you've got the ability to do it as well. It made a tremendous difference because there were people who were saying you better be satisfied with Tuskegee. If you're lucky, you might get to Hampton [Institute, later Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and you better set your sights for law school at some place, other than some place like Harvard. Nothing wrong with Tuskegee, Hampton, or Morehouse, I'm not putting them down at all, thank God for historically black colleges and universities, but that's not where my aim was, and fortunately I had somebody telling me I didn't have to listen to those who told, were telling me to put a limit on what I wanted to do. Story_ID: 178888 Speaker 1: Okay, now we mentioned off-camera the photographer, P.H. Pope. Speaker 2: P. H. Pope lived about five or six blocks from where I grew up [in Tuskegee, Alabama], and I knew, I knew him and I knew his children, yeah. Prentice-- Speaker 1: What was he like though? Speaker 2: Prentice Pope. Nobody thought anything unusual about Prentice Pope, so far as I knew when I was a kid. He was a man who took pictures. He was old man Pope down there on Washington Avenue and had no sense of his, his historic significance until I got away from Tuskegee [Alabama] and began to learn about other black photographers and in that process began reading about this black photographer in Tuskegee [Alabama]. I said wait a minute I know him (laughter). He took pictures of me (laughter). Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--you said-- Speaker 2: He has a photo album out, published. Speaker 1: It was a photo of you, right? Speaker 2: Yes when I was about four or five years old, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 178889 Speaker 1: Now what about--did you know Monroe Nathan Work? Speaker 2: No I did not. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you know about the Tuskegee Airmen when they were going through there? Speaker 2: Very, very well. My father [Theodore Roosevelt Newman]--we lived in the, the church parsonage on Bruce Street. My father knew that eventually he was not going to be in a parsonage, so in 1940, late '40 [1940], early '41 [1941] he began building a home. It was completed in '41 [1941]. We were still in the parsonage. The first persons to occupy that house were Benjamin O. Davis, Jr., and his wife Agatha. Indeed in B.O. [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.]'s biography there are two pictures of that house, which is on the market to be sold now that my mother [Ruth McAlpine Newman] is dead if you wanna buy a house in Tuskegee [Alabama] (laughter), I've got two for sell. Speaker 1: That's a historic-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --res, residency now. Speaker 2: Yes, but I'm not going back to Tuskegee. Speaker 1: Okay, did you know Davis--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so I, I-- Speaker 1: Did you go to the field and watch the planes or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --did you get a chance to do that? Speaker 2: No. My father worked out there when they were building the base [Moton Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] as a painter. He went out there looking for a job because the church wasn't paying that much and they asked him what kind of work did he want, and he asked them what kind of work did they have and he said we among other things we need some painters. He said well I'm a painter. Daddy had never done any painting in his life. He ended up owning a paint contracting agency. Speaker 1: That, that's--it takes, I guess often you hear stories of people that take the initiative--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: My father was like that. Indeed when they tore down the base daddy bid on and won the officer's club and two of the barracks. I helped tear them down. I straightened nails, which daddy used in building three rental houses, and he paid me 25 cent an hour, he says. I said I never collected. He said I fed you (laughter), and he said and I'll, I'll use the rest to send you to school. Speaker 1: That sounds like the logic of those days-- Speaker 2: I couldn't argue with it. Speaker 1: No. Story_ID: 178890 Speaker 1: You mentioned a couple of times C. G. Gomillion [Charles G. Gomillion]. I've heard other pe, people mention this person, and I don't think we've ever had a definition of what they do-- Speaker 2: C. G. was a professor at Tuskegee Institute [later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. He was the life force of the Tuskegee Civic Association. His life other than teaching was devoted to the Tuskegee Civic Association and to, through the Civic Association to Civil Rights in Alabama, voting rights, economic rights, the whole ten yards. He is a name plaintiff in Gomillion v. Lightfoot [1960], a Supreme Court case which held the gerrymandering of the city limits of Tuskegee to be unconstitutional, the first gerrymandering case to hold the gerrymandering of a city to be unconstitutional. They gerrymandered the city to exclude as many blacks from the city limits as they could. Speaker 1: Now, this is--this, when was this case resolved? Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s] or '60s [1960s], maybe as late as the '70s [1970s], but I think about late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay, you weren't there by-when that happens. Speaker 2: I was gone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I left in 1950 going to prep school. Story_ID: 178891 Speaker 1: Okay, now just a little bit more about high school [Tuskegee Institute High School, Tuskegee, Alabama] before we leave Tuskegee [Alabama]. Now, when you were in high school were you involved in the typical high school activities? Speaker 2: Debating club, high school football, the glee club, seeking to organize a student council, which was what led to an attempt to expel me from the eleventh grade. I was trying to organize student a student council. Speaker 1: Student council was frowned upon. Speaker 2: They sought to expel, the principal sought to get me expelled from school from seeking to get one organized. Speaker 1: It is more than frowned upon. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: Now, now this just raised to me a question of about a changing of the guard at Tuskegee and other black universities in terms of the old-fashioned education of the South, you know-- Speaker 2: This was not Tuskegee Institute [later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. This was a high school. Speaker 1: High school. Speaker 2: This was a high school. Speaker 1: But, I still think it would be very much influenced by the same morals and manners in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I can't, I can't speak about what was going on the college 'cause I just don't know. To the extent that I know when Fred Patterson [Frederick D. Patterson] was president, Tuskegee was a rather forward-looking black college under his regime-- Speaker 1: Okay -- Story_ID: 178892 Speaker 1: So you would imagine that they would have a student council at Tuskegee Institute High School [Tuskegee, Alabama] or a student body-(simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd, I'd be stunned and amazed if there were not student participation in self-government kind of things on the college campus, but there had not been at Tuskegee Institute High School and a rebel by the name of Theodore Newman, because I didn't become Ted until I left Tuskegee, and if I go to Tuskegee now those who knew me as a kid still Theodore. My mother [Ruth McAlpine Newman] called me Theodore the last time I talked to her before she died [in 2003]. But, K. B. Young who was my principal was not gonna tolerate this rebel Ted Newman trying to set up a student government in his high school. Ted Newman and K. B. Young and the Newman family had had their difficulties all the while Ted was there. Speaker 1: It seemed like a fairly innocent thing for high schools even in those days to have a student government. Speaker 2: Well, there was bad blood between the principal and my family because my father [Theodore Roosevelt Newman] had help break up a scheme where the principal and the superintendent of education were charging a fee for certain activities at a public high school, which was unlawful and the superintendent of the schools and the principal allegedly were splitting those fees into their own pockets, and daddy and an old illiterate laboring man who had a brother who had access, who was a janitor at the Alabama Supreme Court library, got the librarian to write out for him the position of the statue that said public education in the State of Alabama was free and daddy and Mr. White raised such hell that they forced them to stop collecting these fees, which did not endear me to the principal. Plus, my mother had had some difficulty with the principal also because of some sexual harassment by another teacher, and when mother when to the principal about it, he told her it was her responsibility to take care of herself and when she came and told daddy, it took all that everybody could do to keep daddy at home. So, there was bad blood and so the principal was trying to get me thrown out every excuse he could and from time to time I gave him excuses to do so. Speaker 1: You know, what, what body determined whether he was principal or not? Speaker 2: The state [Alabama] superintendent of education. Speaker 1: I see, so there was no direct control-- Speaker 2: No, no, none. Speaker 1: --over who--(unclear)--principal-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --even in the face of that kind of corruption unlikely that he would receive and come-uppance Speaker 2: The white system determined who was going to be the principal. Speaker 1: That's not the kind of thing--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Of course not, not in those days. Hopefully, it would in these days, but not in those days. Speaker 1: I just imagine that, that put a--heaped a extra burden on already burdened people with low incomes-- Speaker 2: No question. Speaker 1: --and with the [Great] Depression-- Speaker 2: No question. Speaker 1: --shortly thereafter- Speaker 2: No question. Story_ID: 178893 Speaker 1: My high school experience was not a good one. For example, when I took the entrance exam for admission to prep school to Mount Hermon School [for Boys, later Northfield Mount Hermon, Gill, Massachusetts]. For the first time in my life, I had difficulty finishing an exam in the allotted time. Part of the application process to Mount Hermon--and Mount Hermon had been recruiting African Americans in Tuskegee [Alabama] for ten or fifteen years before me--was you had to send a recommendation from your principal. They wanted him to send a recommendation and you could select a teacher to do a recommendation. I selected T. C. Williams, of course. When I got to prep school, the dean of admission, Dean Burdick, all six foot four or five, called me down to the office to talk to me without telling me why. He sent somebody to tell me to come down he wanted to talk to me. I said oh my God what have I done now, I'm getting put out, can't go home, ain't no way in the world I can go back to Alabama and tell my parents I've been put out of Mount Hermon and I said, "I haven't done anything." Dean Burdick said, "No, I--" as soon as I got there I said, "What, have I done something wrong?" He said, "No, no nothing wrong." He said, "But we do want to ask you about Tuskegee Institute High School [Tuskegee, Alabama] because there something that is unusual about your application." He said, "We have two recommendations, your principal and T. C. Williams," and he said, "They are diametrically opposed to each other." He said, "Your test score was very good. Your high school record was good compared to other people from that same high school who'd been here, so we were confident that you could do the work, but we couldn't understand why you got this negative recommendation from your principal," at which time I told him of the family background and the bad blood between my family and the principal. He said, "Well how did you find the exam?" I said, "I didn't find it particularly difficult." I said, "I thought it was a bit long to finish in two and a half hours." He said, "Two and a half hours?" I said, "Yeah, two and half hours." I said, "I had to rush a bit to get through with it, and it's the first time I've ever had to rush to finish a test in the allotted time." He said, "Theodore," he said, "Ted, you were supposed to have four hours." They had deliberately cut my time by an hour and a half. To tried to ensure that I wouldn't get in. That was done at the high school. At my 50th reunion in 19, I mean 2001, as part of the tradition at Mount Hermon you are allowed to see your student file, and I had an opportunity to read the letter that K. B. Young had written and the letter that T. C. Williams had written. You can imagine my reaction at Christmas break, my year, my senior year at prep school when I got back to Tuskegee and went by the high school and K. B. Young, Mount Hermon sent your grades back, your first quarter grades back to the high school from which you had come if you had come from a high school, and they sent them to the principal. I was at the high school and saw K. B. Young, and he told me that he had seen my grades at Mount Hermon and how proud he was of how well I was doing. The bad Ted responded to him appropriately and vulgarly, in the process telling him I knew what he had done, but I was gonna make it in spite of him. Speaker 2: That's something. That certainly says something about the anger of most people-yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) True story, true story. Story_ID: 178894 Speaker 1: Okay now, now Mount Hermon Prep School [Mount Hermon School for Boys, later Northfield Mount Hermon, Gill, Massachusetts], tell us about that? What was that experience like? Speaker 2: Mount Hermon-- Speaker 1: Where is it? It's in Massachusetts? Speaker 2: Mount Hermon, Massachusetts. It's the northwest corner of Massachusetts on the Connecticut River Valley where New Hampshire, Vermont, and Massachusetts join about ten miles south of where they join. Speaker 1: This isn't exactly the black belt is it? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. The school was founded by Dwight L. Moody of Chicago [Illinois] fame-- Speaker 1: Of Moody Bible Institute [Chicago, Illinois] fame? Speaker 2: There you are. And has been integrated from its first class. They've had Native Americans, blacks, all sorts of people in Mount Hermon from its beginning and its sister school Northfield [School for Girls, Northfield, Massachusetts], which are now merged into one institution, Northfield Mount Hermon. I was there for only the twelfth grade, my senior year. It was my first integrated experience because I had lived a total segregated life in Tuskegee, Alabama, Tuskegee Institute [High School]. It was intellectually challenging. Anything that I had to rely on a high school background, I had difficulty. French, I'd had two years of French at--no I took three years of French at Tuskegee Institute, either two or three. They put me in third year French at Mount Hermon. After two weeks, they put me back to second year French and I struggled for the whole year. English lit [literature] I had difficulty because of a background at Tuskegee Institute High School. Chemistry, I went through chemistry with flying colors, and when I got to college I should have not had to take chemistry because of a score on the college boards Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] messed up and made me take chemistry. It was the identical course that I'd taken at Mount Hermon. Consequently, I didn't attend class. I did the lab work out of the lab book I had from Mouth Hermon and got an A- in the course. Anything that I did not need a high school background in at Mount Hermon I did well then. Anything where I was competing with people who had a decent high school background, a quality high school background I was struggling. And the same thing is true in college. If I was into a fresh subject where a high school background did not or only prep school background mattered, I did well. But, if I had to depend on the public education of the State of Alabama--and as I say the public schools in Tuskegee were the best black public schools in the State of Alabama. We were the best and the finest, yet I was handicapped when I got on the fast track. Speaker 1: It's a different standard. Speaker 2: No question, no question. Speaker 1: Different access to materials, too. Speaker 2: Different expectations, the whole ten yards. Speaker 1: Was the pace different? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Remember you would--in those days before track systems, which didn't work out well as you know historically, but teachers taught to the middle, to the middle of the achievement level of those in the class. That handicapped those at the bottom and those at the top. I fortunately was at the top, but suffered some as a consequence. Story_ID: 178895 Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers that stand out at Mount Hermon [School for Boys, later Northfield Mount Hermon, Gill, Massachusetts] that helped you? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. Oh, Tom Donovan. Tom Donovan was my history teacher, Mr. McRay [ph.]. My French teacher who said I spoke French with a southern accent. He said he wasn't talking about the South of France (laughter). My experience at Mount Hermon was a sheer joy, a sheer joy. My chemistry teacher and dorm master who had been out of Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] about three years and was young enough to participate with us in the dead of winter in making some apple jack out of apple cider. It was a totally rewarding experience. My mother [Ruth McAlpine Newman] was not surprised when I left St. Thomas and flew up to Mount Hermon in June of '01 [2001] for my 50th reunion. Speaker 1: Now were you--were there other black students there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, a few. Mount Hermon has been integrated since its first class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were black graduates in the first graduating class out of Mount Hermon and an American Indian. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 178896 Speaker 1: So, well, when you were at, on the verge of graduating, now you graduated from Mount Hermon [School for Boys, later Northfield Mount Hermon, Gill, Massachusetts] in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-one [1951]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1951. So when you were coming out did you have an idea of what career you were gonna pursue now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no question. I'm told that I said I was gonna be a lawyer when I was about five years old. I know by the time I was in the seventh or eighth grade, really about the time I was in fifth or sixth grade I was saying when I refused to salute the flag I knew I was gonna be a lawyer, and I knew I was going to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I was just arrogant enough and cocky enough, a poor little country boy from Southeast Alabama who didn't wear shoes until I was twelve and didn't know meat wasn't a side dish until I was twenty, that kind of poor little country boy, but I knew. I was, I knew I was going to Harvard Law School. I knew I was gonna be a lawyer, never had a second thought about that, never. Story_ID: 178897 Speaker 1: Did you know what college you were gonna attend when you--? Speaker 2: No, no. I knew where I'd apply. I applied to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], five Ivys. Ohio Wesleyan [University, Delaware, Ohio] at the insistence of the college counselor at Mount Hermon [School for Boys, later Northfield Mount Hermon, Gill, Massachusetts] and at the urging of my mother [Ruth McAlpine Newman] to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. I didn't know where I was going. I didn't know where I was gonna get in. It turns out that the first two places I had heard from and the only two I had heard from for a spell were Howard and Ohio Wesleyan. Well, the college counselor had urged me to apply to Ohio Wesleyan because there were scholarship funds at Wesleyan available for the son of Methodist clerics. I didn't wanna go to any place that had that kind of religious orientation. So, I called home all distressed because my choice was between Ohio Wesleyan and Howard. I had nothing against either school. I didn't want to go to Wesleyan, and I didn't wanna go to Howard. I wanted to go to an Ivy League school. Momma was on one extension, daddy [Theodore Roosevelt Newman] was on the other. Momma said, "Well, Theodore maybe you ought to go on to Howard and be a big fish in a little pond." I said, "I'll think about it." Two days later I got a telegram from my father saying, "I disagree with your mother, hold out and be a whale in the ocean." Within about ten days after, I heard from Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Brown, and Dartmouth, and was accepted into all of them. Chose Brown because it gave me a higher percentage of scholarship money than any of the rest except Harvard. Harvard gave me the same percentage, but I didn't want to go to Harvard undergrad [undergraduate] because I knew I was going to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I didn't think I would want to spend seven years at Harvard. Wrong reason as I found out later when I got to Harvard Law School because they were two entirely different worlds, although only separated by Massachusetts, by Massachusetts Avenue, entirely different worlds. I don't regret that I went to Brown. I enjoyed Brown immensely and would probably make the same call if I were doing it all over again, but my reason was wrong. Story_ID: 178898 Speaker 1: Okay, now what was Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] like and what, what distinguishes Brown from the other Ivy League schools? Speaker 2: Brown at that time was experimenting with a curriculum, before the "new curriculum", but it was--Brown was in the state of transition from, let people in and flunk 'em out to becoming a highly selective admission and thus graduating virtually everybody you let in. There was a freedom within curriculum choices. There were some mandatory items you had to have, so many humanities, so much science, blah, blah, blah, required courses, but there was a degree of freedom. It also had a good government department which is what I intended to major in and what I started in. Fortunately, it also had an excellent philosophy department because that's where I transferred from the government and political science into philosophy major and it was my major. Brown was smaller than some of the others. It was close enough to Boston to ensure a social life, which was crucial since in my class there were three or four blacks. There was one black woman in my class at our sister school of Pembroke, so we commuted to Boston on the weekends, once or twice a month for our social life. Dartmouth [University, Hanover, New Hampshire] was too far back up in the woods, Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] was in South Jersey and basically a southern school. Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], I didn't want to go to Yale really. Brown was a good choice for me. Speaker 1: Okay, Brown's in? Speaker 2: Providence, Rhode Island. Speaker 1: Providence, Rhode Island, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 178899 Speaker 1: Well who were the, some of the teachers and mentors that you found at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]? Speaker 2: The one who probably had the biggest impact on me was my, chairman of the department of philosophy, C. J. Ducasse who was my senior written work master and professor. I wrote my senior paper in the Honors Program in philosophy for him in a course in religion. He probably challenged me as much as anybody had up until then to think outside the box, to think for myself. My father [Theodore Roosevelt Newman] used to blame him for my going through my atheist and agnostic phase, and he may be right or it may have just been Ted Newman being a rebel again, but probably C. J. Ducasse more than anybody else. Elmer Blistein in the English lit department, and a couple of others, Professor [Roderick] Chisholm in the philosophy department also. Speaker 1: So, you really began to doubt some of the, your church--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. I had, I had begun, I had begun to pull away before I got to college because I, I saw things in the A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal Church] that distressed me with the clergy. I saw dishonesty, I saw, I saw hypocrisy that bothered me. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I pulled away. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, the philosophy department at Brown just kind of reinforced some of it, the doubt you already had. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it made me think. It made me think and tried to logically reason through some things and when I couldn't find logical explanation for some of the mysteries of religion I began to doubt them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'll come back to that subject-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at a later phase in my life. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I'm back to the church now. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 178900 Speaker 1: Now, your major at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] was philosophy? Speaker 2: I was a philosophy major at Brown. I started off as a political science major. A course in state and local government ran me out of the poli sci [political science] department because a professor told us in the first class that we were gonna be required to learn the names of the forty eight states, their capitals, and major mountains and rivers, and my reaction, a poor little country boy from southeast Alabama, I didn't come all the way up here to Providence, Rhode Island to Brown University to be memorizing this kind of stuff, and I was appalled by that. I put up with it, but I got out of that department immediately. I took one other course in that department the rest of my time at Brown. That was of course in the constitution taught by the same professor, but I wanted that course in the constitution. We were told the first day that we had to memorize certain sections of the constitution because we were gonna be required to write one of them down verbatim as the first question on the final exam, as a five-point question. We got the final exam, and that was the first question, and I left it blank with a note to the professor. Dear Professor so and so, you remember me from state and local government which ran me out of the poli sci department, I rebelled then I still rebel, I refuse to answer this question. It cost me five points out of a hundred and I got a ninety three on the final exam. But for those five points, I'd had a ninety eight, but it didn't make any sense to me to be memorizing stuff. If I need to know what the constitution says, I can be like Hugo Black have a copy of it in my pocket and read it and reciting it verbatim from my memory. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to college to learn how to think and to be intellectually challenged, to learn some content, yes, but to think, and memorizing the name of states and rivers and capitals--that's high school stuff at best, I thought, and still do. Story_ID: 178901 Speaker 1: So did you get involved in the social life at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]? Speaker 2: There was not much social life for African Americans to do. I did that in Boston [Massachusetts] on the weekends. Speaker 1: Okay, did you hang out in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Oh yes, Saint Marks Social Center, which is where I pledged Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity], West Medford [Massachusetts], Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts], oh yeah, the Hi-Hat, Professional and Business Men's Club down on Commonwealth and Mass [Massachusetts Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts], oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you say it with relish, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a social life, but it just wasn't in Providence (laughter). Speaker 1: So, you could put the social life save it for, for the weekend and during the week you could study-- Speaker 2: Once or twice or month we, we were able to make it up on up to Boston on a Friday night or Saturday morning and come back Sunday night. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now you-- Speaker 2: As did a lot of black students from New England colleges. We would gather--you know you'd have a half a dozen in this school and a half a dozen in that school, not enough to do anything, and we'd gather in Boston on the weekends. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now when you graduated from Brown, or is there, is there another story from Brown that you could-- Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: --or that you wanna tell? When you graduated from Brown that was like what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955]. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-five [1955]-- Story_ID: 178902 Speaker 1: And did you go right to law school? Speaker 2: Right to law school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The story on law school I had, I had applied to Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Columbia [Law School, New York, New York], Northwestern [University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], and the University of Michigan [School of Law, Ann Arbor, Michigan], I think. I heard from Northwestern, was accepted, no deposit required. I then heard from Columbia, and they wanted a fifty dollar deposit within ten days. I still hadn't heard from Harvard. Being a brash little kid I was, I'd liberated from the South by now, I picked up the phone and called the dean of admissions at Harvard, introduced myself and said, "If you look at my file you'll see, you will see I'm an applicant for scholarship aid, too. My daddy's [Theodore Roosevelt Newman] a preacher, I've been admitted to Columbia, I don't have fifty dollars to forfeit at Columbia if I don't go," 'cause the fifty dollars was un-refundable. I said, "But I'm going to law school." I said, "What I need is for Harvard to tell me as soon as possible whether I'm in Harvard or not or whether I need to get fifty dollars and send it to Columbia." The next day I got a telegram from the dean of admissions informing me I was admitted to Harvard Law School. I was the first one at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] that year to be admitted to Harvard Law School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As, as a result of my not wanting to give away fifty dollars. In fact, I was certain that the State of Alabama was gonna pay for me to go to law school, and they did. Speaker 1: Now this is a curious situation where the State of Alabama did not admit some called colored students or Negroes to their law school, but were obligated under some federal guidelines-- Speaker 2: State law. Speaker 1: State law, okay. Speaker 2: State law. Speaker 1: To, to Speaker 2: They bought, they bought-- Speaker 1: --pay for your higher education and some other--to, to give you a separate but equal-- Speaker 2: They bought up, they bought you off. I had applied for out-of-state aid to go to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]. They did not have a department of political science at the colored school, Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama], the black school. They took a history professor and made him the whole department of political science at Alabama State so as not to give me out-of-state aid. I applied for out-of-state aid after I was admitted to Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and hadn't heard from the state board of education. My daddy and I drove down to Montgomery [Alabama] to see the officials there, and the lady who was in charge said, "Well we've been busy, we haven't been able to get around to this," and, "We don't know when we'll be able to get around to it," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and daddy was trying to reason with her as he did with white folks. I said, "Excuse me, dad," I said, "Ma'am, is there some place in this building where I can get an application, where--one can get an application to the University of Alabama Law School [Tuscaloosa, Alabama]?" Before she thought, she said, "Yeah, right down the hall in room so and so and so," and then she looked at me and said, "Why?" I said, "'cause I'm gonna go down there and get an application to the University of Alabama Law School and I'm gonna send it to the University of Alabama Law School through you and y'all can act on whichever one of them applications y'all want to." About two days later, there was a phone call informing my father that I had been awarded out-of-state aid. It cost me, it cost my parents about six hundred dollars a year for me to go to Harvard Law School, which the cost that it would cost an in-state student to go to law school at the University of Alabama Law School, plus they gave me one round trip train ticket per year to Boston [Massachusetts] and back. Speaker 1: Now, if you, if you had to pay for Harvard Law School yourself, how much would it have cost? Speaker 2: Oh, it was at least five thousand dollars at the time, at least. I had been approached, my family had been approached about me seeking to integrate the University of Alabama Law School, and my father was adamantly opposed to that notion. My father was bound and determined that his son was gonna go to Harvard like he wanted to, so my father wanted me to get the best legal education in the world and then to come back to Tuskegee [Alabama] and to serve as his lawyer to sue everybody who he wanted to sue for all the wrongs that he had been wanting to correct all of his life and a major disappointment of his life was when I did not come back to Tuskegee to practice law. But, he was proud of what I did here, but he wanted me, he was gonna be fortified with his own lawyer because you couldn't get a lawyer in my days in Tuskegee. White lawyers wouldn't represent black clients in litigation against white folks. They'd represent you in litigation against another black and take all the money you, you could pay 'em, but in litigation against white or a system, no way, no way; it just was not done. They tried to hire a lawyer to sue the superintendent of schools and the principal of the high school about the fees being charged, nobody would touch him, nobody would touch him, and there were on black lawyers, no black lawyers. Speaker 1: This adds another dimension to the inequity in that region-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: You wouldn't think about-- there are so many layers of this, and angles, then it affects people. Speaker 2: Oh no question. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 178903 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] now. Is Harvard Law School, was it, was it difficult for you or? Speaker 2: No. It was hard. It, it, was work, hard work, but no. It was not work that I had difficulty dealing with once I decided to buckle down. You can--if you looked at my transcript in law school you can see from first semester to second semester a slight improvement, and then about midway the third semester Ted Newman said enough of this heading over to Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] or the West Medford [Massachusetts], blah, blah every time you get a chance you'd better get your nose to the grindstone and get some decent grades before you get out of here. And the quality of my performance improved substantially once I decided to really work at being in law school, and the last three semesters there my grades were quite good. Speaker 1: Okay, now who were the major influences on you at, at Harvard Law School? Speaker 2: Number one, Paul Freund who taught me constitutional law clearly. Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name? Speaker 2: F-R-E-U-N-D. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Professor Brown for whom I did my se, my senior written work, Ralph Baker who taught me corporations and trusts. Those were the three. Speaker 1: Okay, now were there any other black students-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at Harvard? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Who was there with you? Speaker 2: Richard Banks--my classmates were Richard Banks, Ralph Cunningham, and myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The three of us. Speaker 1: Do you know what the other two did for a living? Speaker 2: Ralph practiced law here in Washington and is now dead. Richard Banks is a judge on the general jurisdiction trial court in Boston [Massachusetts], I think in Roxbury. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: That's right there were only three of us. There were five women and three blacks. Story_ID: 178904 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you graduated [from Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], now you ended up in the [U.S.] Air Force. How, what happened-- Speaker 2: I was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]. Story about that--you were required to take four courses a semester and ROTC counted as one of them, and that didn't make any sense to me. I mean, one quarter of each semester was so called military science and tactics. That wasn't an intellectual, that wasn't what I went to college for. I got permission to carry five courses a semester without having to pay extra for the fifth course, so I had enough credits to graduate by the end of the seventh semester, but I didn't--I stayed all the way through. I got a deferment. I was, I had a three-year commitment to the Air Force when I graduated from Brown. I got a deferment to go to law school, thus when I graduated from law school I had a three-year commitment to the United States Air Force. Speaker 1: Okay, now you chose the Air Force deliberately? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, and why? Speaker 2: At Brown, there were two ROTC's, [U.S.] Navy and Air Force, and I didn't want any part of the Navy. Speaker 1: Ok, you didn't like the idea of-- Speaker 2: I was from, I was from the South, and the Navy was southern. The Navy officer corps was in the view of us black folks, southern, and I didn't want anything to do with the Navy. So, my option was Air Force ROTC. Speaker 1: The Air Force always--some have suggested the Air Force may be the best branch to get involved in because you're not as in harm's way, you're not out at sea, you know, maybe--did you kind of look at it like that? Speaker 2: No, I, I-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay well what were, what were your experiences in the Air Force? Where were you stationed? Speaker 2: Stationed at Laon Air Base France [Laon-Couvron Air Base]. I spent all but twelve or thirteen days of my three-year military career at Laon Air Base France. I was stationed fifty miles from Paris [France] and about seventy-five miles from Brussels [Belgium]. Enjoyed it immensely. Spent my first year there as a bachelor, came home at the end of the first year got married and took my wife back with me and saw Europe the second two years as a married man, enjoyed it both ways. Story_ID: 178905 Speaker 1: Okay, so your, your wife [Constance B. Newman] was from here, and-- Speaker 2: Wife was from Tuskegee [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her father was a surgeon at the Veteran's Hospital in Tuskegee. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Originally from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Was chief of surgery at Rush [Presbyterian Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Rush Presbyterian, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So, this is like 1957, '58 [1958]? Speaker 2: I was in the [U.S.] Air Force from '58 [1958] to '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Okay in '61 [1961], okay and these are days in the strategic air command sort of thing and cold war, the watching of the Air Force, keeping a close eye on what the Soviet Union is doing, what the East Germans were doing and so, so what were your assignments in? Speaker 2: I was a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was judge advocate. I fought my war with the manual for courts martials. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Pure and simple I was a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--were you a prosecutor or, or-- Speaker 2: Both. Speaker 1: Both. Speaker 2: Depending on circumstances. I prosecuted cases, I defended cases. I did civil legal aid. I did observation of the trial of American service personnel in the French courts under the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] Status of Forces Agreement. I did soup to nuts--There were only three lawyers on our base, maximum. At one point, I was the only lawyer on the base, so I did the full panoply of things that a lawyer would do in virtually any environment. Speaker 1: Now was it I guess special that you were a Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] trained lawyer and you black and in the Air Force and did they consider this odd? Speaker 2: No, not, not that I noticed. There were other blacks in the JAG Corps [Judge Advocate General's Corps], and the Air Force did not have the racism problems that the United States Army in Europe did, and I'm not sure why that is, but it was in fact a fact. We could tell it by courts martial rate, a variety of indicia. There was still racism. There were bars in Paris that were known to be for the white Servicemen. There were bars in Paris that were known to be for the black Servicemen. The--as they call them in Uganda, the sex workers could not go back and forth between these clubs. If you were a sex worker servicing the white bar you were not to go and service the black bar. Speaker 1: That's to prevent the mixing of races I suppose. Speaker 2: We took our racism with us wherever we went as Americans and still do. But, nowhere near the problems in the Air Force that I could observe in the Army from court-martial rate, board rates, riots, the whole ten yards. Part of that may have been we in the Air Force paid every two weeks. In the Army, they paid once a month. GI [Government Issue], Air Force, Airmen gets paid go to the big city, have his weekend, come back, he's got one more weekend he's gotta get through before next pay day. The soldier gets paid, blows his paycheck having his ball on the weekend, he gotta a whole month. Speaker 1: 'Cause--I suppose the rule is he's gonna blow all of it. Speaker 2: Chances were (laughter), chances were. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, are there any memorable cases that, that you can-- Speaker 2: No, I tried a couple of--tried a number of court-martials, some of them with racial overtones as defense counsel in one of the major ones, but--I tried a, prosecuted a Air Force lieutenant for infanticide. She gave birth and strangled the--baby. Story_ID: 179407 Speaker 1: Now Paris [France] at the time that you were there, and it probably still is to some extent, is a home of a lot of Negro or black expatriates that left the country, especially in those days because of the freedoms here weren't as great. So, there was a colony of American artists and writers and intellectuals in those days Richard Wright would have been there, James Baldwin, and numerous musicians and so forth and artists. Speaker 2: Yeah and I soon was introduced to a restaurant that served soul food in Paris, called Haynes and Gabby's [Chez Haynes] in the Pigalle's section [Quartier Pigalle] of Paris. Haynes was an African American graduated from Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] with his master's, came to Paris to go to the Sorbonne to get a doctorate, ran into Gabby, and they got married and opened this soul food restaurant. Among the expatriates in quotes that I met there was Hazel Scott with a son Skipper. There were others that would come there for soul cooking as well. I'd leave base at five o'clock on Friday, head straight for Paris, and the first stop after I'd checked into a hotel would be the Haynes and Gabby's in Pigalle to get some soul food. Speaker 1: Now, Hazel Scott was married at one time to Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]. Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell. Skipper, Skipper is-- Speaker 1: His son. Speaker 2: --Adam's son. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, okay, anything else about Paris you wanna tell us, or about, can tell us? Speaker 2: No (laughter), no. It was a--I saw after a year in France as a bachelor I came home and got married and took my wife [Constance B. Newman] back with me. I was able to see Europe, Europe both as a bachelor and married and enjoyed it immensely both ways. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: My first year there as a bachelor I missed one weekend in Paris and that was a weekend I spent in Copenhagen [Denmark]. Story_ID: 179408 Speaker 1: So did you get a chance to travel much around the rest of Europe? Speaker 2: Yes I did, both when I was a bachelor and married. Both officially I was often on the road to other bases to try court-martials, either prosecuting or defending. I did a lot of sightseeing, some at government expense. We would run C-47's into Berlin [Germany] for radio modification and I got along very, very well with the wing commander. I shot skeet with him on the weekends and anytime we had a C-47 going up and they had the extra seat on it I was able to hitch a ride and fly up to spend the weekend in Berlin. We ran planes into Copenhagen [Denmark] for some reason, I don't remember what it was, they were basically furniture runs. We'd get to Copenhagen, declare engine failure and have to spend two days there; that kind of thing. Some official travel--I went to a tax school down in Berlin, I mean excuse me, not in Berlin, in Munich [Germany]. My boss wouldn't let me drive nor would he let me fly. As a consequence, I went to Munich on the Orient Express. It was going to require me to miss a weekend in Paris [France], and I didn't want to do that. I arranged with a pilot friend of mine from the base to come down in a jet trainer, two-seated, pick me up at the air base outside of Munich, 1st and Fallbrook, fly me to Orly [Paris Orly Airport, Orly, France] in Paris so I'd make my weekend in Paris. Speaker 1: So you kind of had it made in-- Speaker 2: I enjoyed it. Speaker 1: --the Air Force it sounds. Speaker 2: I enjoyed it. Story_ID: 179409 Speaker 1: Okay, so you come back to the States in what year-- Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 1: In '61, okay. Now what did you do when you came back? Speaker 2: I went to work for the U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division on a three-year commitment. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about that now who was in charge of that and what were they trying to do? Speaker 2: Burke Marshall was the assistant attorney general of Civil Rights at the time, and the major action in the division was by the voting rights staff lead by John Doar-- Speaker 1: John Doar. Speaker 2: --and the appellate division headed by Harold Greene. I applied for the voting rights staff (that's where the action was) and was told there was not a vacancy and that I should go and join the general litigation staff of the civil rights section, which I did, and they would let me know first vacancy available on the voting rights staff. There were no black attorneys on the voting rights staff at that time. Speaker 1: Did a vacancy ever appear on the voting rights staff? Speaker 2: Yes, I found out late, I found after they had been filled. There came a time in my first year there, 'cause I was only there eleven months before I left, that Frank Dunbar who was on the voting rights staff, came to see me and told me they were getting ready to do a voting rights investigation in Henry County, Alabama, and knowing I was from Alabama wanted to know if I knew anybody in Henry County who they might get in touch with who might be involved in civil, the Civil Rights Movement in Henry County, Alabama. I said yes I do. He said, "Who?" I said, "My uncle Jack, my uncle Tom, my uncle Will, my cousin Conrad," and named off about six or eight relatives. And then the pain hit me. I said, Here these folks have promised me consideration for that voting rights staff, they still don't have a black lawyer around there, they're coming to me to find out who I know in Alabama so they can send some white lawyers down there to conduct an investigation to gather data to file a voting rights suit. I said, Boy, it is time for you to get your hat and get out of here, and I did. When I left, there was some angst, I guess that's about the way of putting some concern at least, because in the last two or three months that I was there periodically I would have a message in my office, the secretary would give me a message that Simeon Booker had called. Speaker 1: Now Simeon Booker is the Washington [D.C.] editor for Jet Magazine. Speaker 2: Correct. That fact was reported around to the front office that he's getting calls from Simeon Booker and this was after I had announced my intention to leave. I am informed that there was concern that I was going to give a story to Jet and Ebony about what I had experienced in not being considered for the voting rights staff, and that was why Simeon [Booker] was calling me. Comical as hell, Simeon was calling me to tell me he had been in Chicago [Illinois] and had seen my cousin Eunice Johnson of Johnson Publishing and Eunice [Johnson] had told him when he got back to Washington to call me and say hello for her, pure and simple. Shortly after I left, shortly after I left, they hired a black lawyer who they later had to fire or permit to resign after he lied under oath, filed a false affidavit denying that he had loaned a governmentally rented car to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr., to go from Birmingham [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama]. That same person is now a United States District Court Judge in the United States. Speaker 1: Who is that? Speaker 2: I'm not, I didn't say. Speaker 1: It's a long time ago, so-- Speaker 2: Thelton Henderson is chief judge of the United States District Court in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thelton. It's a public story. Speaker 1: All these, these names now -- so much has been written about the activities then, Burke Marshall, John Doar often down there, John Doar often down there by himself reassuring people that he couldn't protect-- Story_ID: 179410 Speaker 1: He [John Doar] walked Meredith [James Meredith] to the front door. He walked the lady [Vivian Malone] who integrated the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] to the front door and confronted George Wallace. John Doar was a giant, so was Burke Marshall, so was Burke Marshall, so was Harold Greene, who was later Chief Judge of Superior Court when I was--Harold was Chief when I was on the Superior Court. They were all giants, so was the boss I worked for general litigation, Maceo Hubbard. Maceo Hubbard was a tremendous mentor to me in a number of respects, in life as well as law. In decision, about when I was gonna sign up for healthcare, which healthcare option to sign up with when I first got to government. Maceo saw me puzzling over the materials. He said, "Ted, if you don't mind, let me make a suggestion," and he gave me what turned out to be perfect advice. I'm still with the kind of coverage that he recommended then. Maceo was a tremendous guy, tremendous guy. Speaker 2: So you, you look very favorably on the activities in the Justice Department [U.S. Department of Justice]. Speaker 1: Except their refusal to consider me for the voting rights staff, which caused me to leave after eleven and a half months and fortunately I had sense enough not to give in to the temptation to leave with a blast. As I walked out the door the last time, I wiped the dust off my feet and kept on moving. Fortunately, I handled it that way for it would have been detrimental to the future developments if I had left with a blast at the Department of Justice. Speaker 2: Now, did, did you run into Louis Martin who was operating out of the White House? Speaker 1: I had met him a couple of times, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 179411 Speaker 1: Okay, all right so what did you do after you left there [U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division]? Speaker 2: I went to a private law firm, Houston, Bryant, and Gardner, the law firm founded by the father of Charles Hamilton Houston, old man William Houston, the firm in which Charlie was working when he died. That's the firm I went with. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Maceo Hubbard sent me up to talk to them after he called them and told him he had a young man who was leaving his office and he knew there was a vacancy because one of their partners had just left going on the bench and he knew they were looking for a young associate, and Maceo sent me up to Houston, Bryant, and Gardner to interview. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's where I went. Speaker 1: All right, so, this is to work in a law firm, you know, Charlie Houston being the one who trained most of the civil rights, black civil rights lawyers-- Speaker 2: No question. Speaker 1: --from Howard Law, Law School and-- Speaker 2: And never was dean. He was always vice dean. Never was dean of Howard Law School, vice dean. Speaker 1: I guess intramural politics are something. Speaker 2: He chose not to be dean. He allowed somebody else to front. Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't a political thing at all. Speaker 2: I don't think so. Story_ID: 179412 Speaker 1: So, well tell me about that position [lawyer at Houston, Bryant, and Gardner, Washington, D.C.], I mean, did you have a chance to get involved in some civil rights activities? Speaker 2: No, I was-- in the general practice of law as a young lawyer struggling to make a living and was involved in Republican politics. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were-- Speaker 2: I was raised as a Republican. Speaker 1: Okay, Tuskegee, Alabama-- Speaker 2: My father [Theodore Roosevelt Newman] was a Republican in Macon County, Alabama who when asked why he wasn't a democratic would pull down a lamp, window shade on which he had copied the party symbol of the democratic party of the State of Alabama. It was a white rooster with its motto being white supremacy for the right, and daddy said if you believe in that you vote democrat. Speaker 1: Now this is serious because I think, I don't think a lot of people realize when we look at those days the, what a democrat was in Alabama, Mississippi, or Florida. Speaker 2: Historically remember black folks post-Civil War were Republicans and in 1932 when the country was voting overwhelmingly for [President] Franklin [Delano] Roosevelt black folks were still voting for [President] Abraham Lincoln and the Republican party, in 1932. In 1952 when the country was voting overwhelming for [President] Dwight [David "Ike"] Eisenhower, black folks were still voting for Franklin Roosevelt. There came a time when I left the Republican Party, but we'll get to that later. Speaker 1: While I guess one could understand the traditions in the South with the major politicians being the Dixiecrats-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and their longstanding policies of hatred and abuse of-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --the black community, but-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --could not consider themselves in that party, the party of the people that, you know-- Speaker 2: And it is now the bedrock of the Republican Party, the [President Richard Milhouse] Nixon strategy to the [Barry Morris] Goldwater years, to the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan years has successed and the South now is almost solidly Republican, the same folks who were the Dixiecrats. Speaker 1: This is all of kind of the internecine struggle in the Democratic Party over civil rights and labor-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Correct. The South went Democratic, I mean went Republican because of us, is the way I put it. Speaker 1: Okay, so well what--so you got involved in Republican politics here in Washington [D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I was vice chairman of the young Republicans, the D.C. young Republicans. There was not a liberal other than me and one or two others in the whole organization. I later was vice chairman of the senior party. I was vice chairman of the senior party when I was appointed to the bench by Richard Nixon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a left wing liberal Republican. Nelson [Aldrich] Rockefeller, Jacob [Koppel "Jack"] Javits, Senator [Charles] Mathias, Governor [Willard Mitt] Romney, let no longer existent breed. Ed Brooke [Edward William Brooke III], that wing of the Republican Party that virtually is extinct as a dodo bird now. Story_ID: 179413 Speaker 1: So you were appointed in 1960-- Speaker 2: I was appointed in 1970. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to the bench by-- Speaker 2: By [President] Richard [Milhouse] Nixon. Speaker 1: --Richard Nixon. Speaker 2: To the Superior Court of the District of Columbia. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about your activities on the bench? Speaker 2: I was--the Superior Court is a court of general trial jurisdiction for the District of Columbia. At the time, I went on the bench it was in the process of obtaining general trial jurisdiction. It had previously been a court of limited jurisdiction, but in a reorganization of the court structure it was becoming the court of general jurisdiction in a three-year transition period. I served six and a half years on that court in virtually, in most of the branches of the court to the exclusion of the family division where I only spent about six weeks. I got along very well with my chief judge, and he knew that I did not like the family division and other than when he was required to be fair, put that in quotes, and assign me over there, he permitted me to stay out of the family division. When we got the fiduciary jurisdiction probate trusts, that kind of stuff transferred from the Federal Courts to our court, Superior Court, I was the fiduciary judge for three and a half years as a supplemental assignment. My practice had been primarily estate planning and probate with some general corporate work and some real estate work, but the bulk of my practice was estate planning and probate; that was my specialty. But, I tried all sorts of cases in the civil division and in the criminal division. The largest rape episode or imbroglio in the district's history the Green Vega rape saga which involved a half dozen or more males raping probably thirty or forty women. The first and lead trial of Davis and Warren I tried the lead case in the Green Vega rape case. I handled the administration of the estate of Marjorie, Mary, Mar, excuse me, Ms. Post, Ms. Merriweather Post, I forget her first name. I tried on the civil side some major malpractice, medical malpractice cases, the full range of litigation, both civil and criminal. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179414 Speaker 1: Was there a particular case, that I guess that would make a good story for us (laughter)? Speaker 2: The one that got me notoriety, the United States v. James Arnold. The District of Columbia had from its beginning of its jurisprudence adhered to the doctrine that to convict a defendant of a sexual offense, a rape, sodomy, the like, the testimony of the victim was not sufficient. There must be corroboration. This resulted in the anomaly that if Joe Blow at gunpoint yanked Mary Jones off the street, drove her ten blocks to the woods, stole her wallet and her watch at gunpoint, and then raped her, on her say so alone if credited by the jury he could be convicted of armed robbery, armed kidnapping, assault with a dangerous weapon, and a variety of other offenses, but not a rape because there was no corroboration. Speaker 1: A man could be convicted of robbery where there no corrob [corroboration], there's not wallet, there's no money-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --but just on the say so-- Speaker 2: Correct, but not of the sex offense; absolutely no sense at all to me. As a trial judge in the case of United States v. James Arnold, Judge Newman ruled that we were no longer going to require corroboration in the District of Columbia. James Arnold was convicted, appealed, the Court of Appeals said Newman you are absolutely wrong you have no power or authority to overturn jurisprudence of the District of Columbia, you erred. However, prospectively, we are going to abolish corroboration where the victim is an adult female and on the facts of this case we find your error to be harmless. I later get to the Court of Appeals and after one unsuccessful try with the full court, all nine of us, on the second attempt in a case of Gary [ph.] Cole [ph.] and P [ph.] v. United States. I wrote the opinion for the full Court of Appeals abolishing the doctrine of corroboration of sex offenses in its entirety. So, rebel as a trial judge got slapped down for being beyond his water, and they were right I was. I knew what I was doing. I knew I didn't have authority to do it, but I was gonna do it 'cause I thought it was right. Speaker 1: But, you made them respond by doing that? Speaker 2: Correct and I got to write the opinion ultimately for the Court of Appeals putting it out of our jurisprudence entirely. Speaker 1: That was a victory. Speaker 2: I smiled the day the opinion was issued. Gary Cole and P v. the United States. I had tried unsuccessfully with the full court in a case called Fitzgerald v. the United States, but one of my colleagues wouldn't go with me, who I thought would, a black woman. Julia, Julia wouldn't go. She went with me in Gary Cole and P, but she for some reason she wasn't ready to go on Fitzgerald and I thought, I thought I had her with me when me went to the en banc court with the case. I thought I had a majority, and I was disappointed when I didn't, but I finally a couple of years later I got it. Story_ID: 179415 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you moved on to, on to a higher position on the bench-- Speaker 2: After six and a half years as a trial judge, I was appointed to the [D.C.] Court of Appeals by Jerry Ford, [President] Gerald [Rudolph] Ford [Jr.], as, in essence I was slotted to be chief judge when I got there. The office of chief was vacant, and it was known when I was appointed and confirmed by the Senate that the commission that designates who will be chief intended to designate me to be chief and thus the first African American to be chief of a state-like jurisdiction. I was the first black chief of a State Supreme Court kind of thing, although my dear friend Robert N.C. Nix who was the first black chief in Pennsylvania says, "Ted, D.C. is not a state, I'm the first black to chief a State Supreme Court." When he arrived in New Orleans [Louisiana] for his first meeting of the congress of state chief justices, I saw him checking into the hotel and went up to him and said, "Bob, as a member of the executive committee of the conference of state chief justices, it's a pleasure for me to welcome you to your first meeting." (laughter) Speaker 1: So you made your point. Okay, all right well in that position, you know, what victories did you achieve, as far as you can-- Speaker 2: Oh boy, oh boy, there was a fight to get there and it had to do with, had to do with race and power. I, as I say I was the first black chief judge in the District of Columbia in any court (I think I'm right on that). I know I was the first black in the D.C. Court of Appeals and the D.C. court, the local court system, clearly that's so, and I think I'm right--I may not be right on the federal side. The powers that be running the D.C. court system did not want to surrender control. Who is that says nobody surrenders control gracefully. Speaker 1: Power concedes nothing without a demand-- Speaker 2: Marcus Garvey said something like that, too. You have to take power to let them give it to you. And my nomination and the opposition to my nomination was about power, and it was a rocky road. It was a rocky road. And there were forces that tried to make sure that I didn't get there. Indeed, my nomination reached the desk of the president of the Senate. Less than three days before adjournment-(unclear)--died. A Jewish landlord and a Jewish lawyer asked to testify at the confirmation hearing with the accusation that I was anti- anti-Semitic. I was alerted through my chief judge of that fact. I was alerted otherwise as well through Senator Mathias' office, one of his staffers who was a friend of mine. My chief judge called me to come in (he was Jewish), he said, "Ted, this is unfair, but I want you to know what's afoot." He said, "Now, I'm gonna give you some help." He said, "I have called Nathan Brody, chair of the B'Nai Anti-Defamation Society, B'Nai B'rith Anti-Defamation League, and he will be in your office within the hour 'cause he wants to talk to you." Story_ID: 178915 Speaker 1: So when we left off you were just about to meet with David Brody of the Anti-Defamation League of B'Nai B'rith (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Defamation System, Anti-Defamation League of B'Nai B'rith. Harold Greene told me Dave would be in my office within an hour. I had not met Dave before, and Dave showed up in my office. He had checked with the Senate's Committee and verified that these two people had asked to testify against my confirmation on the grounds that I was anti-Semitic. Remember there are only three days left in the Congress, and if I don't get confirmed I'm dead. Remember that I'm nominated by Gerald [R.] Ford, and it is clear by then that Jimmy Carter is gonna beat Gerald Ford. Congress is controlled by Democrats, the Senate is, so a Republican president is nominating three days before the end of the session to a Congress controlled by Democrats and Sol Rosen is well aware of that fact and knows that cloud or could reasonably believe that a cloud of anti-Semitism would prevent my confirmation, at least that's what I believe he believes. Dave Brody said, "Ted, Harold Greene thinks very, very highly of you. You know he's Jewish, and I think very highly of Harold. Do you know--do you have any contacts in the Jewish community who know you well?" I said, "Oh yeah." He said, "Who?" I said--he said, "What do they do?" I said, "They're all in the wine and food business." I said, "Because I'm a wine collector." At that time, I had a wine cellar with about, probably about 3,000 bottles in it, and I was regularly involved in gourmet dinnering around the town. I was active in wine and food, and that was an industry that had a substantial Jewish membership in the trade. He said, "Well can you give me the names of some people who know you well," and I gave him a list of probably twenty or thirty names. He came back to see me the next morning and said, "Ted, I've just left the hill [Capitol Hill] with talking to senator so and so, and I assured him that if necessary I could load up three or four buses out of synagogues to come up and testify on your behalf." He said, "I don't think," he said, "I don't think"--he said, "No, let me change that, you will not have any problem on that score." The hearing was held. Brown and Rosen both testified that I was anti-Semitic. Senator Eagleton asked me if I wanted to testify having told me beforehand that my answer to that question should be no. He said, "Judge Newman, you have the right to be heard, do you want to be heard?" I said, "Senator, I know my answer probably should be no, but this accusation goes to the very fiber of my being, and yes, I wanna be heard." And I testified about how outraged I was having been the victim of the bigotry I had been all my life to be now accused falsely of being a bigot, offended the very fiber of my being and I wanted my denial to be spread on the record of that hearing rather than just having this committee vote to confirm me in the face of the accusation. I-- felt an obligation to speak. With about three hours left before the Senate adjourned finally, I was confirmed by unanimous consent at about eight fifteen that evening. About eleven o'clock the Senate adjourned--(unclear)--. I got to the Court of Appeals, and the battles began. Speaker 1: Okay, what were they? Speaker 2: Those who didn't want me there when they saw they weren't going to be able to capture me began a campaign of opposition, and we had some interesting times. Speaker 1: Would you prevail--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, they four of my colleagues tried to prevent me having a second term as chief. The term as chief is four years. The term as judge is fifteen. When I sought my second term as chief, four of my colleagues, who I refer to as the gang of four, sought to prevent me from getting a second term; they were unsuccessful. However, they did generate a series of articles in the Washington Post that were critical of me unfairly. The one day that the Washington Post wrote, had an article favorable to me that was fair it was buried in the metro section. Speaker 1: So, you think that there are higher ups trying to-- Speaker 2: No, the gang of four was using a reported from the Washington Post who-- Speaker 1: Had access to-- Speaker 2: They were providing him confidential memos within the court. They were breaching the confidentiality for court to provide data to the reporter, Ben Weiser, who was an understudy of Bob Woodward. However, they were not successful. I got a second term as chief and after another four years as chief I decided I don't need any more of this chief business, so after eight years as chief I stepped down as chief. I did not seek a third term as chief and serve the rest of my term into retirement as an associate judge. Speaker 1: Okay now it's about 1984 that you stepped down? Speaker 2: Yes, I was chief from '76 [1976] to '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so you spent how much longer on the bench? Speaker 2: I retired in '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991], okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, I spent seven more years there as an associate judge. Story_ID: 178916 Speaker 1: When you look back on your period as a judge, what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: I was chief as the court [D.C. Court of Appeals] grew from infancy in terms of being the highest court of the jurisdiction to intellectual maturity. The quality of the work that was done, the quality of the opinions, this is not my doing, but I had a part in it. The court became a mature, high quality court, began that process of maturation about the time I became chief, and the quality of the work product from that time on, including now, is meaningfully better than it was before, and it is better now than it was when I went out. It has continually gotten better. The opinions are more thoughtful. They are more insightful. They are more reasoned. They are less, it's so because we say it's so. It's less, ipse dixit. We are dealing with tough issues with intellectual honesty. We don't always, the court is not always unanimous, there are divisions, but it's a good court. It's a court that I'm proud to have served eight years as chief of. Story_ID: 178917 Speaker 1: What, sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns today for the black community? Speaker 2: Lord have mercy. The black community is in need of a lot of things. Most of all the black community is in need of organizing and activating itself, its self-respect, its integrity, its sense of self-worth. A lot of the problems that the black community experiences are not the fault of the black community; the fault of white folks. They are white folk's problems. Racism is not a black person's problem. It's a white person's problem. Racism is alive and well, but we as a black community cannot wait for the world to be right. We've got to get on about our own efforts to make it right. I understand the sociological influences that affect the black community, but we can do something I suspect about babies having babies. I don't know what the solution is, but I know damn well we need to try. For as long as a mother is fourteen years old, thirteen years, fifteen years old, and is a junior high school dropout she has, and the father, excuse me the sire of the child ain't nowhere to be found, 'cause they ain't no father he's a sire, there is nobody to contribute anything, and I'm not just talking about, I'm not talking mainly about money, and nobody to contribute anything to the baby. You got a fourteen-year-old who knows nothing trying to raise a fourteen-week old, and it's a vicious cycle. We need to be involved in putting a stop to that. And you can go through the panoply of social problems. Yeah, the greater community has a responsibility in that regard, too, no question about that, but so do we. And instead of cursing Charlie as the only solution, we need to be about. And we've got resources we can do it. Story_ID: 178918 Speaker 1: I was at Bethel A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church in St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands in April of last year, excuse me April of this year [2013]. For the annual conference of the Virgin Islands District of the A.M.E. Church, my favorite, my former pastor, favorite preacher now that my daddy [Theodore Roosevelt Newman] is dead, Bishop William P. DeVoe was holding the conference. They had a youth service. A woman preacher from Greater A.M.E. Church who holds services in her garage, services in her garage, had her youth choir, and the church is three years old, services in her garage, she had her youth choir there to sing, five girls, five boys; twelve, thirteen, fourteen years old; ten of them in robes. If she can keep those children around that church 'til they're eighteen and nineteen years old, you're not gonna see them in a juvenile court. She is doing something in an economically depressed environment of St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands]. She's got as many boy children in a choir as she's got girl children. I seldom see that here on the main land [United States]. I see many more girl children in Sunday school than I see boy children. I see mamas bringing the children to school, to church to Sunday school, I seldom see daddies. One of the things I love about the former Secretary of Transportation, [HM] Rodney Slater, who's a member of my church: every Sunday morning, Rodney Slater brings his daughter to Sunday school, and his wife meets him later for church. But, Rodney is bringing his daughter to Sunday school. We need--things like that. I recognize, when I talk about Rodney Slater, I'm talking about an intact home with mama and daddy, but even when there is not an intact home, we as mentors, we as big brother, big sister, something, we've got to be able to do something to break the cycle, and I think it can be done. I was thrilled recently reading an article about a young man who graduated from high school here in D.C., daddy in the penitentiary, he doesn't know where his mama is, being raised by his great grand mama out in the Trinidad Ivy neighborhood out here in Northeast Washington near Gallaudet school a very heavy drug community, drug area in that area out there, accepted to Bowie [State University, Prince George's County, Maryland] and two other colleges but couldn't get in. He was a football player, couldn't get in because of his test scores. Enrolled in a junior college in Kansas. The college paid, was paying for his, they didn't have any accolade scholarships, paying for his tuition and fees, but couldn't pay for his room and board. The Trinidad community neighborhood and a woman who lives in that neighborhood were raising funds to pay for that boy's room and board at that community college. And the article said that one of the lead women involved in it was a secretary to a judge in the Superior Court. I called the chief, chambers of the Chief Judge of the Superior Court and found out who she was secretary to, called her talked to her awhile, verified that she was involved with it, told her I'd be back to her. I sent an email to my fellow judges and to the Chief Judge of the trial court calling their attention to the article and saying I was sending the judge's secretary a check. I asked the lady who I should--I called her back and asked her who I should make the check payable to, and she told me make it payable to his great grand mama. I sent her a check for two hundred dollars and she sent up to see me in tears. I also talked to a friend of mine who I knew when I was involved in a scholarship fund. She could not fit him into her criteria, but she was on the board of an organization called E.F.E.C., Efforts for Ex-Convicts, which had about 5,000 dollar in scholarship money that they were not using for any purpose. She got them to make a grant for a 1000 dollars at my request, excuse me, at my urging for this young man. The judge's secretary called at six o'clock on Friday evening and said, "Judge, I know as a retired judge you ain't here now, but I couldn't go home without saying thank you and God bless you." We can all do something and when the secretary asked me, "Judge why are you doing this?" I said, "'Cause I stood on somebody's else's shoulders." Somebody helped me, time for me to, you know, give an opportunity; don't walk away. Each one, help one. That's what I'm talking about. Story_ID: 178919 Speaker 1: Sir, is there anything that you would do differently looking back on your life? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I'd study harder. I'd get into less trouble, but it wouldn't be as much fun (laughter). No, really I can't think of--I would not choose Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] on the rationale that I did. I'm glad I did choose it. I lucked up and got to the right place. Some of the mistakes in life I made I would probably avoid. I have not made any mistakes that have been career threatening or life endangering, but I've done some things that I wish I hadn't done. I've cussed out some folks I wished I hadn't cussed out. I've lost my temper when I wish I hadn't. Yeah, I'm human, disgustingly human. I would have handled the controversy surrounding my tenure as chief [justice] a bit more diplomatically. I could have been more diplomatic. I could have handled that a bit better. I could have handled it much better, but when you come at me with a broad sword, I'm gonna respond with a pickaxe, and that's not always the best tactic, but it sometimes helps survival. Story_ID: 178920 Speaker 1: Now you've received numerous awards and you've experienced a great deal of travel, and you've been to Africa numerous times, you're wearing a piece right now from Ghana, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, professionally, as one who did his job as lawyer for the best interest of the client, and did it well, and I think I can say with confidence that those who will remember me as a practicing lawyer would remember me in that fashion. When I was a practitioner in estate planning and probate, I was deemed to be one of the eight of ten best in the town, and I didn't say best black. I was one of the eight of ten best in the town in my craft, although my clientele was black and thus I was not dealing with some of the big dollars in estate planning that some of my contemporaries were in the major firms, but it was the same kind of work. As a judge, that I dealt with people fairly, as a trial judge, that I did my job thoroughly. On the [D.C.] Court of Appeals, that I brought intellectual discipline to the task, that I made some major contributions to the development of the jurisprudence of this jurisdiction. I think it's fair to say I did in a number of respects. That I challenged my colleagues to produce the best work that they could during the time I was chief [justice], that I managed the court with efficiency and integrity, and that I still every now and then turn out a significant major piece of work, as I did last year on a First Amendment issue involving a church dispute. And I hope I have another five, six, seven, or eight years of meaningful labor at the court as a senior judge before I finally decide to spend even more time looking at the waters of the Caribbean and Atlantic [Ocean] out of my front door in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]...