 Story_ID: 167999 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Leslie Outerbridge, L-E-S-L-I-E, O-U-T-E-R-B-R-I-D-G-E. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 29, 1936, Chicago, Illinois, county hospital. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired firefighter. Speaker 1: All right, and were you not, past president of the African American Firefighters Association? Speaker 2: Yes, founding member of the African American Firefighters [& Paramedics] League of Chicago, and four-time president. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is December 8th, is it? Speaker 1: I think it's the ninth. Speaker 2: Ninth. Speaker 1: Ninth? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: December 9th-- Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: --2003 [December 9, 2003]. Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We're at HistoryMakers [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 168000 Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They're warm-up questions, I guess. The first question is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I like cabbage and ham and potatoes for a meal. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, rust. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: As a writer, I have many of them, but I can't--oh, I have one: in order to get the proper answer, you have to ask the right question. Story_ID: 168001 Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's side of the family. But we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, Lillie Taylor, L-I-L-L-I-E, T-A-Y-L-O-R, and, of course, Outerbridge. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 27, 1913, Louisville, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: My great-grandmother, I'm not quite sure where she was born. But her side of the family has Blackfoot Indian from the Blackfoot Indians. And my great-grandmother, I have a picture of her. She looked just like Cochise. She had long, white hair that she could sit on. And from her profile, she had the traditional hook nose. She smoked a corncob pipe, and had a bass voice. If you heard her, if you were standing behind a door, and you heard her talking, you would think it was a man. But she was a beautiful woman. My grandfather, he was born in Westbrook, Kentucky [sic, Westwood, Kentucky]. He had a third-grade education. He made his living as a contractor. And one of the stories that my mother used to always tell was that even with a third-grade education, he was a foreman. He was a contracting foreman. And they talked about a building that was moved from one spot to another in the town of Louisville, and he was the foreman for it. When he got sick, I got--I lived with him for about, oh, maybe two years. He was a plumber by that time, by trade. And up until very recently, I recognized the fact that I had taken a lot of my demeanor from him. He was a no-nonsense guy and so far as my activities in the fire department is concerned, I can relate to his demeanor because I kind of took it on. He couldn't write anything probably other than his name, but he could count and he could make out a bill. So he wasn't--he didn't have a lot of formal education. He sold vegetables on the street with a horse and a cart. In many ways, he was a hustler, but he had, you know, many, many skills. He was also a minister. So, you know, his thought process ran the entire gamut. He worked for rich people on the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois]. He used to take care of buildings for rich landlords. And there's one story where he did a job for someone. They wouldn't pay him, so he knocked him out. I mean he would fight (laughter). My mother was probably his favorite child because she was probably the only one that was truly obedient. So I had benefit of that as well. I don't know what else I can tell you about that side of the family. Speaker 1: Are there any--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I did go back to--I used to take my mother to Louisville every year. And she'd stay there for two weeks. Then I'd go back and pick her up. And I learned that my grandfather was born Westbrook or Westwood [Kentucky]. I think it's Westbrook. It's between Lexington [Kentucky] and Louisville. I had friends on the fire department in Lexington, so I used to go to Lexington and spend the night, and then come back to Chicago [Illinois]. But I stopped through Westbrook, and I asked a few questions. Westbrook is only about a half mile square. And there was a general store on the main road there. And the same family had owned that store for generations. And I simply, you know, said his name, and this was a young man. And he knew that he was from the Clark (ph.) family, and that was kind of weird because one of my aunts in Louisville, her name was Clark. But he knew exactly who, you know, who that brood was. It's also the general area where Abraham Lincoln--I don't know whether he lived there or he walked there or he worked there, but they had signs along the road (clearing throat) indicating that Abe Lincoln functioned there in some-- Speaker 1: I think he may have been born in Kentucky actually, and-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: I think he was born in Kentucky actually-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and lived in Indiana and then ended up, you know, living his adult life in Illinois. Speaker 2: But that side of the family had Blackfoot Indian in them. I had one uncle that lived to be 105 years old. And I visited him with my mother during the time she was there. And I took some pictures of him. By being a photographer, I try to take as many pictures as I can, particularly when I'm out of town. And I purposely took a profile of him, and he was baldheaded, but if you could imagine a headdress on him, everything else said Indian, the high cheekbones, the long, cranium, the--I call it a hook nose, a nose with a big bend at the top, looked just like an Indian. Story_ID: 168002 Speaker 1: Okay, now are there any stories in your family about, you know, the 19th century or stories about slavery or the Civil War or any of that? Speaker 2: No. And, you know, until--my mother [Lillie Taylor Outerbridge] passed in 1999. And that was the first time that I really realized that she was not--she was only what? Fifty years removed from slavery, and that never clicked with me before, and, of course, now I just wish that I had asked some of those questions. I wasn't that interested in history as a child. I was more interested in sports. So I followed sports and the history of sports and that sort of thing. And when I saw Jackie Robinson play in 1947, I wanted to be a professional baseball player. Story_ID: 168003 Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, Alexander Outerbridge, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, O-U-T-E-R-B-R-I-D-G-E. He was-- Speaker 1: Oh, before you go further, I noticed in the survey you turned in that you had some information on the name Outerbridge and where it comes from. Can-- Speaker 2: Yes, it comes from, if you heard of, it's British. My grandmother and grandfather were born in Bermuda. My grandfather's name was Freddy Outerbridge (ph.). He was renowned as the Babe Ruth of cricket. He scored 103 runs before they got him out. And all over England, cricket, particularly back then, was very big. And there was a, an annual match between Somerset [Cricket Club] and Hamilton [Parish Football Club]. Both towns would close down for the day whenever this match took place. And my great-grandfather was the man. Speaker 1: And his name, once again, is-- Speaker 2: Freddy Outerbridge. Speaker 1: Freddy Outerbridge. Speaker 2: They called him "Freddy Hundreds." That was his moniker. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Very small, short man. I'm taller than my father was, and he's taller than his father was. But he was some kind of athlete. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what year was your father born and where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born 1913 in New York City [New York]. New York City has a large group of Bermudians, well, that being the port where they--before the plane, the only way you could get to Bermuda would be by boat. And my grandmother used to take the train from here to New York, and then take the boat to Bermuda. I think it was a two-week trip. So that being, you know, the major port, a lot of Bermudians settled there. Most of his family are there, just about all of them. And he was born in New York, New York City. Speaker 1: Is there a story about why the family migrated to New York or why your grandfather--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, my mother, my grandmother and my grandfather separated. And she came to New York. In fact, she may have been carrying my father at the time 'cause he was born in New York City. Story_ID: 168004 Speaker 1: Okay, any stories from that side of the family about the 19th century or old, old days? Speaker 2: My grandmother's maiden name was Simon [ph.]. And one of the, one of the stories I can remember her telling me was about one of the relatives, an uncle--just to back up a minute. Witchcraft was very big in Bermuda and the story goes that her uncle had a spell put on him. And he didn't speak for thirty years, he could not speak. My grandmother used to make hair oil that made your hair grow. Speaker 1: What was the recipe? Speaker 2: I have no idea. The only thing I, I can remember that she put in it was Glover's Mange [Cure], was one of the ingredients. And Glover's mange is like a dark brown, but her hair oil was like a light green. And it smelled good, and my father [Alexander Outerbridge] was known as "Patent Leather." He had an extremely artistic grade of hair. And in those days, particularly, blacks, wore their hair short and straight back. And his hair always laid in such a way that he got the nickname, "Patent Leather." And I am--she belonged to a Holiness church. And I remember a couple of the women at the church where their hair was falling out. And they used her hair oil, and their hair came back. She used to make this coconut candy that was just absolutely delicious. She was a master cook and baker. As I said, I lived with them for about two years. My grandfather got sick, and I attribute my body being built up because of the fact that for those two years, I had to carry coal from beneath the sidewalk to the third floor in scuttles every day. And I got to the point where I would carry two scuttles at a time. And that strengthened me. Story_ID: 168005 Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: I liked, I liked to, to play all types of sports. I was very small for my, for my age. I was a midget almost, and I always wanted to big. I wanted to be six foot and two hundred [pounds]. That was--but I was small. And I didn't start growing until about my second year in high school [at Wells Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. When I went to high school, in fact, I was weighing about eighty-five pounds. I had gotten about three double promotions so I was much younger than my peers. Speaker 1: Let's see. Most students start at fourteen. You would have started then at twelve? Speaker 2: Twelve. Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: All three of my--I have two older sisters, and all of three of us were in high school at the same time. And that was something. Speaker 1: Is it just three of you? Are there three-- Speaker 2: No, there're four. Speaker 1: Four. Speaker 2: One younger and two older. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168006 Speaker 1: All right. Now, tell me about growing up. What was it like being--now, what side of Chicago [Illinois] did you grow up on? Speaker 2: Grew up on the North Side in Cabrini [Cabrini-Green Homes]. We were the second family to move into Cabrini Homes, 1940. In fact, I looked for this picture in 1939. We were living on the premises where the administration building was ultimately built. So we had first preference. And it was a wooden, frame house with a two-story stairwell, outside stairwell. And I was about, let's see, 1939, I was three years old. And I was in a little sun suit (laughter). But in 1940, we moved in. It was brand new. It was beautiful, you know, grass. Today there's all, everything is cemented over. There was a coal shoot. I had to empty ashes (laughter). I went to [Edward] Jenner [Elementary] School [later, Edward Jenner Elementary Academy of the Arts, Chicago, Illinois]. Incidentally, I'm the vice president of the West Chesterfield Historical Society in the neighborhood that I live in. And I just found out today--we met today briefly. I had to leave the meeting in order to get here. One of the members was a teacher at Jenner School when I was going there 'cause I'm the youngest member of that whole group. And that was really something. [HM] Ramsey Lewis went to that school, [HM] Jerry Butler went to that school. I don't know--no, [HM] Jesse White lived in the neighborhood, but he went to Franklin School [sic, Schiller Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Jenner, Edward Jenner. Speaker 1: Jenner, okay. Speaker 2: It was about, oh, 95 percent white. So that was my introduction to living among people of another race. Story_ID: 168007 Speaker 1: So what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood [Near North Side, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, Montgomery Ward's was a big thing. We used to sneak over there into the boxcars and take bananas (laughter). My front yard was the sight of the big marble games. My father [Alexander Outerbridge] was a fancier of marbles. He taught me how to shoot marbles, and we used to always have the big games in my yard. And I remember one time, I won all the marbles. And he made me give them all back (laughter). My father was a scout master. There's a A.M.E. church right across--well, it's about a block and a half from [Edward] Jenner [Elementary] School [later, Edward Jenner Elementary Academy of the Arts, School, Chicago, Illinois], Wayman A.M.E. Church. That was the church that we attended. My father was a scout master there for twenty-five years. And just recently, in a [Chicago] Tribune Magazine seg- section, sector, there was an interview with [HM] Congressman Bobby Rush, and he stated that my father was a great influence on his life. He was in the Cub Scout troop. Bobby didn't have a father. So my father served as his father figure. And he served as a father figure to a host of young men. And I used to get so angry at it because he treated them the same way he treated me (laughter). But years later, you know, I understood. Sights and sounds. A lot of softball in the street, touch football, and I can recall, we used to play what they called fast pitch, where you draw a box on a wall and you throw a rubber ball and the batter would try to hit, and then you'd mark off, you know, your distances for a single, a double, a homerun. If you hit it so far, that's, that's a homerun. I used to play against teenagers when I was like nine and ten years old. I had a tremendous arm. I threw it out eventually. But I couldn't play that particular game with my peers because my arm was too strong. And I guess that's why I wanted to be a professional baseball player. Story_ID: 168008 Speaker 1: Now, you've gotten a--I read that once you won all the marbles and somebody appointed another person to beat you up? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. That was in the, that was in the schoolyard, during recess. I won all the marbles (laughter), and this guy recruited one of his friends. He was, he was really a man child, and, hell, I was, I couldn't have been no more than like fifth, sixth grade. And I was, like I say, I was small for my age. And I ended up with a black eye, and he took all the marbles. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I don't know what I learned from that, but I accepted that. I knew I--I thought about that when I mentioned it. But I accepted that for what it was worth. And because I was better than, you know, the guys in my age group, when they used to pick sides, whether it was football 'cause I was, I was a fast runner as well. I had good foot speed, whether it was baseball or football, whatever we were playing, I would volunteer to get on the lesser team to try to make a game out of basketball, whatever it was. And if I, you know, I knew that this team was loaded, I'd, I'd go to the other side. Speaker 1: And try and make it even? Speaker 2: Right, do, you know, do what I could do. Story_ID: 168009 Speaker 1: Tell me about your grade school [Edward Jenner Elementary School, later, Edward Jenner Academy of the Arts, Chicago, Illinois]. What were your favorite subjects in grade school? Speaker 2: Penmanship. My father [Alexander Outerbridge] saved one of my report cards. I have it in an album at home. I have all Es and down at the bottom, the comment was I was to be commended for my penmanship. Other subjects, I guess I liked history, but my father was some sort of a historian. And we could ask him questions. Sometimes he'd answer them, but most of the time, he'd make us go get the encyclopedia, and then we'd have discussion on it. So, you know, a lot of my background for most of my subjects came from those types of discussions that we used to have. Every Sunday evening, in fact, everybody would come to the kitchen table, and my oldest sister--she's about four years older than I. My next sister is about two years older than I, and my youngest sister is two years younger than I. So while we were doing, while we were discuss--they were discussing her subjects, I was learning. And that's probably why I got as many double promotions as they did. I really didn't focus in on any particular subject. As I think about it now, I gave all of them just about the same level of interest or disinterest. Speaker 1: So were you a good student or-- Speaker 2: Yes, I was an excellent student in grammar school. And by me being so young, by the time I hit high school [Wells Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I realized, you know, how far behind I was in, on the social level with, you know, my peers. So consequently, I only lasted in high school for two years. And I quit. Speaker 1: Now, you would have been only about fourteen, I guess, when you quit high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You started grade [sic, high] school at about twelve and you ended about fourteen? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I may have, I may have like turned fifteen by the time I, I left. Story_ID: 168010 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you, I didn't, I didn't ask you like, what your father [Alexander Outerbridge] did for a living or what your mother [Lillie Taylor Outerbridge] did for a living or how they met. We didn't even ask, talk about that. Speaker 2: Oh, that's, now, that's the story. I only have one set of grandparents. My mother's father [Robert Taylor], wife died. My father's mother [Adelle Simms] divorced her husband. They met, so my mother and father were in the same household, okay, as brother and--half brothers and sisters--(laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) so they-- Speaker 2: Oh, man. Speaker 1: How old were they at that time? Were they very young? Speaker 2: Let's see, they were married in 1930. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were still in their teens then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: If they were born in 1913. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So-- Speaker 1: They were seventeen, I guess. Speaker 2: She was seventeen when she, when she had her first child, well, when they got married. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: And she was with child at that time. Speaker 1: That's an interesting way to meet. That's the most interesting way that I've heard so far. Speaker 2: Well, actually, it was kind of a forced situation by them being, you know, in the same household together and then she got pregnant. And they were forced to marry. Story_ID: 168011 Speaker 1: Okay now. Now, what did your father [Alexander Outerbridge] do for a living? Speaker 2: Well, my father worked for Hobart Manufacturing Company. Speaker 1: They make some faucets and things? Speaker 2: No, it makes scales, you know, computerized scales, you know, little computers. In fact, they had some form of computerized scales, oh, back in the '60s [1960s], mixers, Kitchen-Aid appliances, Kitchen-Aid was a subsidiary of Hobart at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's the same outfit. They make those fountains that cool off water and stuff like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, all that stuff. I don't know what they're doing now. I know they used to be at Wacker Drive and Garvey Court [Chicago, Illinois]. That was the lower level, but on Wacker Drive between Dearborn [Street] and Clark [Street], I believe, because I used to go down there. He used to ride to work on a bike. I'd go down with him. Then I'd bring the bike back home. And, man-- Speaker 1: Well, how would you go down? You'd go--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'd ride on the bike with him. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you'd drive it--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And I'd ride the bike back home. We used to meet him for lunch, and we used to go to Hillman's Stop and Shop, which was on Washington [Street]. There was a lower level. And it was, I mean that was, that was big-time stuff. Sometimes we'd go see a movie after we had lunch with daddy. He was a, a real fine--he was, he was--he loved children, and he was good with, with kids. Story_ID: 168012 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Who do you take after, you think, the most? Is it your mother [Lillie Taylor Outerbridge] or your father [Alexander Outerbridge]? Speaker 1: Both. My father thought that I took after my mother because I had her attitude. She was, I guess what you could call a prude. I mean, you know, if she were, if she were in Bermuda, she would be the epitome of the social class. She was fashion conscious. She was social graces conscious. She dressed to a T. And, you know, we didn't have a lot of money. So we used to go down to the resale shops with her. And we'd be just as well dressed on Sunday morning as the rich kids. As far as my father is concerned, my activities with the fire department have to be attributed to him because he was involved very deeply with the A.M.E. Laymen Organization [sic, Lay Organization of the African Methodist Episcopal Church], and he was president of the laymen league here. He was the district president. And eventually, he, he published a, a newsletter, an international newsletter for the A.M.E. Church. So, what I've, what I did in the fire department came directly from him. He used to drag me along with him to all of his meetings. They used to meet out at the Bethel [A.M.E. Church] parish house at 45th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. And, oh, I couldn't have been no more than five years old when we started. So I got a sense of how a meeting is run, you know, how debate takes place, the rules of organization and it, it helped me to do what I did in the fire department, both locally and with the national black firemen's organization [International Association of Black Professional Firefighters]. So I became tuned. And all, always blamed, you know, the fact that I made the commitment on him because that's where I got it from. Speaker 2: Well, it's good to have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The social commitment. Speaker 2: --yeah, that exposure to organizational life. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: A lot of people don't have any access to that at all. Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 168013 Speaker 1: You went to high school at Wells [High School, later, Wells Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Wells High School. Speaker 1: Wells High School. Now, was Cabrini [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois] still holding up as a decent place to live? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Wells, at that time was right in the center of a Polish neighborhood. It's about 1000 North on Ashland Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. And there were very few blacks, you know, in the school. Probably the one thing that kept me there, kept my mind there as long as it was, was the drum and bugle corps. I was in [J]ROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and I became a member of the drum and bugle corps. And we used to play at football games. We used to get in free, basketball games. And I participated in drum competitions, city-wide drum competitions. We had like a four-man team. Speaker 1: What drum did you play? Speaker 2: I played snare drum. And that was quite beneficial. I really enjoyed, you know, the music aspect of that. Speaker 1: And so--okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: As far as my other subjects were concerned, I just became somewhat disinterested. Speaker 1: Were you concerned about being small and being young? Speaker 2: Yes, and, you know, the girls didn't take me serious (laughter). I had three sisters, didn't have a brother. I couldn't hit girls-- Speaker 1: But they were big enough to pick on you (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah. My father [Alexander Outerbridge] didn't want me to fight, so I wrestled. And I was a pretty good wrestler. And here again, my peers, I couldn't, I couldn't get anything on. I had to wrestle guys that were larger than I, okay. So I guess that was one way of getting my frustration out. And my best friend--I probably weighed about, I don't know, between fifty and sixty pounds. He had to be a hundred pounds or more. And I used to beat him wrestling. Eventually, he played football in the Canadian [Football] League. He was a--became a lineman in the Canadian League 'cause he, you know, he was big and he was, he was, he was a pretty good athlete. But I was too quick for him (laughter). Story_ID: 168014 Speaker 1: But, and just, you know, one story along that line. There was a girl that used to sit behind me in school. And I don't know, I think she liked me, but, you know, at that time, I didn't have, you know, any ideas or thoughts about girls. Having three sisters, you know, there was a whole lot of no-no's going on in the house (laughter). And I was a sort of protector. You know, I felt protective of my three sisters. Once we got into high school [Wells High School, later, Wells Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I was their big brother, okay. Every now and then I'd cut a class, and I'd pitch pennies, and I'd win some money, and I'd give them lunch money (laughter). But this girl used to pick at me and pick at me, and I mean stick me in the back, hit me with paper balls, you name it. This particular day, she decided she was gonna beat me up after school. So about a block and a half--she followed me home from school. And I decided that I was just going to stop. I had no, you know, ideas about hitting her or hurting her, but I mean it was just demeaning (laughter). And when you're that-- Speaker 2: To run from her (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, and when you're that young, that story will live with you for the rest of your life. So I just stopped and faced her, and then she stopped. And somebody went to my house and got my mother [Lillie Taylor Outerbridge]. And my mother came--it was about, I was about maybe two blocks from home. And my mother came and intervened. And as fate would have it, by me being a photographer, I do most of the photography work for the National Council of Negro Women (unclear). The woman who runs it, she lived in the neighborhood, lived right cata-cornered from my house. And she had been knowing me all my life. So she got me to, you know, do the photography work for them. And by me being a professional model, or having been a professional model, I worked with the cotillion. And this girl was on the committee, on the cotillion committee. She is a, probably a lifetime volunteer for the National Council of Negro Women. So we were reunited under those circumstances. And I asked her one day, I said, you were trying to tell me something, weren't you? (Laughter) I didn't take it any further than that. But she laughed and I believe that, you know, she was just simply trying to tell me that she really liked me, and I didn't give her the time of day (laughter). That was weird. Speaker 2: And beat you up (laughter). (Unclear) impression (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: She was mean, oh, she was mean. Speaker 2: But she didn't--when you stopped, she didn't continue? Speaker 1: No, she just stopped and stood there, you know. And I had seen her beat up girls (laughter), you know. She was one of the, she was bully, is what she was. And, you know, I can remember at least one time when she tried to copy off of my paper. And I wouldn't let her copy off of my paper. So that may have been the same time, I don't know. But I was, there were three students in my class that always vied for the top spot. And I was one of them. The other two were girls. Story_ID: 168015 Speaker 1: So when you got to high school [Wells High School, later, Wells Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], it was a little bit different? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: You kind of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you're learning how to study on your own and that sort of thing. But at that age, I was more concerned about the social aspect, you know, of things. And I, I guess I just became depressed as a result of it. Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers that you remember that were like, that sort of mentored you in grade school or high school? Speaker 2: Yes, my, my kindergarten teacher, Mrs. Cooperkoft (ph.) was her name. And my mother, my mother [Lillie Taylor Outerbridge] used to launder the smocks for some of the teachers. During those days, all the teachers wore smocks. And I had a good, I had good penmanship. My mother used to make me practice all the time. And my kindergarten teacher used to encourage me, you know, as a result of my penmanship. There was a fifth or sixth grade teacher that promoted that--and I can't, I can't even remember what her name was. But she was very encouraging. I didn't need any coaching in school because I got it at home. My mother should have been a school teacher. In fact, I was only in kindergarten for about a half a semester, and I was put in the first grade because I could do first and second-grade work. So as far as my--you know, my educational influence came from home. Speaker 1: Okay, but your experience at Wells [High School, later, Wells Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] was pretty, pretty bad? You just didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I mean at that, at that stage of the game, you begin to like girls. And, you know, being a virgin didn't help either (laughter), okay. And as I look back, a lot of the other guys were virgins too. They just lied about it (laughter). Speaker 1: And they're a little older than you though, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: What did your--when did you--now, you decided to drop out when you were almost fifteen, you say, or about fifteen? Speaker 2: Right around fifteen. Speaker 1: What did your parents say about that? Speaker 2: Oh, they were outraged. But I was, I was just determined that, you know, I wasn't gon' do that no more. Speaker 1: So you just wouldn't go to school? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And stopped going? Speaker 2: I just stopped going. Speaker 1: Was there an incident that, that kind of provoked that? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of. Speaker 1: All right, just one day you just stopped going? Speaker 2: Yeah. I just decided I didn't wanna go to school no more. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What did you do at age fifteen? You-- Speaker 2: Oh, I shined shoes in a barbershop. I had been working in the barbershop since I was ten years old. That may have had some influence on it because I got a street education in the barbershop. And it was the main barbershop on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] at that time. I mean everybody came through there, you know, the police, the players, the pimps, the confidence men, the numbers, the rackets, everybody. So, you know, politicians, and so I got, I got a real education from that. And, hey, I made a lot of money. I used to make, on the weekends, Friday, after school, all day Saturday, and a half a day Sunday, I made as much money as my father [Alexander Outerbridge] made working all week. And no matter how much I made, I always gave my mother half. Okay, so that was my--that justified everything (laughter). I mean the fact that I wasn't in school for those things. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168016 Speaker 1: Now, you, you eventually joined the [U.S.] Air Force or am I going too fast as we're about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, at age seventeen. Speaker 1: So what happened? I mean how did you choose the Air Force? Speaker 2: I just wanted to do something different. I just wanted some adventure, you know. I'd always had an adventurous type of mind. Most of my adventure had happened in sports. And if you could imagine, I played basketball with men, okay. I played on a semi-pro baseball team when I was fifteen. And I wasn't a starter, but I was a pinch hitter. I was a pinch runner. And I got into the game every so often. But these guys were semi-pros. So, you now, I was, at fifteen, I was playing some serious sports. So that kind of satisfied me, you know, in that regard. But by the time I was seventeen, I decided I wanted to--and then, you know, the uniform. The girls liked the uniform (laughter), okay. So I decided that I would volunteer for the Air Force. Speaker 1: Now, where did they station you? Speaker 2: I took basic training in Geneva, New York, and the basic training at that time was like, maybe thirty to sixty days. But I happened to be in charge of a work detail, and one of the guys came up missing. So they court martialed him. So they held me over for like another thirty days, so I didn't get to leave with, you know, my regular group. So they took us through a series of tests and what have you. And they were gonna send me to teletype school. And it was in, somewhere, Macon, Georgia or somewhere. And, oh--oh, those assignments came out prior to the notification that I had to be held over for the court martial. And you talking about somebody praying. I did not wanna go to the South because I felt like with my attitude, if I went South, and somebody said something, said the wrong thing to me, I was gon' be all over that person and then I'd end up in jail or dead or whatever. So as it turned out, I went to, they sent me to Youngstown, Ohio. Speaker 1: Now, this is 1953, I guess? Speaker 2: This is fifty--I went in in '54 [1954], '54 [1954]. Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954], okay. Okay, so, now you're in Youngstown, Ohio. And that's-- Speaker 2: That's (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And here again, where sports came in. I played on all of the base teams. So I spent a good 75 percent of my time in the service, traveling, playing baseball, football, basketball. I was--(unclear) base billiard champ. I was the base ping pong champ (laughter). So I got to go to those tournaments. So I spent a lot of time away from, you know, armament. It was an air defense base, and the main thing that we had to learn was how to read schematics because we had F-86Ds [F-86D Sabre] and they had rockets, had like twenty-four rockets in a pod that was up under the plane that would lower in order to fire. And we had to check all of those planes every day, every morning. And you definitely had to know how to read a schematic, to understand how to check it without firing those rockets, to make sure that the system would fire without actually firing the rockets. Speaker 1: Did anybody ever make a mistake that you know of? Speaker 2: Not at that base, but in, at Selfridge Air [National Guard] Base in Detroit [Michigan], it happened. And the rockets went through a school. I don't, I'm--now, I don't know if they killed anybody. I don't think they killed anybody, but the rockets hit a school. So it must have been miles away. Story_ID: 168017 Speaker 1: The [U.S.] Air Force base you were at in Youngstown [Ohio] was named what? Speaker 2: Youngstown Municipal Airport [later, Youngstown-Warren Regional Airport, Vienna, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was on the tail end of the civilian airport. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Youngstown Airport. And we used to work, we had--as I said, we were the air defense command. We had F-80s [Lockheed P-80 Shooting Star] which was the training plane, trainer plane. That was the first jet that this country built. And they had fifty caliber machine guns coming off the nose. And we used to have to take care of those machine guns, clean them. And we were responsible for all the guns, all of the armament. Pilots carried a .38 pistol that was so light that you couldn't believe it. I don't know what it was made out of. Well you know, it wasn't made to do a lot of shooting. So it could manage the six rounds at a time or five rounds at a time, whatever it was. It was made out of, like a composite and it was so light. But we had to--we used to have to clean those, BAR's [Browning Automatic Rifle]. We had the grease gun, and we had the M--we had the M-1's, the M--I think they were M-15's and auto--semi-automatic machine guns with fifteen and thirty round clips. So we had a gun room, and that was, that was our job. But we had F-80s for training, as a trainer, F-86Ds [F-86D Sabre]. And during that time, the Bay of Pigs jumped off. And we were on twenty-four hour alert. Speaker 1: Bay of Pigs is 1963, correct? Speaker 2: No [sic, 1961]. Speaker 1: Wasn't that just before--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. This wasn't the Bay of Pigs. It was something else. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause this, this--it had to happen like in 1956 or '57 [1957], but it had something to do with Cuba. Speaker 1: Well, Cuba had a revolution then. That's when [Fidel] Castro took over--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, that's what it was. Speaker 1: --in '57 [1957], yeah. Speaker 2: We were on twenty-four-hour alert. So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And there was a rumor that the U.S. was gonna go over, but they never went. Speaker 2: Right, right. We were on twenty-four hour--we had what they called an alert hangar that was like, maybe a mile and a half away from the base along the runway. In fact, you know, you had to take a vehicle to get there. And we used to have to stay there for twenty-four hours at a time. All right, we'd be on twenty-four, then we'd be off twenty-twenty-four, on again twenty-four. And during that particular period, I just recall that it was very tense, very tense situation, at least they made it appear to be, even if it wasn't because you get the planes scrambling. We had one plane to crash and the theory in relationship to a plane crashing is, you make them fly, okay, make everybody get out there and get up in the air to try to forget about it. So we had periodic scrambles, okay, tests of sort. So it was kind of stressful, at least for us. I'm sure it was for them too, but it was kind of a stressful situation. Story_ID: 168018 Speaker 1: Now, in the midst of all that, I mean how were you treated in the [U.S.] Air Force? Speaker 2: I was treated extremely well because I was among the star athletes. I got together with a group of guys, and we had a little singing group. And we became the most renowned in that entire area. You got a lot of little, small towns where a lot of blacks lived, Warren, Ohio, Niles [Ohio], Youngstown [Ohio]. And we used to get invitations to go and sing at different places. We even sang on the television telethon. And what's the guy that was in 'Of Mice and Men?' Used to play a heavy, played a lot of cowboy roles? Speaker 1: The old version from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Lon Chaney [Jr.]. Speaker 1: Lon Chaney, okay. Speaker 2: Lon Chaney. He did a scene for 'Mice and Men.' And that was a big deal because we got a chance to meet him and talk to him, and he was just like a regular guy, you know, just like, you know, somebody you've known all your life. And that was, that was quite exciting. And everybody in town got to see us on TV. And we used to--on our days off, we used to practice, practice. We'd drink wine and sing (laughter), sing dusties, sing the, you know, the old--what we now know as the old dusties. And we went, we left Youngstown and went over to Warren, Ohio which is about fifteen miles from the base [Youngstown Municipal Airport, later, Youngstown-Warren Regional Airport, Vienna, Ohio]. And we decided we were gonna steal some gas. But we got caught (laughter). Speaker 1: Were you trying to steal gas out of a pump or out of someone's car? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't gas. We stole a battery. I was carrying the battery, and I was laughing so hard until I spilled the acid. And by the time I got to jail, my whole leg was out because the acid had eaten (laughter) through my blue jeans. A lieutenant colonel came and got me out, paid my fine and got me out. As it turns out, he was one of my fans. I never knew he was at the games, but he was always at the softball games. Well, we played this fast-pitch, ten-inch ball where you had a glove, and that ball is as hard as the league ball. And the ball is coming faster than a hard ball is, up to 125 miles an hour. One guy, well, this one guy, they clocked him at 125 miles an hour from sixty feet. I mean that's, that's how far the--where the pitcher's mound was. His name was Ed Finger (ph.). His right arm was about this big, his bicep. His left arm was about this big (laughter). He could pitch from second base--he had four players. They used to travel around and play full teams. He had a catcher, a pitcher, a first baseman and a short stop because if you hit it, you wanted it to--you weren't gonna hit it past the short stop, okay. Sometimes, he'd pitch from second base, okay. That's how fast that game is. So, and I'm--I played center field. And he was my biggest fan. And after he got me out, I don't know how he did it. All of us got off, but he paid my fine, okay. And I had a couple of conversations with him. And apparently, he had been a ball player during his time. But he gave me a lot of fatherly advice as well because after nine months' time, I made corporal. And I was on the list for sergeant. And my propensity for drinking got me busted, okay. But his intervention was really, it was godsend, okay. And, you know, we talked about baseball. He was getting ready to retire. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: I can't remember his name, but I can see his face. He was a, he was a small man. He couldn't have been no more than about 5'8". He was very thin, but apparently, he was--well, he was highly educated, I mean from the way he sounded when you talked with him, the way he, you know, presented himself, he was highly educated. And I guess he saw that I wasn't a thug, you know. I was probably more socially sound than most of my peers because that's the way I came up. I came up through the Boy Scouts, okay, and that's when I became a professional model. I wore a shirt, a starched shirt and a tie to kindergarten, you know. My mother [Lillie Taylor Outerbridge] put me in (laughter) starched shirts. So, you know, that kind of, you know, gave me a kind of attitude, okay. Story_ID: 168019 Speaker 1: Well, well did you ever leave the states in the [U.S.] Air Force? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were here the whole time of it? Speaker 2: I had opportunities, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --in fact, at the time I got engaged to my wife, I had an opportunity to go to what was known then as French Morocco. It's in Africa somewhere. And everybody who went came back with stripes, okay, sergeant first-class, and so forth. But I was more concerned about my, the love of my life. Speaker 1: Okay, so you met her in Youngstown [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --met her at a USO [United Service Organizations] dance of all places. And we've been married forty-seven years. Speaker 1: Okay. That's the way to do it. Speaker 2: Hey. She's been putting up with me (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so did you start having children right away or did you-- Speaker 2: Yes, we--well, we had a child, oh, about a year after we were married, she got pregnant and had, had a girl. Story_ID: 168020 Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now, did you consider staying in the [U.S.] Air Force as a career or did you-- Speaker 2: I considered it, but, you know, based on the fact that I had an attitude of sort. I got the distinct impression, they didn't want me there (laughter), okay. I had a couple of run-ins with one--the only one that became serious was with a Hispanic sergeant first-class. We used to, we used to talk trash, okay. And one of the euphemisms that blacks used at that time was, it had to do with, "I know what the deal is so there ain't nothing you can tell me about that," okay. And I said that to him. And he took it in the wrong way. And I had to go to the first sergeant on that. He was going to court martial me. And by the time I explained it to the first sergeant, then he understand that it was simply a euphemism that we, that blacks used all the time. And it, you know, it didn't mean nothing. But I guess that kind of set forth what my attitude was because I didn't hem and haw, you know, when I went to the first sergeant. I didn't act like I was afraid of him, you know. I spoke my mind. I said what I had to say, and I spoke fairly good English, which was, you know, not the norm. So I guess, based on that I got the impression that the service was not the place for me to be for any extended amount of time. Story_ID: 168021 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you came out [of the U.S. Air Force], did you move back to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, I came back to Chicago alone-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and got a job as a cab driver. Then I sent for my wife and child. And I made good money as a cab driver. And let's see, 1957, I'm out of the service, and 1958--it was December of '57 [1957]. And I fiddled around for about three months without a job. Then I finally got a job in March of '58 [1958]. And I enjoyed, I enjoyed it. I had a ball driving a cab. Speaker 1: Well, what did you enjoy the most about driving a cab? Speaker 2: The diversity of people, people from all walks of life. I don't know whether many people will remember Mort Sahl? Speaker 1: Yeah, the comedian, right, he was a controversial comedian too. Speaker 2: Right. I picked him up in my cab the night he was blackballed from Mister Kelly's. He was appearing at Mister Kelly's. Speaker 1: Yeah, a famous nightclub in Chicago, right? Speaker 2: On Rush Street. Speaker 1: They used to go from Mister Kelly's to the 'Tonight Show,' and they would be on the 'Tonight Show' and say I'm gonna be at Mister Kelly's in Chicago next week. Speaker 2: Incidentally, when Mister Kelly's burned down, I was on the fire ground, when it burned down (laughter). And I also--well, getting back to Mort Sahl, on the [John F.] Kennedy thing that was his hot topic on the conspiracy theories. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he was scared to death. We rode around for about an hour and a half, and he told me the whole story. He didn't know who, he didn't know when, but he knew--he felt like the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] were coming for him. I mean he was, he was a nervous wreck. And we, you know, we rode around, like I say, for about an hour and a half, until he kind of calmed down. And that was the end of that. [HM] Della Reese was appearing at Mister Kelly's. I picked her up, she and her daughter [Deloreese Daniels Owens]. And I haven't seen a picture of her daughter lately or in recent years, but as a child, she was the most beautiful girl I have ever seen in my life. Oh, that girl was gorgeous. Molly Goldberg [Gertrude Berg] had a television show, The Molly Goldberg Show [sic, 'The GoldBergs'], Sir Cedric Hardwicke. I picked both of them up from the Erlanger Theatre [Chicago, Illinois]. They were appearing in a show at the Erlanger Theatre. It was on Clark Street. It was right next to the Blue Note, right off of Madison [Street]. It used to sit right on the corner of the alley. And on different nights, I picked both of them up and had conversations with them. Speaker 1: Now, Sir Cedric had just, was just coming off of the 'Ten Commandments.' He was, the year before he was in the 'Ten Commandments' in '57 [1957] with, he played the Pharaoh [Seti I]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: The father of Yul Brynner [sic, father of Brynner's character, Rameses I], he played, you know. Speaker 2: He was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He was, towards the end of his career, but he was, it was one of his biggest roles. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was quite an elegant gentleman. Story_ID: 168022 Speaker 1: And a woman came over here from England. And Chicago [Illinois] has always had what has been known as the world's most beautiful skyline. And this woman was fascinated with our skyline. She hired me for the entire day, my entire shift. And all we did was ride up and down South Shore Drive [sic, Lake Shore Drive] to Evanston [Illinois], back to where South Shore Drive ends-- Speaker 2: At Jeffery [Avenue]? Speaker 1: --at Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois], back and forth all day. I probably took her somewhere else to show her other parts of the city as well. But that I remember, and I mean I could look through the rearview mirror at her expressions. And she was just dumbfounded by the beauty of it all. Incidentally, that's what prompted me to do a collection of night scenes of Chicago called 'Chicago at Night.' And it is anchored by the lakefront [Lake Michigan], landmarks, and the world's most beautiful skyline, skyscrapers. Speaker 2: Okay, now, any other memorable events happen as a cab driver that you-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a prostitute. I didn't, you know, understand that she was a prostitute at the time, but as I think about it, she had to be. She was a dope fiend. And this guy--it was a big guy. I mean, you know, it's the type of guy that you see in the movies as a bodyguard. And it must have been heroin that she was on. She got in the car, and then he got in from the other side. And he had this, it looked like a bottle cap. At that time, that's the way they cooked, you know, their stuff. And he said, I'm gonna give her crack. And then he got out of the cab for something. Maybe he went to go to his car to get a needle or something. And she acted like she was out of it when she got in the cab. She was, you know, all drooped down and what have you. And as soon as he got out, she rose up, and she says, "Take off, please." And I did. And I remember I wrote that story. I talked to my mother [Lillie Taylor Outerbridge] about it 'cause it scared me to death. And I had never experienced, you know, that drug culture like that. I, you know, I'd--you'd see an addict on the street some time acting crazy, but, you know, the actual taking of drugs and, you know, the whole heavy aspect of it, that scared me to death, did me a job. And that little story was called, Who Rides the Back Seat?, the point being, you never know who's gonna be in that back seat. Speaker 2: Now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Another thing that was interesting--I made a lot of money with as well, when they had all the strip clubs. They used to pay you a dollar a head, all the conventioneers, you know, the hardware show, the furniture show, all those shows used to be right here in town. And sometimes it got so good, they'd give you five dollars for the first guy--if you had a group of guys, they'd give you five dollars for the first guy and one or two dollars for each, all the rest of them. And a cab would hold--you could get seven, seven people in there, you know. And at these conventions, them guys used to flood those places down on State Street. So that was interesting, made, made good money. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I never, after I got on the fire department, I drove cabs part time. Story_ID: 168023 Speaker 1: Now, how did, how did you get on the fire department? What was the story there? 'Cause I take it, the history of Chicago [Illinois], in the history of Chicago, there've been blacks on the fire department for a long time, but there never were a whole lot of black people in the fire department. Speaker 2: The first one was hired in 1873 as a stoker. But it wasn't until the War [World War II] years that blacks started to get hired in any degree of number. Engine [Company] 21 was the first black fire company. They were located at 9th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue]. Speaker 1: And that was the Black Belt then, right? Speaker 2: Yes, blacks lived right in the Polk [Street] Station, right around--all around Polk Station. So there was only one house where blacks worked. It wasn't until about 1922 that the first black officer was promoted. His name was Woodcliff (ph.). He became the first black lieutenant and the first black captain. During the--oh, let's back up. 1871, the Great Chicago Fire. That fire moved south. It took a turn west, right at the black community. It didn't touch the black community, which was, oh, I think it started around, somewhere between Fourth and maybe Ninth Streets and went up to maybe 16th Street. That was the black community. It was known as Notorious Cheyenne [sic, Little Cheyenne]. I don't know where they got that name from, but that's what it was, it was called, that particular area. So after the Chicago Fire, whites were all burned out for the most part. So my thinking is they had to depend on the black community. Now, when they got ready to party, that's where they came anyway, you know, the gangsters, everybody came to the black community. Story_ID: 168024 Speaker 1: All right. Let me ask you about the black Chicago Fire, the great fire of Chicago [Illinois] they say was 1871 where Mrs. O'Leary's cow supposedly kicked over a lantern or something. Speaker 2: That's been revisited (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Burned, burned everything going north. Speaker 2: --in terms of what, what the actual source was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I just saw something on Channel 11 that had to do with a vagrant that wandered into, theoretically wandered into Mrs. O'Leary's barn and kindled the fire with either a pipe or a cigarette that he had discarded. But anyway, between 1871 and 1874, all right. Let me just back up a minute. The actual, the path of the Chicago Fire, there's a map on the wall at the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois]. And it shows that that fire took about an eighty degree turn when it reached the black community and moved southwest. So it bypassed the black community. The black community was still intact. It was known as Notorious Cheyenne [sic, Little Cheyenne]. I mean you had Red Light District, you had, you know, all sorts of entertainment, gambling, prostitution, whatever. When people wanted to party, that's where they had to go for the most part. Speaker 1: Right. I think that that's worth noting too that in a lot of communities, urban communities, the black community was used as a vice-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --depository. Speaker 2: (Unclear) right-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So between 1871 and the advent of the fire in 1874, that's a three-month [sic, year] period where the black community was intact, and the white community was in shambles. And my theory and the theory that is being produced is that that's, that fire was started by a vandal or purposely. It is recorded that it started in an alley at Fourth and Clark Street[s]. And I think it spread three blocks west and about fifteen blocks south and destroyed the entire black community. So blacks, those that survived the fire, they had to go somewhere. They couldn't go north because that had all been burned out all the way to the river, the Chicago River. And there was a small community on, I think on the opposite, on the north side of the river, but if I'm not mistaken, that's where most of your rich, entrepreneurs were. But where they lived was east of State Street along that corridor that we're talking about, between Fourth [Street] and 16th Street or maybe it was--I don't know, it could have been 12th Street. No, it wasn't beyond 12th Street, but that's where the rich people lived. And on the west is where the immigrants lived, the people that were coming here from other countries. So the blacks were caught in the middle. They couldn't go east and they couldn't go west. They couldn't go north, so they had to go south. They survived by living in vacant warehouses, garages, and eventually, kept going south on State Street. And at 22nd Street, began what is commonly known as the Black Belt. Now, when blacks began to come here from the South, Polk Street Station, the electric trains at 12th Street, everybody came south. Incidentally, Engine [Company] 21, which was located at Ninth [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] was burned up fighting that black Chicago Fire. Story_ID: 168025 Speaker 1: I don't know whether it was at--it was probably a little later that the migration began to happen. So that company [Engine Company 21] was moved to 34th [Street] and Rhodes [Avenue], 3444 Rhodes [Chicago, Illinois]. That was the only black fire company we had. And as they hired, and when they got to the point where they had more than enough to fill the two shifts 'cause they only had two shifts. They worked one day on and one day off. They used to give the guys a night out, the extra. Now, during the day, they'd fight a lot of fire because that area was in the process of either being rebuilt or torn down. So it was a lot of old, dilapidated frame housing. So there were a lot fires. And everything during that time was done by hand. Speaker 2: In terms of the pumping of the water and so forth? Speaker 1: Well, the--after 1920--let's see, horses went out--they even had the, they had the steam engine. And, you know, it wasn't like a hand operated pump, probably around the turn of, up until about the turn of the century or a little after, you had hand-operated pumps, where you had a lever on one side and one on the other side, and you'd pump this way, okay. Then the water would come out of the hose. But then they got the steam, the steam pumps that were pulled by horses which was kind of an automatic type pumping operation. But the migration caused more blacks to be hired. So that meant that they had to open up another station to accommodate blacks because blacks couldn't work with the white firemen. The black firemen had white officers. Speaker 2: Now, did they hire black firemen because white firemen didn't wanna put out fires in the black community or why was it that black firemen were hired in the first place because being a fireman is, I know it's a coveted position in the City of Chicago [Illinois] and in other major cities, just as the police department is. So-- Speaker 1: I would have to say it was because whites didn't wanna work with blacks, all right. So, or at that time, in the black community. So as the black community grew, you know, so did the number of black firefighters. Now, the officer of the first black fire company's name was [David] Kenyon. He was a Civil War Army officer that had commanded blacks. So he became, you know, the first officer for the black company. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that was Engine [Company] 21. By the time they moved, moved them to 34th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue], they became Engine [Company] 19. And as their numbers began to grow, they opened up a hook and ladder company for blacks which was Hook and Ladder 11, which, at that time was 36th Place and State Street. Just as a side note, in 1956, they built a new house and put the first two black fire companies in that house. They're at 34th and Calumet now, directly in line with where the first black fire company was on Rhodes, 3444 Rhodes. This one is at 3421 South Calumet, and it's still there. That was my first company that I was assigned to. Story_ID: 168026 Speaker 1: We're talking about the history of blacks in the [Chicago] Fire Department and how did you--now, at the time that you became a firefighter, were there many blacks on Chi- in the Chicago Fire Department? Or were they still confined to this one company? Speaker 2: No, there were seven companies by 1961 when I was hired. It was segregated, still segregated. They were only seven firehouses where a black could work in this entire city. At the time I came on the department, I was living up in [Julia C.] Lathrop Homes [Chicago, Illinois], up on Diversey [Parkway] and Damen [Avenue]. And traditionally, when you come out of drill school, you ask for an assignment near your home. In the old days, most of the firemen worked in their own neighborhood, okay. A lot of them could walk to work. In fact, most of them did. Some of them lived right out the back door, and then they'd spend a lot of their off time in the firehouse. That's how close knit that group is. It always has been. Just heard about the story in New York, about the guys who were assigned to families who, of the firemen who got killed. They ended divorcing, leaving their women and living with the woman that they're supposed to be caring for. Okay, that's taking it, you know, a little, a little far. But the fire department, that fraternity, that's the way they operate. I mean they take care of their own, okay. Story_ID: 168027 Speaker 1: Well, you were talking about--I was asking you and I don't think we ever discussed like how you actually got on the [Chicago] Fire Department? Speaker 2: Okay. 1961, April, yeah, '61 [1961]. They had just built the new fire academy at 548 DeKoven [Street, Chicago, Illinois]. That is supposedly where Mrs. O'Leary's barn was. We were the second class in the new building. We went through our--oh, we had a physical routine that we used to have to go through every day. Now, the physical aspect of the job is taken a lot more serious than it was then, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. Now, you have to be very strong, you have to be very fit to be a firefighter. Speaker 2: Oh, you had to be fit back then too if, particularly, if you were working in the black community. And that's why black firefighters were renowned as the best and most experienced because they're the ones that were doing the work, okay. There weren't that many fires anywhere else in comparison to what we were doing. We were doing from twenty to thirty runs a day, and we were having at least fifteen fires, okay. And I mean we were losing people, people were dying, all right. So, you know, we had that, that kind of experience. We had to do three chin-up's. One guy couldn't do one. But he got the job as the chief's driver which was a jelly job, which is to say, which opens up the whole can of worms on how ninety-nine and nine tenths of the people who are on the police department, fire department get there. As Mayor Richard J. Daley used to say, "I don't wanna talk to nobody that nobody sent." That was one of his great orations for lack of a better term. And that's how you got there, and that's how you stayed there. I mean, you know, the black fire companies were a training ground for white officers. And all those fair-haired boys who were on their way up the ranks, they had to come through the black belt to learn their craft. And early on, I, I figured it out. And I promised myself, if I get killed, it won't be because one of these stupid officers gave me an order and I tried to follow it and got killed. I decided when I first came on this job, after I learned, you know, all of my, all of the basics of the fire ground, that I was gonna do what I thought was best. Now, if I have a black officer and there weren't--there're only a few--I happened to have one of the few black officers. And at that time, you got your training from the senior men. The officers didn't train you. The senior men did. And I was kind of a favorite because I didn't drink. I was sober, but if you could imagine the kind of fire duty that the old-timers had to go through--incidentally, Grant Chaney who was the top, black fireman, he was the go-to man, he came on the job in 1936, the year I was born. He retired a year after I got there. But I mean all these older guys were still there, all right. So I didn't drink. So they treated me a little differently. They treated me with some degree of respect. Plus, I was a good firefighter. I wasn't afraid to get into the smoke. So that helps. That always helps. I mean if you're a good firefighter, you get your respect, whether they like you or don't like you. There was--they will respect you. So that's how I got on. I got spoken for. Story_ID: 168028 Speaker 1: So when it came time for the assignments, the drill master did not come--there were three, only three blacks in our class out of about 110. He did not come to the three of us and tell us that we could not go to a white fire company. He sent two of our peers. And we used to fill out, we had to fill out a form, and you put down maybe three or four companies that you would like to go to. And by me living up on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], I wanted to be near home. They came to us and told us in so many words, the [Chicago] Fire Department is still segregated. So you're gonna have to choose a black firehouse. I tore my sheet up right in front of them and threw it on the floor. And I told them, now, you go back and tell the drill master to send me where he wants me to go. So that started my reputation. I didn't realize it. I was just reacting, okay. And that's the way I reacted. And I was dead serious, and from that day until the day I retired, I did not care about being promoted. I did not care about being quote, unquote "a nice guy." I did what I felt needed to be done in order for me to get over, and for my black brothers to get over. But that started my reputation. And it went all uphill from there. It just escalated on its own. It just had a life of its own it seemed. Speaker 2: And in the meanwhile, you're still saving lives and fighting fires. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Here again, sports came into play 'cause the fire department had a summer, pro baseball team, and I was, the only black playing on that. So, you know, that gave me some notoriety as well. But all three of us came back to, when we left drill school, all three of us went to the same firehouse [Engine Company 19] at 3421 [S] Calumet [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Two of us went on to the, one on the engine, and one went on the truck. And I'd been on the job about six months, and I don't know whether you're familiar or maybe the visual audience is aware of Grant Chaney. He was tied politically to Congressman [William L.] Dawson. He was his fire department man, and [Richard J.] Daley, he was Daley's man in the black fire department. Everything that pertained to a black firefighter had to be filtered through him. You know, it's, it's kind of strange. Most of the firemen really didn't like it because with that whole political thing. But I studied the man. He was a functional illiterate. But he had, you know, what is known, what we know as mother wit. And he was as elegant, socially elegant as anybody you'll ever meet. And he was just as intellectual as anyone you'd ever meet. He was fair, okay. But when he, he said something, he meant it, and what he was trying to do, as I look back, was to maintain a cadre of black firefighters. He got as many white--he spoke for as many white firefighters as he did black because he had some power, all right? They made him a--he was a captain for twenty years. And just before he retired, within a year, about a year's time, he was promoted to battalion chief and to deputy chief, which they couldn't afford to give him before 1961. I mean if anybody would have got it, he would have got it 'cause he was Daley's right-hand man and, and Dawson, you know. That was, that was his left hand or he was Dawson's left hand. So, you know, it's that kind of atmosphere, and I resented that. I didn't know that my father [Alexander Outerbridge] had to pay three hundred dollars for me to pass the physical. And by me being an all-sport athlete, I mean that, that hit me right where it hurt. Story_ID: 168029 Speaker 1: And there came a time--well, 1965, when the black woman [Dessie May Williams] got killed on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], on Wilcox [Street] and Pulaski [Road], the hook and ladder came out of the station without being, without the tiller being manned, the back end. It swung around--she was waiting for a bus, and it hit her and it killed her. The next morning, the fire department was integrated. They sent about, they took about 75 percent of the blacks, spread them all over the city, one to a shift. So that meant that they were on a shift by themselves. They caught holy hell. Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute. Let's back up a little bit. Now, how did that incident--did that incident have something to do with the dispersion of black firefighters around the city? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's known as the overnight integration. Speaker 2: I mean, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: In fact--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But why would that, you know-- Speaker 1: That night, that same day, Hook and Ladder 15, located at 46th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], all black, they sent that company over to that house because they went to the fire, and when they came back, the community would not allow them to back into that firehouse. They blocked the doors. So they sent this black hook and ladder company over to those quarters, and the community was okay. They just filled the house with black firemen. And the next morning, I was sent over to Larrabee [Street] and Division [Street], which is on the edge of Cabrini [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois] where I grew up. And the point of having only one black on a shift, in that particular house, you've got an engine, a truck, an ambulance, a battalion chief and deputy chief. So you got two fire companies, an ambulance company and two chiefs in that one house. And you're the only black there. When I, when I reached the house--oh, incidentally, at the time that they notified me that I was gonna be transferred, I was out in the community trying to get a softball team together. The department had started like an intramural league and every company had to, you know, roust up a team. And somebody came and got me while I was in the community, you know, knocking on doors. When I reached the firehouse, the battalion chief that was on duty at that time, he had the reputation of being the boogie man, meaning everybody was afraid of him. He was a reformed drunk, and had become a man that goes by the book. He met me at the door. He shook my hand, welcomed me into the station and they had a pool table in the kitchen, and they had a ping pong table just outside of the kitchen. He invited me to play a game of pool. I told him, you know, you go ahead, you go ahead and play. He broke the balls. He didn't make anything. I ran the table on him. That started my relationship with him. That was my message to him. And he and I had several run-ins. I used to go up to his room and knock on his door just to mess with him. The first time I wrote a form on an officer was him. Story_ID: 168030 Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Now, just to go back, just for clarification if I--there may be somebody else who doesn't understand this. But the incident you described earlier, was a white fire company on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that you suspect, might have been drinking or something, that pulled out and the tiller man was not in his seat, and the apparatus swung around and killed a, killed a black woman [Dessie May Williams]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --on the West Side. And this is, this sort of sparked the integration of a lot of fire companies, white fire companies that were in black communities, as the community--as Chicago [Illinois] is becoming increasing black with all the migration, the--there were still white companies in black communities that--and with no black firefighters-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and so it created a real tense situation. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay, so I just wanted to understand this. Okay. Story_ID: 168031 Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were dispersed out to your neighborhood fire station at Cabrini [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Were you the only black in the-- Speaker 2: I was the only black on my shift. Speaker 1: Did most black firefighters discover they were the only black person in a, in an all-white--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They didn't have to discover it. They knew what time it was 'cause, you know, everybody knew where the black firehouses were. So, you know, everybody had to go where they were sent. And, you know, that whole situation really didn't make race relations any better. In fact, it worsened. Just put it--just from a social standpoint. It reminded me of the time when, you know, the first black was hired and the first, I mean and there are stories from other cities, and the story is the same. You had to sleep on your own mattress. You had to use your own eating utensils, okay. Anything that you touched, that was yours. It was separate. So, you know, just the stress of that situation, and then there's no interaction as well. And the fire department, a firehouse is a social atmosphere, I mean having fun was just as important as the days' meals because that helped to take your mind away from the stress of your job. And up until the firefighters strike in 1980, black, blacks and poor folks were dying, man. I've got some pictures that you would not believe. Speaker 1: Of? Speaker 2: Of fire deaths, particularly, children, all right. We'll come back to that. This incident on the West Side, sort of pulled the covers off of the fact that blacks do not, cannot work in their own communities. As I said before, there were only seven firehouses in the entire city where blacks worked. And the most western black firehouse--it was a single house--it only had one apparatus in it, was at Lake [Street] and Paulina [Street, Chicago, Illinois]. And there was one in Jew Town, one apparatus, 40th [Street] and Dearborn [Street], one apparatus. And then they moved a company from 26th [Street] and Dearborn into 40th and Dearborn so you had two engine companies in that one house. There was one over in the stockyards, way back in the middle of the stockyards, Engine [Company] 53. I was detailed over there a few times. And you had the one at 46th and Cottage [Grove Avenue], Engine [Company] 45 and Truck 15. They were the fastest running companies in the world for about twenty years. Engine [Company] 19 and Truck 11 at 34th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue], we were running second and third. Engine [Company] 16 and Engine [Company] 48 were at 40th and Dearborn. They were right there. We were all right there in terms of standings. I'm talking worldwide, nationally, internationally, in terms of number of runs, fire runs. There was one at 24th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue], Engine [Company] 9, one apparatus. So anywhere you went--somebody made a mistake and detailed my officer to the firehouse, Engine [Company] 29, which was across the street from where Mayor [Richard J.] Daley lived. And his name was Victor Decudro (ph.). He as very fair-skinned, straight hair, and if you looked at him quick, he would--he looked like he was white. Man, the phones jumped off the hook (laughter) to get him out of there. And they sent him back. You couldn't even be detailed to a white house until the time I came on the job. Then you could be detailed. Okay, but not an officer, not a black officer over a white company, all right. They wouldn't have none of that. But a black fireman could go and work for a day. Story_ID: 168032 Speaker 1: Now, did that affect the number of black officers that were commissioned after you all were integrated or dispersed out--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Before and after. Before, before the integration and before the explosion of black firefighters, there were only a certain amount of slots for black officers. In fact, that's what got into my psyche and I could not get it out. A black had to die or retire before somebody else could get that spot. And I said, oh, no. I'm not gonna, you know, I'm not going to live day-to-day like these guys do, you know, praying to become an officer in that type of format. I just said to myself, I've got enough skills that I can make enough money outside of the [Chicago] Fire Department, all right. In fact, I told myself when I came, when I stepped into that house, I just kind of tarried at the door and looked around. And I said to myself, if, if I'm not out of here in ten years, I'm a give myself ten years. And if I'm not outta here, then I'm going to make my mark here. I just, I just--I didn't actually speak it to myself. But that was my feeling because, see, I knew about some of the stories, okay. I knew how the fire department was sent up, you know, the political favoritism and so forth. But then when I was confronted with it, it was as if I didn't know anything. It just hit me square in the face, realization. So I decided that I am not going to depend on my becoming an officer here. I'm gonna do some other things. Story_ID: 168033 Speaker 1: Now, along the way, the steps along the way. Now, the African American Firefighters League [later, African American Firefighters & Paramedics League, Chicago, Illinois], was it called? Speaker 2: [Nodding head, yes]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that wasn't founded until '71 [1971], right? Speaker 2: No, no, 1967. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was an out--really, an outgrowth from the African American Police League [formerly, Afro-American Patrolmen's League, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: [HM] Renault Robinson and [Tom] Mitchell and Buzz Palmer [HM Edward "Buzz" Palmer] were friends of my sidekick who was Jim [James] Winbush. He was sort of a social animal, and he knew all these guys. I didn't know them. I didn't know them. But he's the one that recruited me, and ultimately, we became the co-chairmen of the league. But the, the policemen's first office is right across from Woodland, not Woodland, Woodlawn Bank. That building is still standing. They had an office up on the third floor [at 63rd Street and Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. They shared their office space, their telephone, everything, all their resources with us. So about, within a month after they organized, we began to organize. And-- Speaker 1: Was it, was it easy to organize? I mean-- Speaker 2: No, no. Just like anything else when, you know, when you ask somebody to, you know, step up and take a stand against the politically, presiding political authority. So our first task was to do a study, you know, based on the gripes that we had. We didn't have no black firemen, black people were dying a mile a minute. We didn't have no--we were doing the most work. We had the worst equipment. The best equipment, the new equipment would go downtown. We'd get their hand-me downs. But we were lucky to get it direct. For instance, Engine [Company] 1 that was downtown, they got the first of everything. Now, if you--we never got one of Engine 1's cast-offs. We got somebody else's. When I came on the job in 1961, our company [Engine Company 19] had a 1954 hearse. And fire equipment has, at that time, depending on the amount of running that you do, but just normally, it has like a five-year span. We had, we had an item in our press release where we had a fire death because we couldn't get the engine started. We had to, you had to push the engine to get it started, this particular engine, all right. And we were delayed, and we had a death. We chronicled that in our press release. So we found out that out of five thousand, a five thousand-man force, there were only 194 blacks. And the city was around 50 percent black at the time. So-- Speaker 1: Out of five thousand men-- Speaker 2: A hundred and ninety-four which was exactly 4 percent. New York [City] had 4 percent. But their department was three times large as ours. They had five hundred blacks, you know, out of a fifteen thousand-man force. And to this day, they are lucky to still have five hundred, where we were well over a thousand after the, the strike of 1980. Story_ID: 168034 Speaker 1: But the overnight integration [of the Chicago Fire Department] created a lot of incidents across the city [Chicago, Illinois]. I mean I was strong enough to handle my situation. In fact, I created most of the hoopla that happened, you know, with me after the overnight integration. Speaker 2: Describe an incident that you--you're saying you sort of agitated a situation that you knew was going to create-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --create a problem-- Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --which-- Speaker 1: See, Harper, Chief Harper [ph.], he had a picture on his wall, I think of he and [Dwight D.] Eisenhower on a boat fishing, on just a little fishing boat. So he was, he was politically connected. And he had been, he was, he was sharp on the books. I mean he was strictly a book man. And, but he was a drunk, and after he reformed, he became a dictator. And I just couldn't deal with that, you know, particularly in those kinds of close quarters. Now, I've got to, I've got to follow this man's directions, and like I mentioned before, all of those high-ranking officers did a stint in the black communities somewhere. He happened to be on Truck 15. He was the captain of Truck 15 over at 46th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. And he wore that like a badge. But, see, I found out that he didn't know what the heck he was doing once he got to a fire. And that whole thing proved itself out when we had a fire in, that was in our district, but we happened to be somewhere on maybe a rubbish fire or something. And we came in late. So whatever other company they called, they got there before we did. This chief had ordered hose strung for at least a block, had two lines of hose. When you go to a fire, you back up to a fire and then you drive away, and the hose repels off, off the engine until you get to a hydrant. Then you disconnect it, couple it up, put it on, send the water. All this hose, I'm looking at all this hose, and I don't see nothing but a little smoke coming out of this building. So I grabbed the hand pump, five gallons of water. This building, it was like, they used to have like double buildings, a building in front of the property and a building on the back end. This building was on the back end. And it was like a long stairway. I grabbed the hand pump and ran to the back building, ran up the stairs, went into the bedroom. It was a mattress burning. I put the mattress out with a hand pump. Now, I don't know where all these other companies were. Maybe nobody had even gotten to the fire yet 'cause I don't remember seeing nobody there. I put the fire out and it was smoky. Now, a mattress, it's got that condensed cotton, all right. And that is toxic, all right. But, see, but by me not drinking, I could take, I could maneuver in the smoke pretty good, all right. And I came out, nose running, you know, sweating. And by the time I got up to the front, I saw a couple firemen standing on the corner and said, who ordered all of this? They said, Chief Harper. I was about maybe fifteen feet from the corner. I just hollered at them. I said, if he can fight fire, I can make a watch. And by the time I got to the corner, Harper was standing right there. And I stood there, and I looked at him, I looked him dead in his eye. He didn't say doodley [ph.]. Story_ID: 168035 Speaker 1: But, see, that was a combination of a whole lot of other stuff. I mean, you know, what he did, and what he [Chief Harper, (ph.)] did was, he sent me before what--at that time, was known as the Kangaroo Court. That's where all these top-ranking officers sat in judgment. Speaker 2: Okay, so it's a real, it does have real authority in the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it has authority--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --the department [Chicago Fire Department]. Okay. Speaker 1: But, you know, the rank and file called it the Kangaroo Court. I didn't even get back to the firehouse. I went right then. Somebody took me. I don't even remember. I--I didn't go with him. Somebody else took me like a buggy, somebody else's buggy. It might have been one of the other officers or whatever. And at that time, the commissioner's office was in [Chicago] City Hall on the first floor of City Hall, Room 105. And they had these, these tall doors like in a courtroom, like maybe, what a sixteen-foot door? A fifteen-foot door, whatever, twelve-foot door. But they were all heavy, heavy doors. Anyway, I go in there, and I've still got on my firefighting equipment. It was, it as in the wintertime because I had some bunkers on. That's what you wear at night or when it's cold, you know, padded pants with the suspenders. And you have a separate set of boots for them. And I remember I was still in, in my bunkers, went in there, and I sat down. And the two highest ranking officers were stationed in my house, so they knew what time it was. They saw what was going on. In fact, one of them--I'd had a run-in with Harper 'cause every--I, we were playing ping pong. And I was the best ping-pong player in the house, and by it being wintertime, I had on long underwear, you know. And I took my shirt off, and I was just in my long underwear, and by the time, I got through playing, I was wringing wet. So I went back upstairs and washed up and put on some fresh, put on some fresh underwear, and in the meantime, we got a run. So everybody was down on the first floor. I was the only one upstairs. So as I'm sliding the pole, the engine's going out the door. The second deputy is sitting in the kitchen and he's watching. He sees what happened. And he was sitting there while I was kicking they butts on the ping pong table. So I got in my car, went to the fire. It was, nothing happened. They sent them back. I came back. Chief Harper decides that he's gonna write charges on me. This second deputy pulled his coattail. It ain't gonna happen. But this second deputy was in the room on this particular day, and Harper said what he had to say. I guess his was that I was insubordinate. And on occasion, I was, but, you know, I wasn't rowdy. I wasn't loud. I had written form to--I got a new car. Everybody liked my car. He went and got a new car. They didn't like his car (laughter). He'd bring his car in the station and wash it. As soon as he'd pull out, I'd bring mine in. His thing was, you didn't ask. I said, if you can bring yours in and wash it, so can I. So that's the level of insubordination that, you know, I'm aware of. So Harper made his spiel. The ranking officer, nice guy, ah, he was just as--I mean, you know, you wouldn't believe that he was in the same job as these people. I mean he's just, just a very kindred spirit type of guy. And he was, he was very honest when he said, "Well, maybe you'll feel a lot better if you worked around your own." And by me knowing the type of individual he is, I took offense to it, but I didn't take, you know, direct offense. I just kind of let it mull. I just let it slide. This other officer jumps up and says, "Well, you've got a mental block." I jumped straight up out of my chair like I had been shot out of a cannon. And I said, to him to the rest of them, I said, "If I do have mental block, it started when I came on this job and they told me I had to pay three hundred dollars to pass the physical, and I look like Atlas besides 90 percent of you motherfuckers." I turned around, and I walked out, and these great big doors, I tried to knocked that door off its hinges. I was so angry that it--the audacity (laughter), and on every fire company I was ever on, well, I was the pipe man. I was the man who put the water on the fire, all right, because I was agile. Whoever brought me, took me back to my firehouse. By the time I got back there, I had been transferred to 24th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue], Engine Company 9 which was the last, all-black fire company or all black shift. They did have some white guys working on the other two shifts. But this particular shift had a black officer, a black engineer and all black firefighters. So that's how that situation was dispelled. I didn't--he didn't--I didn't have to put up with him, he didn't have to put up with me because I was in his--I was on his case. I'd go up to his room, knock on his door and ask him a question just to mess with him (laughter). I'd create a question or a scenario, and I'd go up there, and I would harass his butt, and, you know, he had to maintain his demeanor. He had to maintain his cool. He couldn't do what I could do in that kind of situation, and I took advantage of it. So he couldn't deal with that. Story_ID: 168036 Speaker 1: I was, I was playing on the [Chicago] Fire Department's baseball team, only black on the baseball team. We're in a semi-pro league, we're in three leagues. We didn't have to work Saturdays or Sundays any--on a scheduled Saturday or Sunday, we were automatically off. And if we were working on a Wednesday, we would get time off to go play in the evening league, on the Wednesday league that we were in. He didn't like that. Speaker 2: But the fire department allowed, huh, people to play ball on--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the fire department allowed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --the days that they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes, hey, this was publicity for them, you know, and this was during the time of the [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] riots. So, you know, if they didn't have no-- Speaker 2: What was the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --black faces--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, what was the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That was after. That was what? Sixty-eight [1968]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: What was the disposition of the fire department during the time of Dr. King's assassination 'cause I know we've heard-- Speaker 1: Well, we did our study in 1967. Well, we completed it towards the, right at 1968. It was 194 blacks, 4 percent. And-- Speaker 2: Was there a lot of tension in the firehouses after Dr. King was assassinated, between the-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --black firefighters and the whites? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, and we went to, we went to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]--no, Milwaukee's--no, we didn't. We went to one of the suburbs, like Waukegan [Illinois] or north Chicago and played--no, Evanston [Illinois], and played an all-black team. And one of my teammates slid into second base and kind of roughed the second-baseman up. I had to come off the bench and quell that because it was about to get off. We played Milwaukee's Fire Department right after he got killed. And all of us had our wives with us. And I'm the only black there, and we played on a field that looked like Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois], and it was a park district field, but it was enclosed. It had stands, you know, all of the accoutrements, just gorgeous field. And after the game, we changed clothes, put on our dress, and we had a banquet. I had a police escort in front of my car and one behind my car. That's how tense that situation--I didn't see it that way. But apparently, they did. But they gave me two police escorts. So it was, it was hot. Story_ID: 168037 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the International Association of Black Professional Firefighters. That, that started in 1969? Were you a part of the development of that? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Two, two gentlemen, one from New York [City] and one from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], [David] Dave Floyd from New York City and [Charles] Hendricks from Philadelphia, they undertook a jaunt from one coast--starting on the West Coast, all the way back to the East Coast, stopping in every major city, trying to locate black firefighters, the idea being that black firefighters should be united nationally. They came to Chicago [Illinois], and they found, they found me, and they also found Jim [James] Winbush. We were co-chairmen at the time, but I ended up taking them around the city, kind of showing them, you know, different parts of the city. And we both got invitations to, invitations were given to come to New York for an initial kind of meeting. It was October, 1969, and we met at the Commodore Hotel [later, Grand Hyatt New York, New York City] which is no longer there, about three hundred black firemen from all over the country. You know, man, what a sight? What a venue? And everybody was telling the same story. So the outgrowth of that is, you know, we all have a common problem that needs to be addressed. And the only way--not the only way, but one of the best ways to address it is to become a national organization whereby we can share information and, you know, provide direct assistance where needed. And in the early days, you know, there were time--and I've even, I've even been a part of it myself, where an incident would happen in a particular setting, and, you know, black firefighters would get a convoy going. And they would go up there and address it head up, straight up. Now, that's kind of a primitive way of, you know, addressing the situation. But that was more, that developed more out of the camaraderie and common bond that we held for each other. The one problem that I had early on--oh, let me go back. It started on a Thursday, and it was, the main meeting was on Friday--no, we started on a Friday, which was mostly a social, a day of social interaction. And, oh, that was a glorious experience. I mean it's like--and I talk about it in my memoirs. It gave me the idea of what the slaves felt like when they were finally reunited with their, their loved ones, you know. They had been separated and now they're back together. That's what it felt like to me. That's what I equated it with. So it was a beautiful experience, you know, an entire day, big hospitality suite and as it is with firefighters, they are brothers, okay, because they, they are committed to dying together if need by or of dying for your brother. If, if the situation presents itself, that's what you do. So it was kind of an automatic camaraderie there, connection. Story_ID: 168038 Speaker 1: Saturday was the first official meeting [of the International Association of Black Professional Firefighters]. Saturday morning, one of the first speakers was--I can't remember his first name, but his last name was O'Keefe [ph.]. He was the president of the International Association of Firefighters, the IAFF. When I looked on the program, and I saw that, I was totally incensed because the union has always fought against black firefighters. See, at that time, there were no closed shops. If you got anything done for you through the union, it was because they wanted to do it, not because it was the right thing to do or you had it coming as a union member, okay. You had to be liked to get it done. So as soon as he got through speaking, he left, he left the room. I wanted him to stay there because I got up and questioned the floor and asked why the fox would be invited into the chicken house. Here we are in our infancy, trying to develop a strategy, and you got the enemy speaking to you. Story_ID: 168039 Speaker 1: The other part of that is we had, we had done a pretesting, pre-training program here in Chicago [Illinois]. All of--it couldn't have been three months before this thing [International Association of Black Professional Firefighters conference] jumped off in New York [City]. So we took the program to New York to share it with the other black firefighters. And what it was, and the Afro-police, invented that, get some school teachers together to teach you how to take an exam, teach you how to unlock yourself to take an exam. Get some community doctors to check you out and see what your physical situation is like, okay. They even had classroom study on--the basic exam was like maybe a high school, based on a high school education at the time, even though you didn't have to a diploma. You didn't have to be a high school graduate when I came on, all right. And if I hadn't gotten my GED while I was in service, if you did have to have, have a diploma (laughter), I never would a gotten on. In fact, the, one of the old stories that was going, that has always gone around is that when they formed the police and the fire departments, the guys with the brains went on the police department. The guys with the brawn went on the fire department. There was so much stupidity in, in the fire department that you would not believe it, okay. By that time, I had begun to educate myself, you know, through reading, studying. And my whole background served to support whatever I did because education was pushed, all right. I didn't wanna, I didn't wanna leave grammar school. I didn't want my last double promotion (laughter) 'cause that would take me away from my friends, all right. So my point being that I had enough in me to know stupidity when I saw it, okay, and especially at that level of authority. Story_ID: 168040 Speaker 1: Okay, so I got up and I asked the question. And the answer that I got had to do with being politically correct. John Lindsay was running for his second term as mayor of New York [City, New York] at the time. And there was something that had to do with that. They didn't do some stuff that was supposed to be black oriented, based on the mayor's running, okay. So I have a very short fuse in regard to their political correctness. So I got out. After I had my say, and they answered me with, "We have to be politically correct." Walked out. My partner, walked out. I boycotted the International [Association of Black Professional Firefighters] for ten years, and in 1980, I went to the national convention in Detroit [Michigan] and kind of eased my way back in. I was, you know, I had a yearning to get back to it. I mean ten years was long enough to pout, as it were. Story_ID: 168041 Speaker 1: In 1983--1982, my region scheduled me to run for vice president of International [Association of Black Professional Firefighters]. I didn't win, but I made my mark because that, too, was political, okay. And even though I'd been gone for ten years, everybody remembered me, remembered the position I took. It was a whole lot of them that felt the same way, but they wouldn't say it, didn't have the fortitude to say it. So, that kind of started my reputation, my national reputation in the international. Eighty-two [1982], our region--out of six regions, we were number five in total votes. The number of organizations that were already there totaled thirty votes. I brought in fourteen proxy votes which gave us forty-four, all right. So they understood what some of my skills were. In 1983, I ran for regional director, and I won. I didn't win with the votes that were there. I only got two votes out of, what was it? Eight registered organizations at the time. I only got two votes out of that eight. But I took a three-day--four days. In four days, I traveled through twenty-five different cities in Illinois and Indiana. I didn't go any further--I went all the way to East St. Louis [Illinois] and recruited my votes. And I won twelve to six. I beat Mary McLeod Bethune's great-grandson, who was regional director at the time. Story_ID: 168042 Speaker 1: Some of my activities in the International [Association of Black Professional Firefighters], I was International's representative to the national fire conference, which is given by FEMA, the Federal Emergency Management Agency every year. And they spend millions and millions of dollars on that conference. Anybody and anything that has to do with construction, fire safety, anything that has to do with fire, including the whole construction industry. In fact, this was 1984. I was sent as an observer. And that's when all this plastic piping came in. They were hawking it at that fire conference 'cause that's where all that stuff comes in, all the new ideas and the technology and what have--the purveyors and what have you. I came back. I wrote a report. I suggested to the president that we use that as a--that they--that the black firefighters use that as a forum. In other words, be present at that conference, all right, and have an agenda. The next year, I was on the planning, I was put on the planning team. International had a slot. They put me in. The federal government paid for everything, the food, lodging, travel. The only thing I had to do was to get permission from my fire commissioner for time off. At first we went for the planning session, and then we had to go back for the actual conference. So, the planning session period, was like what? Three days, four days. I needed one, one working day off. By that time--we got the contract in 1980, and in the contract it had the availability of personal days, you know, you had so many personal days that were given. But since the federal government was paying for this, and it was a fire-related situation, I didn't feel like I had to use a personal day. So I wrote what we call a Form 2, which is a general communication form that the [Chicago] Fire Department uses. Anything else that doesn't have a printed form for it specifically, use a Form 2. And I asked permission for the day off based on, I'm a representative or I'm on the planning team of the national fire conference. Fire Commissioner Geleni (ph.) was in at that time. And he didn't write me back. He had somebody call me, to tell me that I should take a personal day. So I decided I wasn't gonna take my personal day. I wrote another Form 2. And in so many words, I told him that I'm on the planning team. I intend to be there with or without your permission. So I waited and waited. I waited till the day before I was supposed to catch a plane. The federal government had sent me a voucher for a plane ticket. And I said, I'm just gonna wait on him, see what he--see how he handles this. Didn't say nothing. So I told my officer, my last working day (unclear) I said, you get somebody else to drive this--I was a fire engineer. I drove the engine that carries the hose, said, you get somebody else to drive this next day. I will be on my way to Arlington, Virginia to the national fire conference. The night before, I dressed in civilian clothes on purpose. I wrote another form, took it down to the fire commissioner's office. He wasn't there. The assistant commissioner was there. I walked into his office, handed him that form. He read it, and as he read it, his knuckles started turning white. I could, I mean you could literally see the blood leaving his hands. He called the, the chief fire marshal was in the next office. He called him in. Never will forget him, Chief Maloney (ph.). Pain in the butt. He told Maloney this was All--it wasn't Albright, [Edward] Altman [Jr.] was the assistant fire commissioner. He, assumed--he became fire commissioner when Harold Washington fired Geleni for having claimed, being an architect, posing as an architect. He had been drawing up plans for fire houses. He had worked with architects for many years. And he posed as an architect and did not have the credentials. So Washington fired him, and Altman became fire commissioner. Anyway, he called Maloney who was the top fire officer. He says, "Do you realize we can't say, no, to the federal government?" And Maloney and I had had a, a run-in which he lost. I never, I never lost a skirmish (laughter). I just leaned over, I said, "Chief, did you hear what he said?" (Laughter) Just to aggravate him. He turned red. Story_ID: 168043 Speaker 1: So what I had done is I looked at the contract. And they had a piece in there that had to do with an education committee that would allow time off for you to gain a higher form of education. So I used that clause, okay, and the assistant fire commissioner is supposed to be the head of that committee. But that committee had never formed, and it had never met. They did not meet the dictates of the contract. And I knew it. So he tells me, well, the committee will meet and I'll get right back to you. That evening, I got a--later that evening, I got a phone call, giving me permission to go. Now, by this time, I've missed my flight. So I drove. I stopped--it's about, almost eight hundred miles. I stopped halfway in Youngstown, Ohio, which is halfway, where, you know, I married my wife from, and just stayed on the interstate. And when I got back, I billed the [Chicago] Fire Department for my travel, expenses, my eating expenses and my, and my overnight lodging both ways because I stopped both ways. I could have driven straight through. But I just did it to make the point. So that is kind of how I perceived the fire department as an adversary, all right. They never perceived me as an adver--well, yeah, they perceived me as an adversary, but they would not get into the ring. They never answered one of my Form 2's, not one. And I've got a copy of every one of them I sent because I, I had to get--you have to get a signature. Whenever anything goes through channels. Whoever your company officer is, you submit it to him; he signs it and forwards it. So in my files, I have every one of them. Story_ID: 168044 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the consent decree. I think we--that's a little bit--we went past that, and I think that that's important to talk about. Speaker 2: Of '73 [1973]? Speaker 1: Yeah, 1973. I, and we've, you know, I know we talked to [HM] Renault Robinson and [HM] Howard Saffold and others about the consent decree, but the African American Firefighters League [later, African American Firefighters & Paramedics League, Chicago, Illinois] was in on that lawsuit, right, against the City of Chicago-- Speaker 2: No, no, ours was separate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And ours came after theirs. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I think they filed theirs in '71 [1971], if I'm not mistaken. We filed, ours was filed in '73 [1973], and the consent decree was not signed until '77 [1977]. See, between '73 [1973] and '77 [1977], [Richard J.] Daley refused--they were condemned for discrimination in hiring and promoting in 1973. Speaker 1: Yeah, by the federal courts, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Judge Prentice Marshall. Speaker 2: Prentice Marshall. Speaker 1: Right, and they were supposed to consent to certain hiring practices and to, to bring the number of black firefighters up-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --right, to some sort of reasonable level. Speaker 2: So, what Daley decided was that, he wasn't gonna adhere to that. So he stopped--so therefore, they stopped the federal funding, the same way they did with the police. Speaker 1: And millions of dollars were-- Speaker 2: Seventy-six million dollars. Speaker 1: Seventy-six million dollars. Speaker 2: Seventy-six million dollars. Speaker 1: Were frozen--and funds were frozen, right-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because they wouldn't sign off--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So over a four-year period, who knows how much that ended up being, okay, because Daley decided that they was gonna--not gonna be no hiring and no promoting until 1977 when--because his way of doing things was robbing Peter to pay Paul, okay, the public school system, the sanitary district, the water department. He juggled that money to balance his budget. So he didn't--you know, by them withholding the funds, he had have no money to juggle. So he had to relent, and he signed the decree. And that's when blacks started coming on. Story_ID: 168045 Speaker 1: Tell me, since the consent decree, we were discussing off camera, that the numbers today in 2003 are up to 14 percent, but that's, that's, it doesn't really show a lot of progress for twenty-four years--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And it may not be 14 percent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By 1977--between 19--around 1973, there was right around, we were right at 4 percent. When the freeze took place, and [Mayor Richard J.] Daley put the freeze on hiring and promoting, a lot of the older guys retired. So by 1977, we had somewhere between 125, and, you know, less than 150. So between '77 [1977] and '80 [1980], we jumped to about 450. So about three hundred blacks were hired between '77 [1977] and 1980. And, if you recall, 1979, Mayor Byrne, Jane Byrne became mayor. The firefighters union supported her, and the police union. Those were her two big supporters. They did a big fundraiser for her, and it was--and the payoff was supposed to be, she's gonna give us our first contract. Speaker 1: Because the police nor the firefighters were unionized prior to that time, right? Speaker 2: Well, they were unionized, but they didn't have a contract. Speaker 1: They weren't--they didn't have a contract with the city [Chicago, Illinois]. Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, the, New York [City] was Local Number 1 and Chicago was Local Number 2 as far as the IAFF, International Association of Firefighters. So when Jane got in, she double-crossed them, and she zeroed in on the residency issue, point being that out of 5,000 firefighters, about 2,500 of them lived outside of the city. So, therefore, the city wasn't, they weren't paying any taxes. The city was losing a lot of money by them not living here, okay, and shopping here for the most part, or sending their kids to school. And the same percentage or, it was the same in the [Chicago] Police Department. At least this is what she says, 50 percent of police and fire live outside of the city. So that means that the other bureaus--there are fifty-six bureaus. And out of those other bureaus, the numbers had to be just about the same. So the point being that the city is losing a lot of tax money. So, she--and the point is, the reason that that was able to come about is because it wasn't being enforced because no blacks were living outside of the city, all right. So, now, if blacks had been living outside of the city in those same numbers, then something would have been done a long time ago. So that really teed them off. It became a sex, sexist issue. And I remember--oh, this columnist, Mabley, Jack Mabley, oh, he just fanned the flames (laughter) in his column. This woman, and, you know, there were all kinds of stories going around, and, you know, a fireman, in particular, being macho is a part of their whole demeanor. Without that, they have nothing for the most part. I mean that's, that's their entree to the respect. I mean, you know, the rats and the roaches are running out, and you're running in. So that makes you macho, theoretically, at least from, from the eye (laughter). So, you know, all kinds of agitation was going on in the union meetings and what have you, you know, this woman is, you know, got us by the "you know what" (laughter). And so they took a strike vote. This was in late '79 [1979]. Story_ID: 168046 Speaker 1: It wasn't, wasn't very long after she--let's see. She [Mayor Jane Byrne] came in in March [sic, April 1979], right? So this was like October. They took a strike vote. And the vote to strike failed by just about the number of black firefighters that are on the job. It was right in that, that area. So they whipped, you know, they whipped themselves up again at the union meetings. We've got to do something about this mayor. She promised us a contract, and she, she's relinquishing on her promise. So that must have been--the first vote must have been well before October or November because the second vote was taken right around the end of the year. But this time, they sent out bands of hooligans from the union, union sympathizers, to every firehouse in the city, threatening, cajoling, promising, anything they had to do to get a "yes, let's strike" vote. And during this time, the blacks, particularly the new blacks who had no concept of what the heck was going on, they were intimidated, okay. And those that did vote, voted for the strike. You didn't have to vote, but if they didn't vote, and, and, you know, that group found out that you didn't vote, and here you are living in the same firehouse with them, then you would pay for that. So I just believe that they were intimidated and voted yes. So they got the second strike vote. So the strike was set for Valentine's Day, February 15th [sic, 14th], five o'clock in the morning. I happened to be working the day before because we start at eight [o'clock] in the morning. We get off eight the next morning. The strike started at five. So I was scheduled to get off at eight o'clock. I was working that shift. I asked for the last watch. There are four, four watches at night. One goes from ten o'clock to one o'clock, one o'clock to three, three to five, and five to seven. Let's see, ten to one, one to three, three to five and five to seven, right. So I took the last watch. Nobody liked to take last watch because that means, that meant that you have to get up. But the watches, you know, rotated, but in some firehouses, you just choose a watch, okay, depending on, you know, the makeup of your crew. If you couldn't agree, then the officer would set up a watch schedule where everybody would just simply rotate. But I, I asked for the last watch, and I got it. So that meant--no, I had third watch, from three to five. So I was the one to ring the bell and wake everybody up. They headed for the strike lines. I went to 40th [Street] and Dearborn [Street, Chicago, Illinois]. I had to make two trips to my car. Oh, let me back up just a second. They had a, they had a vote in the house so that they would know who was, who was voting and who wasn't voting. And on both occasions, I voted no. I was the only, I was the only black on that shift. I integrated that house, 105th [Street] and Hoxie [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. I was there for twelve years, and for about eight of those years, I was there as the only black. So they knew I wasn't gonna strike. So I knew that most of the fires and the action was going to be toward the inner city. So 40th and Dearborn, for me, was the ideal spot to be. I felt like that's where I could best be utilized because see I could handle a, a rig. I could drive a rig, I could put it to work. If it broke down, you know, if it wasn't, if it wasn't anything major, I knew how to get it fixed, you know, at least well enough to either get it back to the house or to get it pumping again. So that's where I went. And like I said I had to make two trips to my car. Story_ID: 168047 Speaker 1: Now, these are the same guys that used to watch me go in, put the fire out and come back out, and on one occasion, they applauded me because they weren't used to fighting fires. They'd been on the job twenty, twenty-five years. And they weren't used to any serious fire. They had a garage, they had an automobile every now and then, okay. They, they'd have an ambulance call and every blue moon--all right, they had the steel mills over there. Every, every so often, the steel would overflow. They'd have a fire in the steel mill. But hell, all that is, is sitting back and throw some water on it. You don't have to--you ain't gon' go in there (laughter), okay. You ain't gon' get too close to that steel. But, you know, the type of firefighting that we used to do, we had to go in and get people out. We had to go where the fire was. And we learned how to do that. If they ever learned how to do it, they never had any practice at it, all right. So it was automatic for me. I remember once, it was a Catholic church. It was a fire in the steeple. I went up there with a hand pump and put it out. That's when they applauded me. They wouldn't go up there. A couple of them was too old to even climb the steps (laughter). But, all right, so I went to 40th [Street] and Dearborn [Street, Chicago, Illinois], spent the entire twenty-four days there. After every run, I would hold school. We had rookies, all, all rookies working because most of the older guys struck. So, hell, they didn't know, you know, what they were doing. So every fire that we had, I would do a review of the fire with them, and this was part of their initial training. Story_ID: 168048 Speaker 1: The news reporters found out where I was. They called. I gave interviews that were broadcast over radio, TV. Just the audio was on the TV. I was, I was the voice so to speak. And WBEE, I think, called me. Black, it was a black radio station. One of the reporters called me. And I proposed a meeting of the black firefighters, and I called Alderman Sherman, Niles Sherman was alderman of the 21st [Ward], I believe. And Niles and I grew up in the same neighborhood. He, he's not from inside Cabrini [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. He's from just outside of Cabrini. So we've been knowing each other all our lives. In fact, his brother, Jesse (ph.)--two brothers under him--it was a big family of them, went with one of my sisters. So, you know, we had a family connection there. So he agreed to, to hold the meeting there, and over the radio. I called that meeting over the radio. And I got permission to leave--I could somebody to relieve me for a couple hours, and it was, it was a tight situation because most of the guys, like I say, most of them were young. And some of the other guys that were, so to speak, vets, they didn't know how to handle a rig. So, you know, that was really something from the, to find a replacement for me. But see, they knew that that meeting was vital, all right, and they thought--this is what I'm thinking, that they thought that I was going to go into that meeting and suggest that those guys cross the picket line. That's what they were, I believe that's what they were, the brain trust was thinking. But instead--oh, I got it, I got it from both sides. I was president of the [African American Firefighters] League [later, African American Firefighters & Paramedics League, Chicago, Illinois] at the time the strike hit. And I resigned based on, they didn't have guts enough to take a position for or against the strike. If they had taken a position for the strike, naturally, I would have questioned them on it. But I would have, I mean if it, if there was a nugget of common sense in what they said, I would have accepted it and went with them. They didn't give me nothing. My entire board, to a man, agreed that everybody should make their own decision. And that thing hit me like a ton of bricks. Here you are, a representative, a representative organization of a group of people. And you, I mean when the pressure comes down, you will not, cannot make a decision, take a position? I'm not the one to lead you. You need a new president. So I was getting it from both sides. But I didn't care. You know, I was, I was firm in what my position--in the position that I took because the strike was about the fact that Jane Byrne had made them look like punks, and they had to move their families back into the city. They had to pay them taxes. They had to send their, their kids to public school, right? That's what the strike was about. Blacks had come on the department and three hundred in three years was unheard of. They were not ready for that. The department wasn't ready for it, the union wasn't ready for it, okay. So that's what, that was what they struck about. And I wasn't gonna help them project that image. I understood that, but they would have--had conse--I wasn't scared of the union. In fact, I treated the union just like I did Chief Harper (ph.). I used to harass them. I asked the questions. I wrote forty-nine grievances, all right. That's what I felt, how I felt about that union. I didn't have no respect for them. I never disrespected them, but I didn't have any respect for them because they're a bunch of political hacks. So in that meeting, I suggested to them--the first thing I told them was, I'm not here to question your decision. I accept your decision. I expect for you to accept mine. But the point is, while you are out here, you know, some, what? Three hundred strong, you need to come together and create an issue for yourselves. There's a contract being discussed. They're not talking about affirmative action. They're not talking about bringing no more blacks on the job. In other words, create a situation whereby you could sit at that table. So I left that meeting, and they got a group of leadership together, and they called in [HM] Jesse [L.] Jackson. That's how he got involved. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 168049 Speaker 1: And out of that came Appendix G, which was an integral part of a written contract [for the Chicago Fire Department]. It was the first time that affirmative action had ever been written into any contract in this country. It called for 45 percent in all ranks and categories. We ain't nowhere near that, and ain't nobody wrote no grievance on it, but me. I went to arbitration on it and lost the arbitration. I went to arbitration three times, once for the affirmative action officer. The contract called for the affirmative action officer being of equal rank as an assistant commissioner. So what they did was--at that time, we had an assistant commissioner position. They changed the rules. There was no longer an assistant commissioner. So I went to arbitration and suggested that what was called for in the contract is equal to what is now three stars--I forget what the nomenclature of the rank was, but, you know, in terms of the, the amount of money that they were getting, it called for three stars. I lost the arbitration, and within, within two weeks' time, the department put out their promotion letter and gave the affirmative action officer his rank and his money which jumped him about twenty thousand [dollars] a year. Figure that one out. How do you lose an arbitration on the rank and, and position and two weeks later, you give it up? You see, that's, that's my father [Alexander Outerbridge] all over again. That's the kind of stuff he used to do. And when I decided to get mad at him, that's what I'd get mad at him about (laughter). Okay, but it's in me. There's no--I didn't have any choice. You see something, you know what to do, you know how to do, you do it. That's what he instilled in me. So that's why I took the position I did in the [Chicago Fire] Department, and that's why I did the kinds of things that I did. Story_ID: 168050 Speaker 1: Now, where were we? We were at the strike [1980 Chicago Firefighters Strike] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember [HM] Jesse [L.] Jackson had the big meeting at Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity]. I remember that. I was actually there myself and, all of the black firefighters were up on the stage at Operation PUSH, and broadcasts all over the city [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: I wasn't there. I could not be there, didn't wanna be there because that was their fight because they're the ones that wanted, that, begging to be promoted, begging for this, begging for that. I ain't begged, I ain't never begged for nothing. I had three other careers that I was involved in, not to a great degree. I was a professional model, professional photographer. What else was I doing? I was sculpting, all right. Two--right after the strike, I started sculpting to get this crap out of my head. That's how, that's what allowed me to release all that stress that I went, I was under because I was a marked man from both sides. I caught it from both sides. Speaker 2: Were you threatened? Speaker 1: I was threatened. But see, everybody was carrying a pistol, including me, and every time we went to a fire, everybody on the rig had a pistol. They left it, they left them with me, so I had five, I had four under the seat, and one in my belt. So, but, you know, it never really got to that point where anybody ever got threatened with a weapon. But everybody knew that everybody had them. So, you know, that didn't even--you know, I didn't, I didn't fear that. I didn't fear any kind of attack, any kind of physical harm. It was, it was mostly mental because that's how they, that's how they operate in the [Chicago] Fire Department, anywhere for that matter, or any--well, fire, police, in Chicago [Illinois], and probably in other places too. It's by peer pressure-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --see. But see if I--in order for peer pressure to work, you have to want what they want. You need to be going, you have to want to go in the same direction they're going. See, I didn't. So that didn't work on me. There was no peer pressure. My only pressure is between me and my God, and I believe, you know, he ordained me to do what I did because I did it in such a way that there was no repercussion. I never got any repercussions. I never got no, no forms back from questions that I asked. Anything that I ever did, it was one way. They absorbed the vibrations and left it right there. They never opened their mouth one time. They never wrote one word. Now, that is not to say that I didn't respect the power of their capacity. If they wanted to get me, they would have gotten me. But I think it was a matter of respect because out of all the, all of the times that I went after them, and all of the forms that I wrote, I never let nobody see it. That was between me and them, all right. Now, if I'd of let somebody see it--and I knew it, the first time I let somebody read what I wrote, they gonna start talking about it. And that's not gonna help the situation, number one, all right. So I think the reason why I got by as well as I did, and I was able to go as far as I did is they respected me. They respected my intellect, they respected my knowledge of management because that's where I really got them. I challenged, you know, I challenged them from a management perspective, not from a firefighter's perspective because I've got a degree in management. I went back to school after twenty-six years. Speaker 2: To Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And got my degree and studied some more photography. So I think it was a matter of respect and, and there was an air of respect between us even when, you know, I would--we would be in the same room. Certainly, we know what's going on, but there was an air of respect, right. And I knew how far I could go without the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] coming to visit me, all right, or having some, some of their strong men coming to talk with me. I knew how far I could go. I only went as far as I needed to go. I didn't go any further. So it wasn't no ego trip. I wanted to, you know, whatever the situation was, I went as far as I thought I needed to go to solve that situation, all right. And in 95 percent of the cases, that situation was solved, whether it was my situation or somebody around me. Story_ID: 168051 Speaker 1: Okay, sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: That they will, you know, become educated. This whole concept of education has always been a negative. I can remember when I was a kid, the smart kids caught hell, okay, because they were smart or because they got good grades. So it wasn't fashionable to get good grades. And I, I, I can't see that having changed at all. And this day and time, the drop-out rate is just untenable. The hip hop, the generation of the hip hop concept, I think damages our chances of elevating ourselves. So, you know, my hope would be that education would, again, become viable in the home. I've always said that I got more education--I got educated better through my mother [Lillie Taylor Outerbridge] and my father [Alexander Outerbridge] than I did from any teacher 'cause by the--in my particular case, by the time I got to a particular grade, I had the benefit of discussion of my two older sisters, what they were studying, you know, and what was going on with them. So I had the benefit of that, and it helped me tremendously. That needs to happen in the home again. Story_ID: 168052 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on the things that you've done, what would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, it would be probably the driving force that caused me to write my memoirs, and that was my ability to write and express myself on paper from a management perspective. I got the nickname of "Mr. Form 2." [HM] Russ Ewing, everyone will recall, was probably the most renowned investigative reporter of his time. Speaker 1: Right. Everybody that, people would turn themselves over, criminals would call and ask for Russ Ewing (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, for (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --black and white people-- Speaker 2: --for safe passage. Speaker 1: --would ask for Russ Ewing, a black reporter, to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --turn themselves in to-- Speaker 2: Right. He was on the [Chicago] Fire Department for, oh, maybe five, six years. And Russ used to hold promotional classes for the rank of lieutenant. He used to head up the class. And he was never able to be promoted. Everybody, you know, certain others in the class would get promoted, and he never got promoted. Russ had extremely intelligent young man, journalism degree. He was a, he was a licensed pilot. He was an accomplished musician. He used to teach piano and organ. Speaker 1: And yet he could not qualify for a fire department lieutenant? Speaker 2: He could not qualify for lieutenant. He could not qualify for the helicopter. The fire department had a helicopter. And here he is, a pilot, and he couldn't. And Russ wrote a Form 2 to [Chicago] Fire Commissioner [Robert] Quinn which was unheard of. I don't know if any of the white firefighters ever wrote to the commissioner, particularly, you know, a firefighter from the firefighter's ranks. Now, you know, an officer, they might find cause to have to write a communication to the fire commissioner. But a firefighter has no reason, theoretically, to communicate directly with the fire commissioner. But Russ took a chance of doing that. And that impressed me. I said, now, he's got guts enough to challenge the fire commissioner on paper. That is really something worthwhile. And, let's see, I came on in '61 [1961] and I wrote my first Form 2--and before I wrote it, I thought about Russ. It gave me the idea. Why don't you write a Form 2 on Chief Harper (ph.)? And my claim to fame for that one was, I, I created the quote "a pressurized atmosphere," him creating a pressurized atmosphere. And from that day forward, I always philosophized somehow in every form that I wrote. Sometimes I even quoted the Bible. But most of the time, I was quoting management concepts. The fire department has adopted the IFSTA manuals, International Fire Service Association, training, Training Association [International Fire Service Training Association]. And we had a volume of twenty-six manuals. And what they were, were how to manuals for various segments of department operation. And I, I was looking through the officers, the fire officers' manual one day. And I ended up buying my own. And what struck me was the communication section on what a viable communication system must entail. And it didn't happen in the fire department. The fire department's communication is one way. In order for a communication cycle to take place, it has to be two ways, all right. And the thing that prevented it from being two-way was their inability to provide feedback. Without feedback, that communication is stopped dead in its tracks. So that's what I hammered them on. So if there were one thing, then it would be the series of Form 2's that I wrote to three commissioners. I challenged three different fire commissioners and five different district chiefs with the same question, basically. Story_ID: 168053 Speaker 1: Okay, do you think that, with all the, the fighting that's gone on over the years with the [Chicago] Fire Department for justice in terms of the black firefighters, and for service to the black community by your--by [HM] Russ Ewing, as you mentioned, yourself, Kublai Khan [Muhammad] Toure and others, where do you think things are now in relationship to the fire department and the black community? Speaker 2: Well, insofar as the black firemen themselves, they are making so much money now until they will not make any waves, all right. During my tenure--well, when I came on the fire department, the pay scale was $5,200 a year, which was a hundred dollars a week. In 1961, that was a lot of money, all right. So the benefits that they're receiving, since the contract they get twelve paid holidays. If they work overtime, they get paid a lot of money. I made $600 in one twenty-four hour period, eight years ago, as a fire engineer. That's a lot of money. It's a waste of money, but it's being done in a vacuum. See, and that includes all of the citizens of Chicago [Illinois]. They're being robbed. I'm not saying that a fireman doesn't earn his money, and I'm not saying that they're being paid too much. But on the service side, if you're getting paid this amount of money, then this is the kind of service that you need to be providing for your community and the community at large. It's, it's a divorce from that side of it, all right. The average firefighter is working to get paid. There's no commitment side, not even to themselves. Right now, the hierarchy of the fire department is top heavy with blacks. But the payoff for that is, when they retire, it'll be another forty years before that cycle can even begin itself again. Speaker 1: So they're enjoying--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And here we--and here this group is, taking the money and running and not leaving any type of legacy, not making any type of preparation so that somebody can step into it, all right. We should be, we should be at 2,500. We should be half of the fire department. We're at about six hundred, maybe seven. I don't know what the numbers are now. Speaker 1: Out of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I've been gone eight years. Speaker 1: --out of five thousand or-- Speaker 2: Out of five thousand. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So nobody's thinking about tomorrow. Everybody is thinking about themselves. That is, and, and the same is true for the most part in our black communities. There is a Collins, the word Collins. If somebody says, if you're talking about entrepreneurs, and somebody says Collins just about everybody'll know, there was a George Collins (ph.). It was a family of them. They had a store on-- Speaker 1: Caesar Collins, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was one had a barbeque place on 71st [Street] and [Martin Luther] King [Jr. Drive] [sic, 71st Street and Yates Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois], just off of King Drive. The twenty-four hour store at 87th [Street] and King Drive. Speaker 1: Food Basket. Speaker 2: Food Basket is now owned by Arabs. The only store that's in our community of any size right now is 79th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue]. I mean, what else do you have to, you know, what do you have to do to realize that you're being closed out. You're being shut out in your own community. Story_ID: 168054 Speaker 1: Tell me, is there--when you look back on your activities, is there anything that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Yeah. I would have attempted to get promoted because now I know as an officer, I would have had more clout. I would have had, I would have been able to put down more pressure as an officer. But getting to be an officer is a whole new ballgame. I talk about this in my memoirs at length. And when I left, when I found out at, or when I was reminded that the [Chicago] Fire Department was still segregated, I promised myself that I would not worry about being promoted. I would not be spoken for again under any circumstances. If I didn't make it on my own, then I wasn't going to make it. Story_ID: 168055 Speaker 1: Sir, one last question. It's similar to legacy but a little different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered--and I talk about this too a little bit in my memoirs. I'd like to be remembered as someone who did what he believed was right. I don't wanna be remembered--well, you didn't ask me that, did you? (Laughter) but I think it's relevant in that, in the [Chicago] Police [Department] and [Chicago] Fire Department, in particular, in terms of that fraternity concept, the theory is that everybody should be remembered as being a nice guy, you know, getting along. I wanna be remembered for the way I went about doing my business, straightforward, took no prisoners, saved a lot of jobs, wrote a lot of paperwork, and got a lot of people out of trouble, based on my knowledge of management. And the whole, the whole thing of--that enabled me to do that is the average stupidity at the management level because they're not at the management level based on their knowledge of management. They're there because some politician spoke for them and allowed them to be elevated. Speaker 1: There's somebody that knew somebody-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that was sent. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Right, and the--I guess the most simple answer to, from my side of it, in terms of my ability to do what I did, you could sit in the corner of a firehouse over a twenty-four hour period, and you can take notes, and you'll have a pad full by the end of the day in terms of management violations. I never went that way because I enjoyed confronting--the higher they were, the better I liked it. I'd confront them head on, okay, in terms from a, on a management level. I'd ask them a management question and expect a management answer. But they--and the point is, they can't give me a management answer because they don't operate on a management perspective. It's, you know, it's strange for somebody else to hear that, but if you were there on a day-to-day basis, and you see how things are operated and maneuvered, then you will understand what I'm talking about. It does--the fire department does not operate--the fire departments' management does not operate on management principles. It does not operate itself on management principles. It operates itself on being effective where being efficient is of no consequence. Efficiency doesn't have any, any role, except during budget time. And then it's, efficiently lying about whatever you're saying, knowing how to, you know, set it up in an efficiency concept because efficiency takes a back seat to effectiveness. That's all that counts in the fire department, being effective from a political point of view. Story_ID: 168056 Speaker 1: Alright, this is a picture that was taken at the Chicago Fire Academy [Chicago Police and Firefighter Training Academy, Chicago, Illinois]. It is a gathering of the history committee to maintain the history of Chicago's [Illinois] black firefighters. On the far left is Reverend Jerry Jones who is the affirmative action officer and bishop in the Apostolic Church. Next to him is Dekalb Wolcott who did the original research on our history project from the first black firefighters of 1873. The next one is Joe Boatner. He is a high-ranking deputy in the [Chicago] Fire Department currently. Next to him is Lawrence Quinn who is the International Association of Black Professional Firefighters historian. Next to him is, who was at the time, the [Chicago] Fire Commissioner [Edward] Altman [Jr.]. Next to him is Ramon Price who was the curator of the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. Next to him is Kublai Toure [Kublai Khan Muhammad Toure]. He is the chair person for this committee. Next to him is Landis McAlpin who is the first black chaplain for the Chicago Fire Department. Next to him is Donne Trotter, who's a state representative, and I'm on the far left, and I served as the advisor to Kublai Toure for the committee. Speaker 2: What year was this taken? Speaker 1: This was about 1997. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead with this one. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of me and--my father [Alexander Outerbridge] and I. That's about 1942, couldn't be no more than five years old. He used to work at Hobart Manufacturing Company. This was a Christmas party. And as I told you, I used to wear starched shirts and ties to kindergarten (laughter). I've got one on there. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: That's my first furlough home from the [U.S.] Air Force. That's approximately 1954. On the back is my youngest sister on the left, Ida. Next to her is Mary. She's the middle sister. On the right, that's my oldest sister, Adele. Standing next to me is my mother, Lillie [Taylor Outerbridge]. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that's in 1954. Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954], right. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: This was taken in 1980. I was forty years old. I decided to have my model's composite shot. I had it shot in Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Go ahead. Speaker 2: That's approximately 1975, Engine Company 81, which I integrated at 105th [street] and Hoxie [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], and I just posed for a shot, holding the waker bell. Speaker 1: All right, next photo. Go ahead. Speaker 2: This was just before I retired, Engine Company 122 at 79th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. This was during our annual fall inspection. On the far left is Lieutenant Brennan (ph.), myself, ah, we called him Dodo. I can't think of his name. On the right is Edwin Perkins (ph.). Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: William Walker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: William Walker. They called him Dodo huh? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: This picture is taken in New Orleans [Louisiana], in Louisiana at the 1994 national black firefighters convention [International Association of Black Professional Firefighters convention]. On the left is, ah--what is the name on--look at that picture, man? Ron Bellew [sic, Ron Ballew]. Speaker 2: Bellew? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Spelling for Bellew. Speaker 1: That's Ron Bellew. He was the editor for the international's newsletter, and I was one of the contributing editors and sort of his mentor to give an idea of how to matriculate. Speaker 2: And how is his name spelled? Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: Bellew. Speaker 1: Yeah, spell it for us? Speaker 2: Oh, B-E-L-L-E-W. Speaker 1: Okay, next photo. Speaker 2: Now, this is at my retirement in 1995. The gentleman at the podium is Oshemi Adelebu (ph.). He was the president of the International Black Firefighters. He's out of Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my daughter and I, Leslie number two, and she had a son. His is Leslie as well. So I'm Leslie number one she's Leslie number two. Speaker 1: Okay, year? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-five [1995]. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Retirement again. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is my retirement party. This is my father giving me a family salute during my retirement party. Speaker 1: All right, next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of the premises of Channel 19 [Chicago, Illinois]. In the background are my fine art photographs that are often used as a backdrop for their talk shows. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is my fingerprint. This is Feeding Time. It's a shot that I got out of the second story window of Engine [Company] 81. It's an intimate view of a robin's nest there at, during feeding, and the father has a night crawler in his mouth which makes it so dramatic. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: This had to be around 1985 or so. It was a church program and this is my, so to speak, a family program. From left to right, standing my sister, Mary, my father, myself, my niece, my baby sister. On the left seated is my oldest sister and my mother. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: It's upside down? There we go. That is my prize rose in my nature collection. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: The simplistic beauty of nature. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: This is a picture that appeared in the union journal approximately 1985. I was still a firefighter. Oh, so that was a fire coat. That had to be in the '70s [1970s]...