 Story_ID: 172435 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is David Allison Ogburn known as Oggi, David, D-A-V-I-D, Allison, A-L-L-I-S-O-N, O-G-B-U-R-N. Speaker 1: And you're, you're known as-- Speaker 2: Oggi, O-G-G-I. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a very marketing name. Oggi Ogburn has worked for me because what happens, I would see somebody that I've seen before and they might not recognize me 'cause we change our looks, you know, ponytails, Afros, whatever, whatever the (unclear). When I saw Ron Isley with a ponytail, I said, well, I'll get a ponytail now. And Ice-T had a ponytail so, I had a ponytail too. And so a lot of times people wouldn't recognize me, once I said Oggi like oh, oh, yeah, Oggi, I remember, yeah, how you doing, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that works. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Brooklyn Hospital in 1942, December 14, 1942, Brooklyn, New York [New York] and I love Brooklyn, man. Speaker 1: What is your occupation or type? Speaker 2: Well, I would consider myself a freelance photographer. I've been doing that for forty years. And in between I, I used to travel with a historian named Chancellor Williams. But mainly photography was my bulk of my income in forty years working for the music industry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I initially started at a radio station. I lived at a place called the Envoy. Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about all that, as we get- Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I just asked you what your occupation is. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 21st, my mother's [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] birthday was the 19th, and my niece's was the 20th which is yesterday, so that's the only reason I know it's the 21st. Speaker 1: Okay. October 21st-- Speaker 2: Nineteen--2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. at 1900 Lamont Street. Story_ID: 172436 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Right now I'm into Chinese dumplings. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I sort of dug Saint Martin's. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Employment of enjoyment. Speaker 1: Okay. That's right, you did say that earlier (laughter). All right. Story_ID: 172437 Speaker 1: So I'm gonna ask about your family history now. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and then we'll try to put 'em together. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Nannie Bell [ph.], Cabbell was her maiden name, Ogburn, Nannie Bell Ogburn now. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: You know, that is written down and I did send that into you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was born 1921. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: October 19, 1921. Speaker 1: And where? Speaker 2: Brooklyn, New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, my mother's far, family, I can go back to her grandfather was, died at a, she was in the hospital and the nurse came and asked her did she have a relative that was a 102 years old that had just died and it was her grandfather. And he was a farmer and he owned his own land in Virginia. I think it was the same area where Carter G. Woodson's people were. Speaker 1: What, what part of Virginia is that in? Speaker 2: I can't, I don't remember the county. I, it'll come to me but-- Speaker 1: Is it Mecklenburg [County, Virginia] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well Mecklenburg is the father's thing-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --mother's thing was different. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, different county. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. But now, now you were saying earlier you think you were, your family, you're related to-- Speaker 2: Carter G. Woodson. And they put down a plaque down in front of Carter G. Woodson's niece or daughter's store and that's when my family knew. Boy, I wanna say Borington [ph.] but that's not it. But it'll come to me in a minute, subconscious is working on that. Speaker 1: And you were telling me that you were, as a youth you were at a meeting of the Association for Negro American History and-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: And--(unclear) Speaker 2: Yeah, well that was here. Dr. Picow [ph.] was in charge. And what happened I was Walter Washington's campaign photographer and the association for the Study of African American Life and History did a little pamphlet on Walter Washington's campaign, and me and another brother was the campaign photographers. So at the association they had like the guys that did books, because they had published several books that were more historical, and when we went to that, I took my mother was with me and her cousin, Delmar [ph.], and when we said that we read Carter G. Woodson's, had started this organization, she said well Carter, we're related to Carter G. Woodson. And Delmar said he was trying to tell me but he didn't explain it to me the way that I, I really understood. But, you know, when you really get into the history of people's families, it gets kind of shaky down a certain part, you know. But the county's on the tip of my tongue 'cause I remember that's where they put the plaque for Carter G. Woodson because that was his birth place, it was across the street from an aunt's store. Speaker 1: Now would, would he be like, a distant cousin or one of them? Speaker 2: A distant cousin. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: That's definitely a distant cousin, nothing close. Speaker 1: Okay. And Woodson lived in [Washington] D.C. his-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --his whole life base, basically. I think he got his degrees. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So-- Speaker 2: 'Cause he started the organization that was just a one-week black history week and then eventually it became black history month. And he wrote a book called 'The Mis-Education of the Negro,' which was very popular. And I had the book but somehow it disappeared so, books can disappear, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So did you ever have an occasion to meet him? Speaker 2: I never met him, never met him. He had died before-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he died in '51 [1951] or '52 [1952]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 172438 Speaker 1: Now on your mother's [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] side, so her people are from Virginia, rural Virginia. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Her, her grandfather lived to be over a hundred. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you know his name? Speaker 2: William [ph.]. Speaker 1: William, okay. Speaker 2: Right Speaker 1: William Bell? Speaker 2: William Cabbell. Speaker 1: Cabbell? Speaker 2: Cabbell, C-A-B-B-E-L-L. Speaker 1: C-A-- Speaker 2: B-B-E-L-L. Speaker 1: --B-B-E-L-L. Okay. All right. So, all right. Were there any stories on your mother's side other than the Carter G. Woodson story? Speaker 2: Well, not really, not really. I don't really have many stories 'cause my grandmother [Cora Scruggs] had died, I never met her and only, the only people I do remember is my mother's brothers and my sister, and her sisters. We did, they were all, they were all pretty close. Uncle Fred [ph.] was, became a policeman. Uncle Earl [ph.], I never knew what he did but it seemed like he always had to use somebody else's social security number for whatever he was doing. And, and Aunt Helen [ph.] she lived with us for a while. She passed away and Aunt Grace [ph.] lived in the projects for fifty-five years. Speaker 1: Now this is the-- Speaker 2: The Fort Greene Projects. Speaker 1: Now, in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: In Brooklyn [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: In Brooklyn. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, yeah. Yeah, so Earl used somebody else's social security number, right? Yeah, so he must have been-- Speaker 2: I don't know what he would did, you, you know. He, my mother said whenever he took me out I'd be at a bar somewhere on the bar dancing and, he, he brought somebody to our house one time, and he said this guy's a singer, you know. And he said sing something, sing something, and my man said, "She wore blue velvet". So I remember that as a kid, you know. So that was Uncle Earl, you know, that was his thing. He sort of, I guess we say in the fast lane. And I have a picture of him and his boys, clean, clean, you know, back in those days everybody was clean, even if you just went anywhere. You pressed your pants, your shoes were shined. And it was in the '60s [1960s] when sort of that, that look sort of changed 'cause growing up, even me as a, I would be pressing my pants, shining my shoes, even wore a tie and shirt when we went to parties, you know. And but, I, I really, I really had a blessed life. I've had a blessed life even from the very beginning. I went to Andrew Jackson High School in Queens [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Now, I don't wanna get to there yet. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We have to get your mother's side (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But did your mother grow up in Virginia or did she-- Speaker 2: No, my mom grew up in Brooklyn [New York, New York]. She was born in Brooklyn and grew up in Brooklyn but the relatives was in Virginia. So every now and then, when she got pregnant and had a child I would be, be down in Virginia with some relatives and they would tell me, oh, you got a little sister, oh, really, (laughter) you know. And the next time I went away, you know, you got a little brother, okay, so. I think they would ship me off when my mom was pregnant though, but everybody was born at Brooklyn Hospital [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 172439 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] have a chance to go to school or anything like that? Speaker 2: Well, she went to high school, graduated from high school at sixteen but she was, my mother was a seamstress, and when I asked her what, what would you call yourself, she said a dressmaker. 'Cause I know she did a lot of wedding dresses for a lot of people, family members and people in the neighborhood and she could look at something and draw it and, and do it. She was very good at that. And she hustled even when she was in high school, sewing. So sewing was really how she really got over, you know, her adult life even. Even today she, you know, I got pictures of her, you know, still sewing or fixing the preacher's pants or whatever. Speaker 1: Did, do you know what her parents did for a living (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, grandpa, when I met him he was sort of like hanging out in a candy store, and I don't know if he worked there but he would be in the candy store, neighborhood candy store, not, about five or six doors from where he lived. And I remember he gave me a dime and I was real young, a dime got you a lot of candy back in those days. Speaker 1: Was that in Virginia? Speaker 2: No, this is all in Brooklyn. Speaker 1: In Brooklyn, okay. Speaker 2: Right, nothing was done in Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Everything is Brooklyn [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 172440 Speaker 1: --Was there a story about why the family [Ogburn's maternal family] moved to Vir- it may seem obvious? Speaker 2: But what happened, to be honest with you, my grandfather could have lived on a reservation, they were Indians, I don't even know which ones they were. But my mother [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] said because they couldn't own any property, they could live on it, but they could never own it, they decided that they didn't wanna do the reservation thing. So they moved into Brooklyn, New York [New York]. And to be honest with you, they lived around the corner from my grandfather's [Reverend John Taylor Ogburn] church, where my father [Archibald Ogburn] lived. Now around the corner was sort of like the uppity people and my moms came from an area that wasn't really, not the area was, was, was a bad area but it was more like white people and, you know, 'cause my mom wasn't a good cook in the early days. And, you know, beef stew wasn't that seasoning but as she got older she learned how to cook real good, but I mean she came from an area where there was a lot of white, you know, kids that she grew up with, you know. It was sort of like a mixed neighborhood. But, you know, my moms-- Speaker 1: Did, did she grow up like as, as an Indian? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: She grew up regular school, you know. But, you know, she, she-- Speaker 1: What I mean is, did, did she consider herself an Indian or an African American? Speaker 2: Well, she, was an African, I know that. But she really, I really, you know, to be honest with you, that area of the family was like so much white, my, my mother's cousin who went with me to, to the Carter G. Woodson thing, he was sort of unhappy because if you had a certain amount of black blood you was considered Negro. But he had in him so much white blood but he was brown but, you know, he, he, he, he preferred being white more so than anything else. He dumped his woman from twenty-one years and married somebody very fair, who worked at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. And by him, by his wife working at the White House, he got bartending jobs there, and that's my mother's first cousin, Delmar. And Delmar was like old, older than my mother and she sort of looked up to him. I guess he took her under his wing when he came to Washington. And a lot of the family on my mother's side was out of Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we'd go visit Philly every now, Uncle Saul [ph.] and Aunt Bessie [ph.], who I really never got to know, I was younger and, you know, would, I would sort of go to their houses be kind of bored, you know, 'cause I'm a young guy. I'm wanting to play baseball or whatever. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: But that was my mother's side really. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 172441 Speaker 1: All right. Well, let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name, spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay. His name was Archibald Allison Ogburn. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born August 3, 1918. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, where was it, in Mecklenburg [County, Virginia]? Speaker 2: No, he was born in Springfield, Ohio. Speaker 1: Oh, Springfield. Speaker 2: My grandfather [Reverend John Taylor Ogburn] had a, a missionary thing up there and he turned the missionary into a church. And Springfield, that's in Springfield, Ohio? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, Springfield that's right outside of Dayton [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: In between Dayton and Columbus [Ohio]. So he had a Episcopal Church there? Speaker 2: Right, my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's where my father was born while he was up there doing missionary work and eventually the missionary turned into a church in Springfield. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So did your father grow up in Springfield? Speaker 2: No, he mainly came to Brooklyn [New York, New York]. My grandfather end up having a church in Brooklyn, and him and his brothers, they mainly grew up in Brooklyn, Brooklyn, New York. The name of the church was Saint Cyprian's [Church], is what I was telling you about. Speaker 1: Okay, Saint Cyprian. Now that's a, that's a, one of the black saints or one of the African born saints-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: --is that what they say. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustine. Speaker 2: Yeah, well Saint Cyprian's was the name of my grandfather's church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On Boerum Street in Brooklyn, New York. Speaker 1: Okay. So there was a method, you know, there was some, some, somebody was conscious of that probably when they named it Saint Cyprian's. Speaker 2: Yeah, probably. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He, he, he was the one that started the family reunion, him and his, my grandfather and his first cousin who lived in Newark [New Jersey]. The one in Newark was a, he owned an insurance company, and they got together and said we want our children to know each other like we knew each other. They knew each other in Mecklenburg County. My grandfather was the oldest and he sort of left early, the first one to leave, and he might have been a lot older than the next one in the family but it was like eleven of them all together and my grandfather was the oldest. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So, what is your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: His name was John Taylor, Reverend John Taylor Ogburn. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So he, he pastored, he, he started a missionary movement in Springfield, then ended up pastoring a church in, in Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Saint Cyprian's? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandfather went to Saint Paul's College. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And that's where he met my grandmother, at Saint Paul's. And her name was Christina Rodriguez [ph.], and she was from Antigua. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: But when she came here, she changed her name from Rodriguez, which was kind of negative back in those days to have a Latin name, so she changed it to Rodrick [ph.], but her name was Christina Rodriguez and she was from Antigua. But she went to Saint Paul's College in Lawrenceville, Virginia. That's where the college was, which wasn't too far from Mecklenburg County. But it was a different county, I forget what the name of that county was. Story_ID: 172442 Speaker 1: Did your father [Archibald Ogburn] go to college too? Speaker 2: He went to Saint Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia] for a minute but I don't know the circumstances but he never graduated, and like I said, his whole family was there. See, when I went to Saint Paul's my father's first cousins were coming and bringing me food and chickens and stuff like that. And to be honest with you, when I first went to Saint Paul's, I didn't know anything, anybody down there but I had a lot of family there. So my mother and father drives me down to his aunt's house, who her name was Aunt Lizzy [ph.], and I'll be honest with you, when I walked, when we got out the car, this crew of people started walking towards us, got off the, came off the porch and started walking towards us and Aunt Lizzy was kind of tall and big, and the look on her face was a genuine love that I had never seen before. And that's when I knew I was really in good, good hands when I met them. Because she was my grandfather's youngest sister and he was a reverend and I was the oldest grandson, so she was meeting me for the first time, they might have met me before but I was baby, but this is the first time I'm meeting them as an adult to go to college and the love, the, the expression on her face was something that I had never seen before. Speaker 1: So I guess it's a, it's a deep history, your family deep history on your father's side with, with-- Speaker 2: Very deep. Speaker 1: --Saint Paul's. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did the other family members teach at the college or work there? Speaker 2: They didn't teach at the college but they all graduated from there and taught down in that area. Basically most people that went to Saint Paul's when they left usually became teachers. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: You know it was more like that. I took social studies when I was there, and most likely if I hadn't left I would have became a social worker, 'cause a lot of people, you know, they either became a social worker in New York or I don't think I had the credentials to be a teacher, you know. But a lot of people that went to Saint Paul's became teachers, even when I came to Washington [D.C.] everybody I met up here was, was teachers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Still are, you know, retired now a lot of 'em. Speaker 1: Now, now what, what did your father end up doing for a living then? Speaker 2: Well he started out as a bus driver in Brooklyn [New York, New York], and then his older brother, his younger brother was a correction officer, and his younger brother was a, a, a captain in the Department of Corrections and he brought my father over to the Department of Corrections. And because the both of them worked for the Department of Corrections, during the summer when I would go home for the summer, I worked for the Department of Corrections, and it was deep, walking into a prison and the doors clanging behind you, even though you're working there (laughter) it's really uncomfortable, you know. And, and so you got people giving you x-rays and doing this and that and they got on this white uniform and I'm just assuming that they were, you know, working there but they was the inmates, you know, inmates had a lot of the jobs, you know, the cooks and all of that really were inmates. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And unfortunately, I ran into a lot of brothers that I knew from my neighborhood that were there for stupid reasons because at one point, I started out selling commissary, that's the pies and razor blades and cigarettes and stuff. And then I, one time I also went through the mail, went through the mail 'cause we always took the money out of the mail-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --you know, 'cause the inmates we didn't want them to have money 'cause they could bribe people. But that's what they did, my father was a correctional officer until he died. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 172443 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn and Archibald Ogburn] met? Speaker 2: Well, all I knew is that my father was from the reverend, Reverend [John Taylor] Ogburn's group, son, who was the, the bourgeoisie around the corner. My moms was, you know, with the, I don't wanna say lowlife but the people that didn't have as much as the the, the uncle, you know, Reverend Ogburn's crew. And my moms was light-skinned with, with straight hair and, you know, that was very attractive to us. And what happened, because of all my father's brothers, my grandfather was so strict he'd get 'em up in the middle of the night to bring chairs to the church, so soon as they became twenty-one they all went into the service. So my father, my father was in the service [U.S. Military], okay, and my mother was home with me. So my mother took me to a Billy Eckstine concert, and I was maybe about seven or six or seven, and she's at that, we're at a Billy Eckstine concert and when he started singing a certain song, named "Jelly, Jelly, Jelly", she jumped up and was screaming and I, you know, I see, I never seen her excited like that before, I asked her was Billy Eckstine my father (laughter), you know. So it was kind of funny years after that I did meet Ed Eckstine, Billy Eckstine's son. Now Billy Eckstine did go to Saint Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia], he, I don't know what happened. Speaker 1: Didn't-- Speaker 2: He also went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. And so I followed in his footsteps Billy Eckstine, you know. Who, who when I got to meet his son, his son became a record executive who I worked for, you know, he was an executive up here and I worked for his peons down here. And I-- Speaker 1: That's a strange-- Speaker 2: --got to know him. Speaker 1: --that's a kind of a strange connection but it was (unclear) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with Billy Eckstine or the-- Speaker 2: And I also told him that he almost was my brother, you know. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: The son, you know. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: From that, I told him that particular incident. Speaker 1: (Unclear) your parents got married, so you were born in '42 [1942]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you have any, do you have any older brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: No, I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: You're the oldest, okay. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So they got, so did they get married in like 'forty [1940]-- Speaker 2: I know I was born-- Speaker 1: --before the war [World War II]? I mean-- Speaker 2: No, during the war. Speaker 1: No I, I know you-- Speaker 2: My father-- Speaker 1: --were but, but did they get married before the-- Speaker 2: Well, my father was in Okinawa [Japan]-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: So it might have been, I, I (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: The war starts in '41 [1941]. Speaker 2: Well, that was, that was, that was the Second World War was '41 [1941]? Speaker 1: Yes, right, right. Speaker 2: Well, I was born in '42 [1942]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --so he might have been, he, he, they might have gotten married I, I really, I might have to-- Speaker 1: But was he stateside before, I mean when you were born? Speaker 2: Yeah, probably. Yeah, he probably was stateside but he, I know he ended up Okinawa 'cause when he came home, he brought us kimonos that were very nice, you know, fancy from, you know, satin, silk, whatever-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --from Okinawa. Story_ID: 172444 Speaker 1: How would you describe your parents' personalities? Speaker 2: My father [Archibald Ogburn] was a hard worker, you know, and he was a father that fathers are supposed to be. He was strict with us and he took care of business and he, you know, he would joke every now and then but he was more like why don't you get up and cut the grass (laughter) or, you know, why don't you get up and do something, me and my brother, you know but this is while I was in high school and my brother [Robert Ogburn] was about six years younger than me but we shared the same room and, you know, and, but we got along for, my mother, whenever he would get on us, my mother [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] would always tell him well look these kids ain't been to jail, they ain't did this, you know, a lot of kids in the neighborhood, when you grow up in a certain neighborhood most of the cats didn't even graduate from high school. That's why one of the things my mother told me as, as a kid going to start in high school, she said all I want you to do is pass, you know, because other people wasn't even finishing high school, neighborhood kids. And so I told you what my average was, and so that's what I did just, just pass but I end up doing the same thing in college and for undergrad and grad I would just pass, never, she could have also said get As but she said I just want you to pass so, that's the way I took it. But moms really took care of me and I think I might have been her favorite child because I always dressed nice, she always saw that I dress nice and she would make, she told me, I, I didn't understand this at first but she told me this later that, whenever a sheet wore out, she would take the sheet and make shirts with 'em, with, with the sheets. And so I was telling her I'm getting tired of wearing these white shirts all the time, you know. So that's when I started, she started buying, you know, different shirts for me. But she really kept me kind of clean, I, I, I was looking good during high school and even college. I was away at Saint Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia] and I was visiting a good friend of mine who was at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], and I went to visit him and some friends of mine from New York came down to hang out with us at Virginia Union's homecoming, and my mother sent a box with a seersucker suit in it, bailon [ph.], red bailon shirt. I mean, it was a great box 'cause that's, you could hang up that seer, seersucker and that sucker would just hang down, the wrinkles would leave. So I'm a mama's boy and her birthday was day before yesterday, she turned ninety-two. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So she's still alive? Speaker 2: Yeah, she's still alive and still kicking it-- Story_ID: 172445 Speaker 1: So, you got a brother [Robert Ogburn] born in '48 [1948], is that it? (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: My sister [Nancy Hunt] was born in '48 [1948]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and my brother was born in '42 [1942], no my brother was born, she was born in '48 [1948]. She's five, he's six years younger than me, I'm seventy-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and she's five years younger than me, so they were tight, those two. Speaker 1: So, so your sister came first? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: And then my brother. And, and-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --and I was, I really went away at eighteen so I never really grow up with them. And I really didn't get to know them because once I went away I really never came back. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: You know, I've been here forty years now in Washington [D.C.]. I did go home when I graduated from undergrad and got married for a hot minute, had a daughter-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but that didn't work out, even though I had gone with the girl for seven years before we got married, soon as we got married it went (making sound), you know. Story_ID: 178592 Speaker 1: --Your brothers and sisters can, can, can you name them for us? Speaker 2: Okay. My sister is Nancy Ellen Hunt [ph.], is her married name. Speaker 1: And she was born like-- Speaker 2: '48 [1948] Speaker 1: '48 [1948], okay. And your brother? Speaker 2: His, he's Robert Cleveland Ogburn [ph.]. Now, he's named after my mother's father Cleveland [ph.] that was his name, Cleveland Cabell [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And William Cabell [ph.] was his father. Speaker 1: So, he, he's younger than, than-- Speaker 2: Than my sister, a year younger than my sister. Speaker 1: So around '49 [1949] then, is it? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: He must have been born in '49 [1949]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, well tell us a little bit about are they, are they artists, too? Speaker 2: No, my sister end up working for American Airlines. She was gonna come down and move to Washington [D.C.] but she went for a job interview and she got the job. So she end up working for Lorillard [Tobacco Company], is a cigarette company in the beginning, and she eventually ended up at American Airlines, and I think she stayed there until she retired. And I don't know if she has, we're talking about 25 years and possibly that long at American Airlines. And because of her working at American Airlines, you know, you know, that's how when I, when I was getting divorced and came back to Washington she gave me a ticket, you know, one of them fam [family] tickets or something that you can fly, sort of, you know, when back in those days, it was easy for family to fly if you had somebody who worked for the, company. Now my former wife, she worked for Swissair and before we got married, she would hook me up with a student, we could get student flying passes, and I, we would go to Jamaica on the weekends, you know, 'cause she worked for Swissair and, and so Jamaica for the weekend and then come right back and that way you had student fares back in those days. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: Is your sister still around? Speaker 2: Yeah, she's still here and we talk kind of regular, you know. We got Skype. Me and my brother talk on Skype just about every other day. Speaker 1: Okay. And what does your brother do? Speaker 2: He was, started out as a printer. And he got transferred to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and at Pittsburgh things didn't go well and then he came back to New York [New York] and he was a plumber's helper for a while and, and, and then he sort of, he, he's retired now. He went, he was in Vietnam [The Vietnam War], and when he came back from Vietnam, I don't think he was all there because now he's sort of living, even though he's sixty-five or sixty-three, or whatever, he's into the, the, the Vietnam thing on, he plays, plays a lot of games now on the computer, games, war games. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And he's even hooked up on through, through the Internet with guys he was in the service with. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And they play war games, you know. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And he has a Purple Heart which I wasn't aware of, and he has a Purple Heart 'cause he got wounded while he was over in Vietnam. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he, he lives with my mom, he lives with my mother [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my sister, she has two kids and they're all, both are grown now and they're on their own. Her son graduated from Saint John's [University, New York, New York] and her daughter graduated from Hunter [College of the City University of New York, New York, New York], and her daughter's in graduate school now at Hunter but, you know, that's my sister's family. Story_ID: 178593 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory, I always was in love with women, girls. I always loved the opposite sex. And at five years old, I lived in Brooklyn on Madison Avenue [New York, New York] and there was somebody, I don't know if she lived in my building or next door was a, was a little girl named Senada [ph.]. And I remember us both being in the back of the building and we did a, we, we, we did each other's tongue, we just tongue, weren't no kissing but, but each other's tongue and that was my first thing I remembered. We also had a, a white dog that was called Lucky [ph.]. And I do remember when my father [Archibald Ogburn] came home one time we was playing, it was like one bedroom, the living room, and the kitchen, it wasn't a big apartment on Madison Avenue, right around the, right across the street from the original Boys High [School, New York, New York], the Boys High has moved to another place now, and we were around the corner from Concord Church [The Concord Baptist Church of Christ, New York, New York]. Concord Church was a big church around the corner, a Baptist church in Brooklyn. Speaker 1: And that's the one that [HM] Gardner Taylor became the pastor of at some point? Speaker 2: I'm not familiar with, you know,--(Simultaneous) Speaker 1: It was the biggest black Baptist Church in the country. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Now I know. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Concord Baptist Speaker 2: Okay. I got you. Speaker 1: So--(unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: But my family also, there wasn't, my family really belonged to the Cornerstone Baptist Church [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: It was another church in Brooklyn, you know. 'Cause even, we, we had some of our family reunions at Cornerstone Baptist Church. Speaker 1: So, so was that your mother's church? Speaker 2: No, my mother's [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] church, I don't really know what, who, where her church was but she did take me to a Baptist church. I don't know if she was a member there or not but my mother must have grew up in a Baptist church. The only reason I'm saying that is she knew all the songs when they would come up with songs. And, you know, I, I, you know, Episcopal church, you know, the songs was very boring and, you know, very, but her church was alive. And, and I say, well I don't know if it was her church, she just took me to a Baptist church where she might have had family members but most of my family was, belonged to Cornerstone Baptist Church which is another church in Brooklyn, which was my father's nieces and nephews, grandfather's nieces and nephews went there. Speaker 1: Okay. But so did you go to your grandfather's church [Saint Cyprian's Church, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I was an altar boy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I burnt my hair, you know, I was a altar boy from the beginning and because I learned how to-- Speaker 1: Now wait, wait a minute let's, tell us about that. Speaker 2: You know, when you carry the candles? Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And, you know, every now and then, you know, I burned the front of my hair by mistake. And when I got up, you know, it would be kind of boring 'cause I was young, and he'd go into his sermon and I would get really comfortable and probably (making snoring sounds) but I was like, you know, eight or nine. And, and, you know, and like I say my father didn't go, my uncle didn't go any more, they went in the service to get away from all of that. So my uncle would always say that he had a church disease, which means that he couldn't go to church anymore and I'm sorry that there's no cure for that, (laughter) you know. So that was, that was his gripe. But they sort of went in the service early because my grandfather was so strict that he didn't even give 'em a key to the house. When they came home late they had to whistle and either my grandmother or somebody would know it (whistling) and, you know, we still use it every now and then, me and my cousins we play with it but, you know. I can't do it real good right now, though. Story_ID: 178594 Speaker 1: So was your father [Archibald Ogburn] strict himself? Speaker 2: He was sort of strict in a way, he didn't play. And it--to me, he was a father, the way a father's supposed to be. Kids nowadays ain't afraid, you know, they ain't afraid of their parents no more. Well I was not afraid of him but he was strict to the point that you didn't mess up. And by going to church it sort of kept me in line. Where a lot of boys in the neighborhood, you know, they were, you know, messing with the heroin and, you know, the crazy stuff and was selling crack, whatever. And my mother [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] knew the whole neighborhood, all the young guys and saw 'em grow up and sort of, you know, saw a couple of 'em get killed and, you know, shot and,(unclear) you know, drive-by shootings and stuff what was on my block. But I had been interviewed by "Impact Magazine" and I said I grew up in the ghetto, my mother when she saw that she said "you didn't grow up in the ghetto. We owned our home." So, you know, that was, and, and I think one of the things that they did, I have to admit, I was telling you about the apartment in Brooklyn but after that they bought a house, a brownstone on Lafayette Avenue [New York, New York], and they've owned homes ever since. And my father, a lot of times we didn't see him because he'd get up, he was a bus driver did a lot of overtime and a corrections officer to do a lot of overtime because he was the only one working. My mom's did a little hustling with the sewing and, you know, she did wedding dresses and stuff like that but that wasn't like every day kind of thing but she would, she was a dressmaker, she said but she was more of a seamstress 'cause she could do anything. She could look at a picture and, and draw that, and, and, make that dress for you. Speaker 1: Okay. So did, did you tend to favor or, we were talking, talking about church, did, did you tend to favor a Baptist church or-- Speaker 2: Well, what happened when we, we moved out to Queens [New York, New York] (unclear) I was an altar boy at another Episcopal church called Saint Albans the Martyr [Saint Alban the Martyr Episcopal Church, New York, New York]. And me and my brother [Robert Ogburn] were altar boys there, my cousin, Dennis [ph.], was an altar boy there. And even though we would be out all night drinking and hanging out, that morning, seven o'clock in the morning I had to be at church, you know, ringing them bells and, you know, the minister would come in, the priest would open, you know, he'd, he'd smell all the, you know, that Wild Irish Rose or Thunderbird, you know, but 'cause I was, I was a partying individual. I hung out a lot. But my, didn't play about the church. You had to be to church every Sunday and, and when you, and in the morning the first service was at seven, so you had to be there at seven even though you came home at three, get up out of the bed and you go to church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I went there for a long time until I went away to college really. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I was altar boy at Saint Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia] too. I was sort of like doing that for the teachers, you know, giving them that good boy look but from New York [New York], jumping on all the ladies like crazy, you know. Speaker 1: But then, other than, I mean so like, spending a lot of time in the church-- but it seems as though you got a lot of your values from your father in terms of what to do (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. And he was a hard worker. So it was no, no problems for me to work. You know, I was a shoe shine boy for a minute. You know, I caught the flu was, when I got the flu being a shoe shine boy I remember me and my brother was in the bed together sick and, you know. You know, after that I tried to be a, work in a grocery store but my first day there I was dealing with something in the window and backed up too far and knocked over a whole bunch of sodas and that was the one day at Dilbert's [ph.], (laughter) you know. But other than that I was student mainly, you know, even though I wasn't a good student, but I did go to school. I wasn't playing hooky and none of that stuff like a lot of guys, guys did-- Story_ID: 178595 Speaker 1: --Now where did you start school? What was your first school? Speaker 2: You talking about elementary or high school? Speaker 1: Elementary. Speaker 2: My first school was, elementary school was in Brooklyn called P.S. 45 [New York, New York]. And in that playground is where Connie Hawkins [Cornelius L. "Connie" Hawkins] and those guys played basketball. That's how I got to know them. And Eddie Simmons [ph.] and a bunch of those guys played for Boys High [School, New York, New York]. And after we moved to Queens I went to P.S. 15 [New York, New York]. My mother [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] always wanted a place that was near, wanted a house near the school. So when we moved to Queens the school was right up the street, so I end up growing up in the playground, that's where I really learned how to curse. My mother, in the house I would hear words like bitch, maybe or shit maybe but in the playground you heard MF and, you know, (laughter) a lot of different kind of curses. And so I, I played it and I would, and in the playground you played stickball. It was another game we used to play called kings, you know, and I had a bunch of different friends. One of the things that I did learn as a kid in Brooklyn, was I got that confidence because at one time we used to flip cards, I don't know if you had baseball cards we used to flip 'em. And the rough guys was on Clifton Place [New York, New York] and Greene Avenue [New York, New York]. I lived on Lafayette Avenue [New York, New York], it was Clifton Place and then it was Green Avenue. Over that, those two blocks was where the rough people that went to welfare wherever, but we all became friends in the playground. So this one tough guy, named Robert Stancil [ph.], me and him flipped cards and I won all his cards. And believe it or not, I'm getting ready to tear up, that gave me confidence. Confidence is the most important thing an individual could have. And I got the confidence that if I could beat these rough dudes then, you know, I'm cool, you know, I mean I'm just as good. So I played sports with them and I, my uncle and my father [Archibald Ogburn] came and watched me play baseball one day, softball rather, 'cause the playground was right up the street I told you, and they was watching me and, and I did good. I hit the ball to the fence and so, you know, you know, my pops, you know, my father was proud of me, you know, 'cause, and then that, that after that he told me that because of the couple of hits that I got that we won the game because of, of my hits and a couple of other hits too. So, you know, so I played a lot of sports as a kid, stickball on the playground. And kings was when you hit up against the wall. We didn't, I didn't get didn't get into handball that much until I moved out to Queens but I wasn't in to that much, I was more into basketball at that point when I got up to Queens. And I remember before I left Brooklyn I was asking this guy Cherry [ph.], I forget his first name, Horace Cherry [ph.], I said Cherry, can you show me how to do a jump shot? And he was able, just beginning to show me how to do a jump shot and then we moved out to Queens. Unfortunately my best friend was named Tommy Boone [ph.]. We were learning how to dance and we just, I was twelve years old, we just learned how to dance and we're getting ready to go to, we might have went to our first party. So when I left, when I moved up to Queens, I wasn't out there no more than about two or three weeks when Tommy, I had to come back to Tommy's funeral. He started hanging out with the, the rough guys and I think he might OD'd [overdosed] on heroin. Speaker 1: How old were you about at that time? Speaker 2: twelve or thirteen years old at that time. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) was he about the same age? Speaker 2: Yeah, same age. And, and like I said when we were best friends we were just learning how to dance and hang out, and evidently when I left he started hanging out with the, with the wrong crew. And about, my mother took me to the funeral, to the point that I don't even remember it, you know, I had to keep asking her what, you know, but I know that other guys in the neighborhood told me that he, that me might have died of a drug, OD'd trying to hang out with the older guys. Speaker 1: Now, I'm guessing that was unusual for those days for a, a young man that young to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it really was. Speaker 1: --OD. Speaker 2: Yeah, but there were cats shooting drugs though. Horace Cherry's brother, Leon Cherry [ph.], even though he ran track and was good, he would, he would leave a party and say I can't wait to get, get home and shoot that needle in my arm. So they were doing that back then, you know. And I'm talking about '50 [1950], '55 [1955], '56 [1956], 'cause we moved to Queens in '55 [1955] I believe, or '56 [1956], you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My best friend, Tommy Boone. And I also got a letter from somebody, you know, I, I said he was, his name was Hugo, he came from the West Indies but my mother saw where he was at and he had written me from jail. So, you know, and we, we talking about young guys, so if he had did some and got in trouble, maybe shoplifting or something he wouldn't be in a penitentiary or anything like that probably in some kind of young person's prison, you know, you know, home or whatever. So, you know-- Speaker 1: But were-- Speaker 2: I have been exposed. Speaker 1: --were, were gangs an issue growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well in my area growing up was the Stone Killers [ph.]. When we moved out to Queens our gang was called the Night Owls [ph.]. But we were sort of more, because we were athletic, we went to a lot of neighborhoods where we was acceptable because of the sports. And my (unclear) did the, the--(Simultaneous) Speaker 1: So were the gangs like they are today, I mean they were-- Speaker 2: Well, the gangs, well let me tell you. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Fort Greene had the Chaplains [ph.]. Where I lived was, was Lafayette and Classon was like the Stone Killers was on Clifton Place, I was telling you the rough guys, and some of them might have been on Greene Avenue too, but Uptown was like El Quintos [ph.], the Sloppers [ph.]. You know, there was, you know, but there was other groups of Chaplains [ph.] too but Fort Greene was where the Chaplains were mainly and then some other groups might have called themselves Chaplains 'cause out in Queens there was a group they called themselves Chaplains also. It was--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Chaplains-- Speaker 2: It was City Chan [ph.] and City Chan, Sheik [ph.] and Bop [ph.], they were the Chaplains out there, Little Frank [ph.]. And I met Little Frank in jail when I was working Raymond Street [Jail, New York, New York]. You might not remember that but Raymond Street was, was one of the roughest jails in Brooklyn, and then they built a newer one called Brooklyn House of Detention [New York, New York], but Raymond Street was where I first went and that's where I saw cats that I knew-- Speaker 1: You mean-- Speaker 2: --older guys. Speaker 1: You mean to help your, I mean to-- Speaker 2: To work in the commissary. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --during the summer. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 178596 Speaker 1: My first job for working in, in for the, for the prison was Rikers Islands [Rikers Island Prison Complex, New York, New York] really. Because I remember the warden came to me, I was working with gangsters they were like the mafias, were the ones that ran that commissary. And so the warden came to me, he was a brother, I guess he and my uncle and my father [Archibald Ogburn] knew I worked there, he came to me and says if anything, you know, if you don't like what's going on, if anything happens, you let me know. You know, but I was cool with everybody so-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and I'm pretty friendly and kind of, you know, it worked out pretty good. Selling, you know, and, and if I ran into somebody I knew I would give 'em a pie and I'd hook, you know, take the money out of my, my little, you know, 'cause, you know, they, a lot of guys in jail don't have anything. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: 'Cause a lot of times people will throw you, when you're in jail you're not productive, and just like if you're in an old folks homes, you know, people, you know, they don't care anymore unless their relatives or really close relatives. Story_ID: 178597 Speaker 1: Let me go back to school again just ask you, were there any special teachers or mentors when you were growing up in school? Speaker 2: Well, there was a teacher when I was in elementary school at P.S. 45 [New York, New York], there was a teacher named Miss Martin [ph.], she was sort of teaching us art. And what happened was I did a self-portrait of myself, and when I showed it to her, she asked my mother [Nannie Cabell Ogburn] to come to school. So my mother [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] came to school and she said to her, Miss Martin told my mother that your son is pretty talented in art, you really should send him to Pratt [Institute, New York, New York] which wasn't, really wasn't that far from where I lived. And my mother said, well does that cost money? And the teacher said, yeah, it does cost money. She said well he, you know, he can't go there 'cause we didn't have the money for that. And, and after Miss Martin was Mr. Sett [ph.], he taught the seventh grade and the seventh grade was where I read my first book. For some reason I said I wanna read a book, I pulled out this, I probably read books, not reading a whole book, but this book was read about otters and it, you know, I read the whole book and, and next thing I knew that was (unclear). I, I saw a thing just recently, "Animals" about otters, you know, so, that was the first book I read was about otters. And I, I live across from the zoo, the zoo was right across the street, you know. So that's why you see the cheetahs up there. I, I got a whole thing on all the animals. Speaker 1: So the Brooklyn Zoo [New York, New York], you were right across the street from the Brooklyn-- Speaker 2: No, no I'm right across the street from the zoo now, National Zoo [National Zoological Park, Washington, D.C.]. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: That's, okay. Right, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: National Zoo. Speaker 2: But, and when I was in New York, in Brooklyn we always, all we did was go and see the Brooklyn Dodgers at Ebbets Field [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, we, they always gave the kids in the ghetto a bunch of free tickets, you know, fill up the school, you know, fill up the stadium and stuff. Speaker 1: What, what was Jackie Robinson playing? Speaker 2: Jackie Robinson, Duke Snider, Carl Furillo, Pee Wee Reese, who was in left field? Aww man, I used to know everybody on the Dodgers. You know, Duke Snider was my favorite, he was center fielder. And, and the [New York] Yankees were the enemies. You know, the, the white people were into the Yankees, the black people was into the Dodgers. Roy Campanella, so even when I moved out to Queens, Roy Campanella and all those guys lived in Saint Albans [Queens, New York New York], so I got to meet their sons, not that I hung with these guys but I got to meet Roy Campanella, Jr., Frankie [ph.], Jackie Robinson, Jr. I think he didn't come from Jackie, I think he, he might have had a different, different mother or father something, but he was kind of spoiled and kind of got in trouble a lot, Jackie Robinson's son, I believe. But Roy Campanella's son was kind of cool. But these guys grew up with, you know, with the silver spoon kind of thing, you know, they're fathers as baseball players was making decent money then, they wasn't killing them like they do now. But then, you know, Saint Albans was the place, Lena Horne lived there, Brook Benton lived there, Count Basie lived there. Count Basie had the swimming pool that all the bourgeoisie would go swimming at his pools. Wife would hook up the, to see where the way the girls, when they were coming out they would call that the, the cotillions. You know, I never got invited to cotillions. I didn't eat no breakfast, I should have ate breakfast I didn't get invited, you know, we wasn't in that side of the tracks. But my last year in high school I had to do an extra six months because of, of gym, I didn't get, all I needed was a dental note and I could have passed the gym, but because I didn't get a dental note I had to take a bunch of gyms my last six months which was extra to get out of high school. I sort of crossed over to the, to the bourgeoisie side, you know, and had the fine ladies and my best friend had gone to college then. And we still wanna talk to, well, to make a, my best friend in high school, we never talked about college. College never came in the conversation in my house. So I went by my best friends crib one day, and this was the same one that was going, that went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], I went by his house one day and he was kind of down. I said what's the matter with you? He said I didn't get accepted to Delaware State [University, Dover, Delaware]. What? You applied to college. Well you, and I, I have to admit, I took the ghetto mentality, wow, man later for you then, you know, in my mind, you know I didn't say that to him. So he goes off to college and I said well, later for him, you know. But when he came back home Christmas, I started meeting his friends that went to Virginia Union that lived in our neighbor, in our area but I didn't know em, you know. And, you know, I says, you know, they were cool to and so they had parties, you know, coming home for the, you know, for Christmas there was parties. So when I graduated in January, my first job was, was I became a office boy. Speaker 1: This is January 1960-- Speaker 2: '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: '61 [1961]. Okay. Speaker 2: I'm a office boy. My first gig I got was a office boy. We took these exams, one of my boys end up being in the warehouse and I'm ending up being an office boy with this office, with the, with these people, you know. And I was like, you know, flunky around the office. If they needed, and the office that I worked in was a clothing manufacturer. They had a department store in Fort Lauderdale and they ordered the clothes to, for Fort Lauderdale [Florida] but they would check out the clothes first. So they would have sample clothing and they would like take 'em, have me, they would rip it and take it to a place to have it tested to see if it's the same thing that they bought and, you know, it was, it was a lot of finagling going on. And I would get a couple of samples that they would give me 'cause they didn't need any more, and I would take 'em home and give 'em to my sister, and my sister [Nancy Hunt] to this day tell me I gave her a coat that she loved and she couldn't, my mother made a dress for it and, you know, and I wasn't even aware of all that, you know. 'Cause I said, yeah but I was much older than them and when I left for school I was like eighteen, they were still like, you know, twelve, and eleven and so we really didn't grow up together that much. I got to know them after I came home, you know. Story_ID: 178598 Speaker 1: --Talking about you were, graduated from high school, you're working in the garment industry. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: For a company called-- Speaker 1: --as an office boy. Speaker 2: --they bought clothes for apartments, department store in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. And after that job, for some reason they were cutting back and the, the, they had, and would not, they get, well they didn't need me anymore and my next job was at Ideal Toys [Ideal Toy Company]. Ideal Toys was out in Queens [New York, New York]. And in the summertime, that's when they would build all the toys for Christmas. And during this period it was a lot of Puerto Ricans coming to, to New York. And a lot of them worked at Ideal Toys. And it was their job, it was their job but I'm doing it as a, just, excuse me, as, even as a high school student and, you know, I'm there doing, working on the assembly line. And because I have an imagination, I can work boring jobs but my mind would be a lot of different places, I was very creative that way, 'cause I also stuffed mail, that's another story. So what happened on the weekend, when the weekend came I worked from four to twelve. My boys were saying well we having a party Friday. So on Friday, not really having no responsibilities, I tell the, the big guy that they had in charge, that I won't be coming back after lunch I gotta a toothache, he said well don't tell me, tell the guy up front. I said I'm telling you, you're the, you're the guy back in charge back here. And see, see they would give the big guy, they say you in charge but it would really be somebody else that's really in charge they just put him, gave him a little token authority. So when I came back Monday I had a pink slip, you know, I got fired, you know, 'cause they had people that was, you know, it was a real job to them and, and I couldn't even keep up with them. My hands were getting blisters trying to do whatever I had to be doing. So I had called my grandmother out of the blue and said, Grandma, I wanna go to college. 'Cause I had my boy come back from the Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and it didn't seem to be that bad but initially I did had that negative attitude that he would even think about going to college 'cause we didn't talk about it, we never knew about it, but he ran track. And by him running track all of those guys was looking for like scholarships and, you know, college, and plus his family said that he was gonna go to college even though I wasn't aware of it. Story_ID: 178599 Speaker 1: --Did you play ball [basketball] in high school? Speaker 2: Not really. I played ball during high school time but it was the AAU [Amateur Athletic Union Boys Basketball]. It was those, you know, I wasn't on the high school team but I was on other teams. And a matter of fact, won a lot of trophies 'cause we had a, the team that I was with we played regular. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: So it was the same guys. Now, the, the leader of the team, his name was like Weldon Lefleur [ph.]. Weldon was the ball handler, and he's the one that put us, put us together. And my best friend was Leroy Clark [ph.] we called him Slick [ph.]. Another person was Kay [ph.], was Richie Clay [ph.]. Richie Clay eventually played on Howard's team, he came to Howard with me. And the other one we, and our big man changed because back in those days you just had one big man to get the rebounds. So we had Waldorf Fuller [ph.] would be one time and then we'd have Montgomery [ph.] would be the big man or either one. But four or five of us really played together. And since Weldon also ran track, he broke us, him and his boy, he went to Aviation [ph.], his track team from Aviation broke a record at the Penn Relays. So what we would do, we'd get up early in the morning and go to the track at, at Andrew Jackson [High School, New York, New York] and we'd be running with Weldon. So when we played we were all, we never got tired. I mean, we would be playing all day full-court but because we ran track with Weldon, he used us, he let us start off and he'd be way back to catch us. But the team that he had at Aviation, they broke a record of, of time, you know, broke a speed time at Penn Relays. And but Weldon was good at-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --riding bikes. He was also good at shooting pool. He was the guy that gave that, that extra effort, and he became good at shooting pool cycling, running track, and basketball. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And because of him I got my game, basketball game together. I played it every day and I loved it. And one of the friends of mine who was, grew up with us out in Queens [New York, New York], he went to a Catholic school, and I really didn't know him that well, he didn't go to our high school but as I became an adult we got to know each other very well, his name was Sonny Dove. When he got out of, he went to Saint John's [University, New York, New York], and he was the most valuable player in the All-Star Game. I'm a mailman in Washington [D.C.] and I see, I'm at somebody's, delivering mail and their door was open and I'm hearing Sonny Dove most valuable player, you know, for Saint John's. And so in the summertime when we were young, he would have a charity game and that's when Earl The Pearl, Clive [ph.], Clive, what was Clive's name? Speaker 1: Drexler. Speaker 2: Not Drexler. Speaker 1: Oh, Frazier. Speaker 2: Frazier-- Speaker 1: --yeah, Frazier. Speaker 2: --and Willis Reed. And all these guys would come to the party after the charity game. And you know, it would be the party. And Kareem [Abdul-Jabbar, formerly Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor, Jr.], he was good friends with Kareem. I met Kareem and, Kareem was real tall and had a little head before the Afro thing happened. And Riis Beach was the place that, when we were young, before college now, we would all go to Riis Beach and that's where all the basketball players would be. Wilt Chamberlain, all the women in the world from the Bronx [New York, New York], Manhattan [New York, New York], they would, Riis Beach [Jacob Riis Park, New York, New York] was the place that brought everybody together and on Sundays. And that's where all the basketball players would be out there. Wilt Chamberlain was a giant compared with a lot of us. And a lot of professional basketball players-- Speaker 1: So, so playing ball didn't get you a scholarship or anything like that but it got you-- Speaker 2: Kept me out of trouble. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) out of trouble. Speaker 2: And, and it also-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) basketball players-- Speaker 2: --it also I was able to move around, even though it was gangs and stuff but I was able to go in different territories. And we would go play, I, one of the guys on the team was named Bob Soltis [ph.], he played for LIU [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York, New York]. And Willie Williams, he, he scored certainly in high school, he scored like forty points and he was exceptional. But we traveled to other areas, you know, as a basketball team on the weekends, and we'd play other teams. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: I mean other games. We, you know, we'd just go there to play, it was, a school yard ball, you know, but it'd be with professional guys. Of course, when I played, when we played, when, when I was older and really played I mean it was like John Brisker he played, see a lot of these guys came out of the ABA [American Basketball Association] 'cause I think even Sonny came out of the ABA but he, and then they sort of merged with the NBA [National Basketball Association], you know. Speaker 1: They, they played in the ABA before they-- Speaker 2: Then it became N, NBA. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: 'Cause Sonny eventually became a Net after he left Detroit [Michigan]. He was messing around with a guy in Detroit named Richie [ph.], somebody Harding [ph.], who was real tall but he became a, got into drugs and, you know, a seven-footer can't be breaking into people's houses. So he end up getting shot doing something but that was Reggie Harding. These cats that wouldn't stand up during the, you know, Sonny was like a rebel, they wouldn't stand up during the, you know, the, the, you know, Pledge of Allegiance and they were just radicals and so he didn't last that long. But he end up eventually with the Nets, that's what I mean John Brisker, a guy was a guard for the, for the, he was a guard for the, for the Boston Celtics in, in the year that they won, he played with us, Willis Reed played with us. Curly Neal was a [Harlem] Globetrotter but he, he played with us to in the summer. This was all during the summer where these guys wanna stay in shape-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --you know. And-- Speaker 1: So this is a whole world of people-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that were celebrities on some level and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --having (unclear)-- Speaker 2: But, you know, when you grow up playing basketball all your life, you become good at it, you know. And to be honest with you, I would be out at night playing basketball by myself on the street lights because my thing was, I was basically a shooter, nothing else. I wasn't a ball handler and I was a shooter and, you know, I averaged about twenty-five, twenty-six points a game and, I, I loved basketball. And even when I went to went to Saint Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia], I didn't make the team because the foot, you know, the football players was big burly guys and here I'm the fancy guy shooting left and rights and behind the back stuff, and the coach wasn't into that kind of stuff, New York ball kind of thing, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 178600 Speaker 1: Okay, so at Saint Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia]. Now, so your aunt gets you into Saint Paul's, right (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather [Reverend John Taylor Ogburn] was on the board of trustees there. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. Speaker 2: And I called up my grandmother when I got fired from Ideal Toys [Ideal Toy Company, New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --I said grandma I wanna go to college, 'cause my boy come back from college, and I saw college as a, I looked at it in a different way. You know, I had taken the attitude that well he's trying to get an education, he's trying to be like white people and whatever, just dumb ignorant stuff, you know. And so, so when I go to Saint Paul's, like I said I had never seen a college, I had never been on a college campus. So now Saint Paul's is in a rural area called Lawrenceville, Virginia. And it's this little small town where the blacks had to sit in the back of the movie theater or in the balcony and, you know. So what happened is when I first get there, I have a, a jewel, I had a chain that I needed to get fixed so I went to the jewelry store, and the girl, it was a young teenager in the jewelry store, she wouldn't even come out from the back because they wasn't used to black people coming in there, you know, unless maybe it was an adult there or something. So when she saw that I was a college student and I wasn't coming in there acting crazy, she did come out, I said I need to get this fixed, and but then I, when I would sort of saying like wow, I ain't never, in New York [New York] we never experienced nothing, they did it another way in New York. So the same friend of mine, we go to visit, I'm at Saint Paul's now, and my first year, I had never seen a college before so, you go to the football, first football game they're playing Howard University and the, the football field was just a field that was cleared with two by fours as the, you know, the stands. So I had, I never seen a college so I figured that's the way all the colleges were. So we had beat, we had beat Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] so I'm saying, wow, man this is great. So I also had a girlfriend who was a senior in high school and I was a freshman in college. So when she graduated from high school, she went to Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia]. And because of my first year at Saint Paul's, I got all Cs and one Ds 'cause I tried to transfer to either Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] or Virginia State because she was going there. And so when I went to visit her, Virginia State was, was, was blew my mind. Had a, a real football field that had a track around it, it wasn't no bleachers, you know, the bleachers was real bleachers, and so that's when I said I gotta get out of Saint Paul's. So my second year I got into booking real heavy. All I did was try to study and eat, come home, and study. Speaker 1: So, so you, you started in what '62 [1962] or-- Speaker 2: '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: '61 [1961], okay. So it was the same year that you graduated-- Speaker 2: From high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: So I'm at Saint Paul's and I got all Cs and one D the first year. So I couldn't transfer, even though I didn't know what other colleges looked like, I was just saying I wanna transfer to, my girl is going to Virginia State, I wanna go to Virginia State. I wanna be with my love, you know. And so when I went to visit her, by the time I got up there she had another boyfriend and so that's when I realized, you know, distance does make the heart grow fonder. And it, its say, and Virginia State wasn't that far from Saint Paul's but, you know, she was real pretty, sheltered. Her father was a principal at a high school and he wouldn't even let me take her to the prom because, you know, I was a New York guy and, and I, you know, he just, you know, it was his princess and here this slick dressing guy. I went to a high school dance that she, they were having at Russell High [unable to verify]. And I had always, always had a trench coat, London Fog type, you know, that flips and belts, and so when I walked into the high school, (laughter) I had my collar up, and I went through the door and everybody looked over and said, Caroline [ph.] look who's here, that kind of thing. You know, in a country place, you know, they very, you know, a lot of things that you would take for granted is exceptional to them, you know. And so that was our, my relationship. And I know Pops, you know, I went to, I took my family to visit her house, her father didn't even come out to meet to my family but me and her mother, her mother was my teacher, and her mother gave me a A. And when I had the best grades that I ever had in my life 'cause I wanted to transfer, they kicked me out of Saint Paul. I'm home in the summertime, good grades B average, and they said I had, you know, that I didn't live up to Saint Paul standards. And they, that's when I showed you the dirty room thing. And I'll show you the letter, you know, that they sent me. They said I didn't live up to Saint Paul standards, I didn't take a shower on a regular basis. And the way that came about was all three of us was from New York, Buckey [ph.] was from Buffalo, my other roommate, Johnny [ph.] was from the Bronx. And in order to get all, get rid of all three of us, what they did was take a cigarette butt and put a date on it, and they flipped it, we had a bunk bed and a regular bed and they flipped it in the corner of the bunk bed and came back a month later and it was still there. So that's what they used as a justification to say that we didn't clean our room and take showers, and they really the fun. I could see them sitting around drinking scotch, my girl's father who didn't really want me dealing with his daughter and, and, you know, the dean of the school they all were the elitist, the elites around that area, you know, the black elites, you know, and so they were probably drinking scotch saying, "We gotta get rid of these guys from New York", you know, my man is, you know, he's, yeah, "I better not catch him and, you know, with his hand up my girl daughter's dress or anything," you know. "We gotta get rid of them, them New York guys they troublemakers." And so that's how they got rid of us during the summer. Story_ID: 178601 Speaker 1: But fortunately I had great grades. And I got a letter from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] accepting me. Now the reason I think I got accepted to Howard was, a lot of the doctors' and lawyers' sons was starting to go to the white schools, integration had started. So Howard was sort of, had filling in a void, you know. And great, and because my, Saint Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia] was a place that everybody studied at the same time where, you know, midterms, it was a small place, five hundred people. So you knew all the students, you knew all the teachers, everybody knew each other, it was a family. And I really appreciated Saint Paul's more than I did Howard 'cause when you get to a school like Howard, which really ain't a huge school, but you're a number. You know, you're a number and plus you have a lot of distractions. First of all, there's a lot of guys at Howard hanging around Howard that graduate, that didn't graduate, that flunked out but they still around and they know everybody so when it's time to study, they wanna party. So you start then, then I joined a frat called New Gamma Alphas [ph.] which was NGA, no got the average really, but it was the New Gamma Alphas and we were just like any other fraternity. Speaker 2: Are they still in existence? Speaker 1: Well the guys are still around but, you know, that eventually it became Wine Psi Phi. That was became, eventually New Gammas became Wine Psi Phi. The younger generation became Wine Psi Phi. But yeah, I still run around, well the, one of the new Gamma Alphas is on the board of trustees at Howard now, his name is Larkin Arnold. He was a record executive. And he's the one that sort of dealt with, with Michael Jackson, when Michael Jackson had, first record was 'Off the Wall,' the record company loved it. When he came out with 'Thriller' the record couldn't understand that. But Larkin, who was a lawyer, said well, look I don't wanna deal with a salary, I wanna get points on this particular record. And, you know, what 'Thriller' did. So he became a millionaire overnight, and next thing I know I'm visiting him and he's living in a million dollar crib. And while I was at his house, I'm at his house visiting him, I'm visiting my cousin in California but I'm but he's, since he's out there, hey, Larkin I'm over, I'm in California and once he saw, you know, I went to visit him. Speaker 2: Now, now we're jumping ahead to what year?-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --well, yeah, and then see I want you to tell this story but-- Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: --but what, what year is it? Speaker 1: This is 19-- Speaker 2: Is this after 'Thriller' came out? Speaker 1: After 'Thriller' came out. Speaker 2: '80 [1980], '80 [1980]-- Speaker 1: No, no, no, okay. Speaker 2: 'Thriller' came out, the record came out in '78 [1978] I think but the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Well-- Speaker 2: --became a big hit as-- Speaker 1: --well-- Speaker 2: --over the course of a couple years. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: Well, well it was in '78 [1978] is when I was at his house. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm in California and I get a call from Buddah Records [later Buddha Records, New York, New York], a girl I know got a job at Buddah Records, and she calls me up at Larkin's house, evidently somebody told her where I was or whatever, and she said how much do you charge a day, 'cause I want you to go on the road with me, with Melba Moore, and in this was in '78 [1978], I said, I didn't know what to say. I said a hundred dollars a day sounded like a lot to me. So I said a hundred dollars a day and, of course, Rick [ph.] comes over that's great. So we're gonna need you for twelve days. Okay, this is 1978 now. So prior to, prior to that I had gone out to Denver [Colorado]. Speaker 2: Now, let's go, now wait before we start another story I wanna go-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --take you back to Howard, and we will take you back to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you're starting at Howard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and what was your major at Howard? Speaker 1: Sociology, minor psychology. Speaker 2: All right. Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and before we stop talking about Saint Paul's, was there any, any particular teachers or mentors at Saint Paul? Speaker 1: Well, there was a teacher, I don't even remember his name, but he sort of was teaching history from a black perspective which I had never heard before and it was sort of, it was sort of, it got my interests, okay. But when I went to Howard I had, I had already taken my history courses so I didn't have to take any more history when I got to Howard. I had did two years at Saint Paul's now, got the good grades and knocked out my history requirements, so I didn't get a chance to, to do any history stuff at Howard. Sociology, psychology, you know, we had to take, it was heavy as hell, it was statistics and humanities, and, you know, and I, I, I was running with the, what happened, my girlfriend in New York was pregnant, so my mother [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] had me living with her cousin, Delmar [ph.] who I was mentioning with you when I went to Carter G. Woodson, so they never had any children and they're my mother's age, and so I was staying with them which wasn't cool, so I was staying with some friends of mine-- Speaker 2: And Delmar liked to party, you said he was like the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, yeah. But it wasn't cool for, for my thing, my point of view. They were more elitist. They thought they were elite, you know, because she worked at the White House as a maid but that gave her access to the kitchen where she would take my daughter to, to eat hamburgers and stuff at the White House in the kitchen, you know. And so that was, and so that didn't work out. So at the same time that I'm supposed to be living with them, I'm really staying with my boys. They had a mattress under one of the beds that I'd put out every night. And they had a car so I would drive to my, Delmar's house and maybe pick up some clothes and stuff. So one day a friend of mine was at Delmar's house, when they came home, the wife went off because I had somebody there, and so Delmar went off on her and so that's when I said it's time to leave. So I end up moving out into a friend of mine, whose grandmother's house wasn't far from Delmar's house, and I end up moving there and rented a bed. He would rent out beds, forty dollars a month. So I end up being with a couple of other guys. One of the roommates that I had that I slept across, had grew up around the corner from me, his name was Arthur Trotman [ph.], he had a little TR3, TR4, rather, and that's when I, sports car. So what happened at Howard, I had sort of flunked out my first, I had been there two years and I flunked out and because I had flunked out, I got a job at the post office. When you flunked out at Howard you could either become a campus, a Capitol Hill Policeman or you worked at the post office. Speaker 2: Now this is--this is--what year did this happen? Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965]. This is 1965. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 178602 Speaker 1: So I flunked out of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] but what I do, I'm working at the post office, because the post office made us work overtime all the time, you were sort of like forced to stay, I didn't get a chance to spend any money. So I had enough money built up, but I had a little car that my father [Archibald Ogburn], I bought a car from my father for 750 bucks [dollars], which was a cam, I forget what it was, but it was a car, one of those cars that didn't have much to it. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: What do you call those cars? Compact cars, I guess. And so I traded in, when I was working at the post office, I didn't get a chance to spend any money because I'm working all this overtime. So I had built up a little collection, so what I did, was I traded in my car and I bought a brand new MGB, 196 MGB, and I'm still working at the post office at the time. So I'm going to American University [Washington, D.C.] at night to take two courses, and if I pass them I could get back into Howard, which was a lot cheaper. American University was charging sort of like a $150 a credit, so a course, one course would be like three hundred fifty bucks [dollars], I'm a mailman taking just two courses and, you know, didn't have no money because of, you know, expensive AU [American University], so I couldn't wait to get back into Howard. I, working at the post office and I do get back into Howard in 1967. Okay, I leave the post office, I'm running, riding around Howard with a MGB loving it, having, having a ball. I'm a blessed individual at this time in my life to have a sports car, be at a school like Howard, and women loved it, they loved me, and I just had a ball, and I graduated. I got a letter I can show you to where they told me that you have registered with, without, you have registered but you're still on probation. Now you can leave school now, or at the end of this year, you're gonna have to have a point, a two-point average to get out to, to stay. And if you don't have a two-point you'll be banned from Howard forever. So the last semester, last year, you know, I'm booking again. I'm, you know, I gotta get this two-point thing. And to bring up when I flunked out, I messed up a little bit a couple of Fs maybe but I got a couple of As and, you know, to, to balance out. And when it got to a cross point I had, see, I had seen my, I was going to an advisor and I saw my, see they had gone, went out the room, and I opened up my thing it said, he will never get the average to graduate. And that was the determination that I'm gonna graduate. So in 1968 man, I had, it was three roommates. One of 'em was in graduate school, two of 'em was in graduate school, one of 'em, worked at the Giant [Supermarket, Washington, D.C.], and I was the only one that was an undergrad. And, you know, I got into the books. And the last teacher that I needed to, to get that grade, 'cause I told you my moms [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] told me I just want you to pass, so, you know, two, you had to have a two-point to get out, so I graduated undergrad like a 2.6 [grade average], you know, just, just made it, you know. And so when I graduate, I go to, go to New York [New York]. My first job is a social worker at the [New York] Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children [New York, New York]. And, and I had a little argument with my father where, you know, only one man can run this house. It was a argument over my sister, she got a phone call at ten o'clock at night and he said I told you, I thought I told you not to get calls this late. I said well Dad, ten o'clock ain't that, really that late, you know. And if I'm twenty-one she must have been fifteen or whatever. And so me and him got into it, he said well only man can live in this house and give orders or talk back, whatever, so I end up moving out. I loaded up my little MGB and end up moving to The Village [Manhattan, New York, New York] with a friend of mine who had like a, was, his apartment was no bigger than this. You know, he had to roll back the screen that's where the kitchen was, you know, that kind of thing. And I got a job as a social worker. So eventually I end up moving in with another brother up on Park Avenue [New York, New York] and then from there I end up getting a house out in, apartment in Queens [New York, New York] and that's when I got married. Story_ID: 178603 Speaker 1: I got married-- Speaker 2: Now, where did you, was that the same woman you were going with? Speaker 1: Right, I had been goin' with for seven years. She had come down to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and hung out and partied and everything, and I'd go to New York [New York]. But I had girlfriends at Howard too, you know, 'cause she was in New York, I'm having fun down here. And so we got married, that lasted about a year at the most, you know, and so I end up coming back to Washington [D.C.]. So when I was leaving my house in New York, my mother [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] was saying 'cause she, to make a long story short, she threw boiling water on me. And so I had this burn and so that was a justifiable reason to get out of that marriage. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: 'Cause it was kind of hard to say I don't love you no more and we had been together all these years. But that was cool, it got me out of the marriage. Even though when I went to the barber shop, you know, the cats said oh, look Oggi got burned and, you know, I was the talk of the town, whatever. And I'd be on the subway and girls would be giving me some play on this side, and once they saw that side with them blisters and, you know. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But you know, I end up coming back to [Washington] D.C. and I used cocoa butter and the cocoa butter sort of healed that side. People might see a couple of the scars there a little bit now 'cause I didn't use the cocoa butter on the body so they can see it real good there. But, you know, I came back to D.C. to work at Big Luke's Auto Parts Store [ph.]. Now my, after I was a social worker, my next gig was corporate America working for General Motors. My uncle that was a corrections officer, also was sort of halfway politician, he got me a job, he got this Ruth Allen King worked for the [National] Urban League, and Ruth Allen King got me a job with General Motors. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: At that time in 1968, was when I graduated from college, was when there was the riots, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had got shot, and there were riots all over and then, and, and the corporate America found out they didn't have any blacks in management and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Right, now '68 [1968] that's a pivotal year. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But prior to this you were, the activities you were talking about before working in corrections [The Department of Corrections] during the summer and stuff, you were doing that-- Speaker 1: Right, in school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (Unclear) school (unclear). Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --after graduation-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My first gig was at the [New York] Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, social worker. Any complaint that they got about a kid I had to investigate, my area was Harlem [New York, New York]. And it was during the same time that this movie that's out now, where Denzel was the drug king of Harlem-- Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --he worked for Bumpy and all of them? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'American Gangster,' right, yeah. Speaker 1: That was the same period that I was a social worker in Harlem. Everybody was on drugs. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: Cheap drugs, the drugs were cheaper 'cause he eliminated the middle man, he had gone to Vietnam and, you know. So, you know, so a lot of the people, a lot of times, I would have to go to a house because their uncle who was on dope, the kid found the dope under the sink and, and he would hold the kid out the window by the arm kind of torture him, don't you touch my stuff again kind of thing. Somebody would call it in and I'd have to go investigate it. It had gotten to the point that I would go into an apartment, we're still talking about Harlem now, there's guys hanging out on the steps and I would go in upstairs, there'd be a guy on the roof, and they would try to, you know, get me in the middle to rob me but I was, you know, I was a street guy, so I sort of would suspect stuff. So I would go with another guy that worked with me, and he carried a gun even though it was illegal. We were officers of the city but we wasn't, you know, officers of the city as far as our work, but we wasn't allowed to carry, you know, weapons or anything but it was a dangerous thing because during that period a lot of the girls were like prostitutes had kids that they wasn't taking care of right, and I would go and they'd be flirting with me and, you know, all kind of crap. It might be a West Indian family where the guy had daughters from the first wife, and now he got a new wife so he puts the daughters who are really too young to live by themselves in, in one rooms in some apartment building and you get the report and you would go there and say you're living here at sixteen years old, who the parents were, I mean, my parents, you know, they live up, so I would bring 'em in and, and I would tell the father well you can't, these kids are too young to live by themselves, this would be like sixteen and fourteen, you know, and, and, and it would be like a West Indian thing. I'm not knocking it but, you know, that's, those are the kind of the cases I was dealing with. Some of them might have been incest, you know. And what, that, that really wasn't that big but I did go to apartments where roaches would be walking all over the place and wouldn't be no big deal and, you know, it was just an experience for me 'cause I was, I really was a middle class brother but grew up in the ghetto. So I, I sort of could, could hang on both sides 'cause I told you growing up in Brooklyn[New York, New York], Clifton Place [New York, New York] and once I got the confidence, you know, I, I had no fear. And, and even as a, walking around Brooklyn I had no fear where other guys would go in certain neighborhoods and somebody would take their coat or their shoes or whatever, you know, said wow, you know, that never happened to me. But, you know, I just never had that fear, always had the confidence. And I think confidence is one thing that I got flipping cards, and after that confidence came a lot of other ways because I would gamble and doing different things and certain things would work certain things wouldn't work. Story_ID: 178604 Speaker 1: --Mentioning photography, at this point now we're in 1968, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Had you shot any pictures, had you-- Speaker 2: In 1968 I had a camera--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Or were you drawing pictures (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --or, or-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't doing that. I had a, I bought a camera from one of the guys that worked at the post office, I shot one roll of film. I went home for some holiday and somebody robbed my apartment and robbed the camera, the Polaroid, my diamond ring, I had a lot of jewelry that I had gotten from the jail giving guys cigarettes but it was no big deal 'cause, you know, it was a young guy who lived across the hall that did it but, you know, no big deal, you know. So that's, photography didn't happen. So when I come to New York [New York] to get married and blah, blah, blah, I'm coming back to school, got me a, my B.A. [degree], now a friend of mine, when I get back to Washington [D.C.], a friend of mine said do you wanna go to graduate school? Look man I ain't got no money to go to graduate school, I, I ain't even thinking about graduate school. School ain't, you know, hey, I'm not a school guy really. He said well they pay you to go. Okay. That's a different thing. The National Institute of Health [Bethesda, Maryland] was paying people to go to graduate school in Urban Studies, okay. So, and actually I'm getting like, my rent at the apartment was like a $110 and I'm getting like three hundred a month from, they call it a stipend, stipend I guess you call it or fellowship, no I think it was stipend, whatever one of those, and so this is when I'm in graduate school and I'm teaching myself photography because-- Speaker 1: How, how, how, did you become interested in photography and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --what was it? Speaker 2: When I came back, I told you my sister gave me a Rangefinder camera, that my cousin had given her, he brought back from Vietnam [Vietnam War] and gave her. Now a Rangefinder camera is where you look out the side, it's not like a, you know, the, the reflex camera you're looking through the lens-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but here you're looking through the side and, you know, the lens is over here and you're looking this way out of the (unclear) Speaker 1: What was, was it a good-- Speaker 2: It was a Yashica. Speaker 1: Yashica. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Electro Thirty-Five? Speaker 2: It was a good thirty-five milli [ph.] camera. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it was just a-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear) Speaker 2: --wide angle was on it. Speaker 1: Electro thirty, thirty-five-- Speaker 2: It was a, you know, you had to adjust-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was a, it was an amateur's camera. But it was, you know, you could take, it took decent pictures. So that's how I started. I developed film from that camera because I got a job in the summer working for a friend of mine like I told you, my girlfriend's, girlfriend's last boyfriend had left an enlarger at her, at her house. My sister had given me this camera, I get a job in the summer teaching kids photography where, with the, the, it was called Redevelopment Land Agency is who is, I'm working for which is under HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]. And the brother at HUD, now my best friend from Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] is the one that hired me to do the summer job. Speaker 1: Now this is here in [Washington] D.C.? Speaker 2: This is here in D.C. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I'm, I'm, leaving, you got the boiling water and I'm living in D.C. my mother's [Nannie Cabbell Ogburn] telling me you're, you're going back to Washington to get, get your life together. So I come out, I'm living with Big Luke [ph.] he has a auto parts store. I just left General Motors. Speaker 1: And Big Luke is your uncle? Speaker 2: No, he was my daughter's godfather. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: We just became best friends. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Okay. He had a little sports car and I, it was kind of surprising that, you know, he's a big dude and he had a little sports car, TR3. And so he opened up a auto parts store while I'm in New York. We met while I'm an undergrad, okay. We became friends while I was an undergrad. So he opens up a auto parts store, and I'm just leaving General Motors. And so he hires me, he didn't hire me, you know, I'm working for him two dollars an hour. Speaker 1: And just for those watching this, you're looking to the left because there's a giant, a big-- Speaker 2: Oh, right, right, right, right. Speaker 1: --photograph of Big Luke on the left that we can't see but-- Speaker 2: Okay, I got you. Speaker 1: --I just wanna let 'em know (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Right, right, okay. Yeah that's true. Speaker 1: A real powerful photograph, a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And I'll definitely send you that since I'm talking about it, I got him. Story_ID: 178605 Speaker 1: I'm working with Big Luke and what I'm doing is opening up the store every day and I'm sleeping on the couch that had a, had plastic on it, you know, the protected couch, so after a while that was getting kind of rough. So what happened, I was opening the store every day, and I didn't have no problem with that, so one time I said, Luke you're gonna have to open the store today because I wanna get a bank account going and I wanna do a couple of (unclear). He says well, well if you gotta do that then you better get yourself a room. I said oh, shoot a room. That really is talking ghetto talk, I ain't even (unclear). So what I did, I walked up 16th Street [Washington, D.C.] and went to all the apartment buildings and says I'm looking for an apartment. So I got to The Envoy [Washington, D.C.] and the woman says you got fifty dollar down payment and the rent is $110 a month. I said yeah, that's, that'll work. So I went, she showed me the apartment, it was like, The Envoy was a place where a lot of senators back in the day, senators and Congress was their second place. They, they came from their hometown but they would live in The Envoy 'cause the, of course, after the main building, it was like a, a hall, a driveway, and once you went through the driveway were some more apartments back here which was the efficiencies where I think the help lived. And that's where I moved back there, where the help lived. And that's where I met the guy who I told you came with the armful of records. And so I had got a job back there, and two mattresses was left in the apartment which was my bed. And I'm just thinking, you know, I didn't know who lived in there before but, you know, two mattresses was left and that was my bed, I got me some sheets and covered them up and (unclear). At that time, I had a daughter. When I, when I left New York my daughter was like six months old. And my wife had said well Traci needs a new bed. I said what kind of bed, you know, she needs a bed like Calvin [ph.] got, 'cause a friend of mine when we were, when I was married, I was hanging out with a friend of mine who had a child at the same time I had a child, and, you know, his wife was pregnant when mine was pregnant, so we hung out together a little bit. And she said I wanna get a bed like Calvin's daughter, I mean like Calvin's son. I said well what is that? So it ended up being a three hundred dollar bed. So my boy, Tom [ph.], who gave me a summer job and went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], tells me hey, look man, deal with the things you can deal with and the things you can't deal with you're gonna have to say later, you know. And at the time I didn't have no money for no three hundred dollar bed, to send her for, you know. And so I couldn't deal with that, so somehow she survived. But I did, I was giving her money, sending her money 'cause the court made me, the court maybe said I had to send her twenty dollars a week, eighty dollars a month kind of thing, 'cause I was only making two dollars an hour. So you go before the judge and the judge says well, a man needs sixty [dollars] a week to live. So if he's making eighty, he has to give up the twenty. But, you know, if you're making eighty, you know, they taking out taxes and all of that so, you know, it was crazy how that law went. And so, you know, so when I came back to [Washington] D.C., I'm, I'm in graduate school now, and I'm living with a, a young lady who, who was a partner, and, and while I'm living at this place in graduate school, I'm dealing with this photography thing. I set up a dark room in my kitchen. It was a big living room, a bathroom, and a kitchen, it was called an efficiency. So that was my, so that's--that's why my first lab was called Oggi's Kitchen 'cause it was set up in the kitchen. When I moved here, it could have been in the closet but I didn't wanna change it to Oggi's Closet, you know. Speaker 2: So-- Story_ID: 178606 Speaker 1: --This stage, did you see photography as like a hobby or-- Speaker 2: It was a, it was just-- Speaker 1: --part-time-- Speaker 2: --something that I liked. Speaker 1: --so but it was, okay. Speaker 2: Something that I liked. But my boy that lived around the corner, was the new music director at WHUR. So he's telling me-- Speaker 1: Now that's the fellow that you were telling me off camera-- Speaker 2: That I slammed the door on. Speaker 1: Well, well, tell, tell the story, he shows-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --up at your house. Speaker 2: Okay. So I'm playing, I'm living with a sister named Denise Preston [ph.] who was half Puerto Rican and half Black. So we were playing, we were into Latin, you know, Latin music and I'm from New York [New York], Palladium and all that stuff, enjoying it. So this guy knocks on my door and, you know, he has an armful of records. And he says, hey man, my name is Andre [ph. Perry] and I live around the corner. And so I was suspicion of him, he might have been the police or whatever and I just slammed the door in his face but eventually, he became my best friend. And he was the new music director at WHUR, and which exposed me to, I'm dealing with photography, learning it, teaching these kids in the summer, and he's telling me bring your camera to the station, Roberta Flack is coming by. And it was other cats that were usually taking pictures at the station before he got the job. They sort of took pictures in the music business in this area. So once I came on the set and I saw what was really happening, I didn't take the job the first time but the second time they asked me to shoot pictures this was the first time that they had a remote outside of the station and it was Roberta Flack Day. And I did say I'll take the gig then. Story_ID: 178607 Speaker 1: Okay, so Roberta Flack, like she's a Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] graduate. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: As far as I-- Speaker 2: And she had gotten popular at a place called Mr. Henry's, it, it was in Washington [D.C.]. So it was Roberta Flack Day and that, at this time, I did take the, the job. My boy says, and, and at the time, I had got a different camera from a friend of mine who wasn't using a thirty-five millimeters, this is why I put the Rangefinder aside and I'm using this thirty-five millimeter whose, the lens was kind of loose and I end up fixing that. So this is my first thirty-five millimeter camera. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Which was a Canon. Speaker 1: The single lens reflex-- Speaker 2: Right. First time. Speaker 1: --camera, okay. Speaker 2: And so I'm shooting Roberta Flack, I didn't have a flash so, I'm shooting, you know, with natural light and it came out pretty good. And while we, I was doing Roberta Flack, there was a guy from her record company, Atlantic Records, that was, he was gonna give her a plaque or a gold record or something, and he says Roberta Flack has made a lot of money for a lot of people and that stuck with me, you know. And so after that, you know, I was into it, you know, I sort of was developing film. And from that point on, dealing with my man, Andre [Perry], who's my best friend, he's the music director, he's the one that everybody's bribing and giving all the goodies to, to play their records, and he was the first one to, because WHUR the radio station was brand new and they had a philosophy of three-hundred sixty degree of blackness. So that's when they played Jimi Hendrix, Dizzy Gillespie, Phyllis Hyman, they broke Al Jarreau, and a lot of people that ordinarily wouldn't have gotten played, "Slave Driver", I forgot who made that, the "Slave Driver" and Hugh Masekela. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: You know, and all of those kind of guys, you know, they were playing. Herbie Hancock, you know, now this wasn't being played on other stations which were AM, and they were playing forty-fives, you know, more doo wop stuff the, you know. Speaker 1: Right, the popular-- Speaker 2: Right, right at the time. (Unclear) (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: --what they call urban contemporary. Speaker 2: And, and even, even, even at the HUR [WHUR] they were playing The Chi-Lites, you know, which was they didn't play, you know, that much on, on the AM stations, they were playing other stuff, you know. And-- Speaker 1: So but at this, this junction now, I think we kind of, we went over it so fast, but did you have any formal doctrine training or anything for (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Let me tell you this. During the same period that I'm getting into photography, I go home, my brother [Robert Ogburn] is developing a roll of film, okay. And he really didn't explain it to me, I just saw him doing it. The next day, I come here my boy, his name is Frenchie [ph.], Glen French [ph.], who lived up the street from here on Lamont Street [Washington, D.C.], is developing a roll of film but he was more like a teacher, yeah, you put in the developer and you do this and you do that which really, you know, you have to be a scientist because now the chemicals are already made up for you. When [James] Van Der Zee and these old guys got into photography, Decora [Camera] and them, they'd have to go to the drug store and have to make their own, mix their own chemicals and then put 'em on a glass plate, you know, in the dark and all of that. So when I got into it, the chemicals was already made, the, the developer, the fixer and the stop bath, you know. So it was a lot easier, you know. So when I got the enlarger from the girl and so I set up my darkroom in the kitchen. The first night I went in there, television went off in Washington around twelve or one or o'clock during this period, this is early '70s [1970s] now, and I went in the dark room maybe five o'clock and I'm developing pictures and I'm printing pictures, I can even show you some of them, and when I came out my girl was asleep, television was off, and I'm saying wow, you know, this is nice 'cause I could go take a picture of Jesse Jackson and develop the film and print the picture and use some rubber cement and put it on some board and stick it on the wall, and that's what I started doing. And then I get a call from, okay this is at 1900 Lamont, then I wanted, I mean this is at 1600 16th Street, but I wanna become a, a record promoter, I mean a, a produce shows, me and my boys, we gonna produce shows, okay. So I put up the rent money and, and we had a, a three day concert at Cramton Auditorium over at Howard [University]. But what happened is you got like four or five guys, we putting on this show, but nobody's ever did a show before, but they knew how to set up the equipment and sound system but I was the one collecting the money for the tickets that we had spread out in different stores. So if I was knowledgeable of that kind of industry, I would have went back and said we're not selling any tickets, we're gonna have to change up real quick, we're gonna have to promote it a little different, we're gonna have to do something different 'cause this ain't really working, but I had never, I didn't know, you know. So we went broke and because of that, you know, I had started, I, I, a friend of mine from New York [New York] lived in this building, and I think I was getting a notice saying, hey, you know, you know, if you don't come to court on a certain day, you know, they gonna put you out or whatever, so I started moving. So a friend of mine said there's a vacancy in this building. So I told you I lived in the back where the slave, you know, the quarters, not the slave quarters, but the maids and the butlers lived-- Speaker 1: This is at-- Speaker 2: 1600. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The Envoy. Speaker 1: Okay. The Envoy. Speaker 2: Okay. So when I come here, I go tell the landlord that I wanna move into this apartment. Well, what happened is my boy down stairs, he lives down stairs, that I grew up with in Brooklyn [New York], went to high school with, he lives here, and he said there's a vacancy in my building. So when I come over here, I meet the lady and she says well you have to go to their office. I go to the office at 1900 Lamont [Street], I wanna move in to 502. So when I saw this apartment man, it was all white and you looking out the windows and, and man I loved to have this place. So what happened is the landlord, the management company calls my girlfriend instead of calling the landlord where I was at, they called my apartment and she answered the phone and says, oh, yes he's a great tenant he, he pays his rent on time and so we both moved in here together, even had a little dog Pekingese dog, you know. And so I'm in graduate school now and I'm trying to get through graduate school, at the time she was in school, and then somehow she was not in school and the dog, and whenever you took a dog to the, to the, to the doctors it was like going to the regular doctor twenty dollars, fifty dollars, whatever. So she went home and came back kind of on the butterball side and I just say, you know, you need to get your own spot 'cause, you know, this ain't working out no more and, and so she end up going, going back to Puerto Rico and, and I'm in graduate school. So I set up my kitchen, I mean my darkroom back in that room there. And at this time I'm sort of rolling now, my first gig was Roberta Flack, next thing I'm doing, going to clubs because the, the, the pool that the record companies pulled from was people that was in School of Communications which Tony Brown was running at Howard, the School of Communications, and they also draw from the record stores, people that were like clerks in the record store knew about records and stuff so they would get pulled in the pool to become record promoters. Story_ID: 178608 Speaker 1: Now [William Anthony] Tony Brown's the head of the Department [of Communications at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] over there? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And your neighbor-- Speaker 2: Andre-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Was the music director at the radio station, WHUR. Speaker 1: Well, what's his name again? Speaker 2: Andre Perry. Speaker 1: Andre Perry, okay. Speaker 2: So the problem that they were having with Tony Brown, Tony Brown is saying is this school to teach the students radio or is this to become a radio station and be commercial. So Tony Brown didn't stay that long but he was, he was there when they started. And eventually [HM] Cathy Hughes, who was the head of the sales department, she had a bunch of sisters working in sales and they all had, had Mercedes, they all had Mercedes and stuff so they were selling stuff, so what happened eventually Cathy Hughes became the manager, program director of the radio station. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By this time Andre had left and he became a record executive at RCA [Radio Corporation of America] and that's when I started doing, working for the record companies but I had started meeting the record guys when they started coming to the radio station-- Speaker 1: Now, now-- Speaker 2: --when Andre was the music director. Speaker 1: Now who was around 'cause I, I know I asked you earlier about [HM] Dyana Williams being-- Speaker 2: [HM] Dyana Williams was on the air. Her best friend, Dianne Quander, who wrote "Rapture" for Anita Baker was Dyana's main partner. Another girl was Gwen Franklin [ph.], she was on the air. Sheila Eldridge was on the air. And they all became record, Sheila end up starting her own PR [public relations] company. She had, one of her main clients was Coca-Cola and she made a lot of money doing that. And Gwen Franklin end up going to graduate school. Andre end up going to graduate school to, he end up being a teacher in the end though, but he was a record executive and that got me RCA, and one of his boys was another guy that worked at Schwartz Brothers [Washington, D.C.], which was a distributor here, so I end up working, working for the distributor. A girl at the distributor end up being one of my girlfriends, was a girlfriend of mine at the time and, so I end up working for all the distributors, Motown [Records, Detroit, Michigan], they distributed Motown, Arista [Records, Inc., New York, New York]. See at one time the record companies would, you know, you know, it's better to go someplace where people know everybody. It's like if I wanted to go to Richmond [unable to verify] to do a concert, I would really get in touch with the people that gave concerts there and they would sort of be part of the, get a little bit of the chump change off the top, and they would take me to the people who I would need to promote my concert. And it was the same thing, you know, here with, with them with, with here. I mean all the girls sort of kept together when they got out of school 'cause Dyana, you know, she's on the radio still today. But Dyana, since you mentioned her, gave me my first one man exhibit at a conference that she was having with Sheila Eldridge, because she was plugged into, she had like three kids for Kenny Gamble, Dyana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so they had a conference in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and she said bring your pictures up. Now before that I might have had a, a little small exhibit in Brooklyn [New York, New York] where I grew up but this was a little different, October Gallery was a well-known gallery in Philadelphia run by, Redcross was his last name. And Redcross would also come down here and rent a hotel room with his art work and he would get work from me, and he would leave me and say I sold three of your pieces, I only charge like sixty dollars he might have sold 'em for 250 [dollars] for all I knew. Bob Marley or, you know, that would be people that I had but to me they was just regular, you know. And so he, you know, he was getting those kind of pictures and selling 'em and it was good, good for me, you know, 'cause I was just learning. And so Dyana was very instrumental and we became, one of, one of the pictures that Dyana loves of mine is a side thing of her with her fro and everything, and she puts it on Facebook every now and then and, and we became good friends. Speaker 1: About, about what year is this when you had the exhibit with Dyana? Speaker 2: Okay. We talking must be '90 [1990]-- Speaker 1: So it was much later after (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right much later. Speaker 1: --after you were-- Speaker 2: This was after I graduated from graduate school which was '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then I became a freelance photographer after that. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: That's when I started shooting entertainers and stuff like that. Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: '73 [1973] on. Speaker 1: So, so you (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: So I knew her in '73 [1973], so it might have been '73 [1973] when she might have, see she left the radio station and went to New York, I mean she, she was in New York for a while with, with Frankie Crocker and them guys. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: You know, 'cause she was fine and her best friend was fine to that spoke French, her name I forget her name but she was fine too, too. So Frankie was running around with these two fine, Dyana's Latin and this other chick was Creole or whatever, and, you know, what Frankie was doing, so she worked at the BLS [Bureau of Labor Statistics, Washington, D.C.] for a while. But eventually she end up going back to Philly [Philadelphia], I mean hooking up with Kenny Gamble some kind of way, and she end up working in Philadelphia BADAS [ph.] or whatever, and now she's working at a Cathy station, 'cause, you know, Cathy Hughes eventually end up owning like sixty radio stations. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And now she's into the television thing now. Story_ID: 178609 Speaker 1: But this is the beginning of a lot of, I mean this is the (unclear)-- Speaker 2: When I graduated from undergraduate school--when I graduated from graduate school, which is in '73 [1973], okay, I'm, I know photography a little bit now and now I'm free. I began three different part-time gigs. One of them, I'm a sound man at the D.C. Black Repertory Company [Washington, D.C.], I'm an assistant sound man. Speaker 1: Now this is a company founded by [HM] Robert Hooks? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Robert Hooks? Speaker 1: Vantile Whitfield [co-founder of the D.C. Black Repertory Company with Robert Hooks]-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) Vantile Whitfield, right, you hit it right on the head. Vantile Whitfield's wife was Lynn Smith [Lynn Whitfield], was, was, Lynn Smith but she end up (unclear) you know, Whitfield now. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Was the, you know-- Speaker 1: Exactly right. Speaker 2: --yeah, right. And I seen a lot of different things. Now I didn't know she was married to her, 'cause she was his best friend's daughter because, yeah, his best friend from UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] was a big, was a dentist and, and they were from Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Dr. Valerian Smith. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Damn how you know that though? Speaker 1: I don't, well-- Speaker 2: You're doing your homework, brother, I mean, I mean you must know them from other things. Valerian Smith, I think he was a little sweet, too, but, you know, that wasn't no big deal. But he had wrote this, this play called "Changes", and Lynn was the star of the play. And he had brought a music director, a music guy that came from Baton Rouge. And we, this one night that we were, were taping the show, the play was called "Changes". And one night while we're taping the show I'm the sound, assistant sound man, we got a tape up in the booth and, you know, we're taping everything. So it gets to a point that Lynn has a singing part. So when she sings the part, she was off key and flat, so she comes up to the booth where the guy is playing the piano and says, did you give me the right note? And so he said, now this is the, the play is still going on, so she's up in the booth saying, "did you give me the right note?" he said "yeah, I gave you the right note." She said, "you didn't give me the right note." He said, "Bitch you can't sing." And she smacked him, pow, and all of this is, you know, audience is out there, there's, this is a really little booth they had made on the side, that they had the music, and she, she smacked him and he, you know, he packed up his stuff and went back to Baton Rouge, and so they end up working out though, the play ended up being pretty, you know, end up doing pretty good but that was one little episode with Lynn. I mean Lynn was a little spoiled brat, obviously. And she, I, I, I dug her but I knew she was married (unclear). I liked her, I was the sound, you know, when you come into the theater, it's like an apprenticeship, you know, and, and because even Sidney Poitier's daughter worked there. And she's going to school for business but I'm at the theater to learn theater, you know. 'Cause when we were talking to her and she was talking about her driveway was like a, a quarter of a mile before they got to her house and the bus would leave her off, you know, at the front of the gate or whatever and she said we'd have to walk to our house, and I'm saying like walk to your house a quarter mile who, who, who is this girl, Sidney Poitier's daughter, you know. I got to meet her, years later she was doing something else over in Baltimore [Maryland]. So that was the D.C. Black Repetory. When you come in there-- Speaker 1: Now was this, this, was this the theater on Georgia Avenue [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Georgia Avenue. And when I say I graduated from graduate school, my first job was, I, I was a photographer, I thought I was a photographer, and I also had just met Chancellor Williams. I had read his book, I had gone to Egypt, this is all that '73 [1973], '74 [1974] period. Speaker 1: Wait a minute we have to go through this. Some of this we got to go back to but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but, okay. So but at, all right, so-- Speaker 2: I'm finishing graduate school. Speaker 1: So you're the sound man at the, at the D.C. Black-- Speaker 2: Assistant sound man. Speaker 1: Yeah, assistant sound man. You're doing freelance photography 'cause-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --celebrities are coming (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: And then now, now around the same time, you mention Chancellor Williams in 19, I guess it was '73 [1973] the-- Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 1: 'The Destruction of Black Civilization' was published (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Okay. It came out in '71 [1971] Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Somebody else published it. Speaker 1: There was a, there was a smaller edition. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That came out in '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Then he, then he gave, he said he wanted to give it to a black publisher and that was [HM] Haki [Madhubuti]. Story_ID: 178610 Speaker 1: Tell us who Chancellor Williams is? Speaker 2: Dr. Chancellor Williams was an individual that taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] twenty-seven years. Now when he first went to Howard his mentor was William Leo Hansberry. And William Leo Hansberry's mentor was W.E.B. Du Bois, okay. Now during this period at Howard, William Leo Hansberry had to teach African history under disguise of Greek mythology 'cause Howard wasn't into that kind of thing at all. But, matter of fact, I'm running around now, I've met Leo, William Leo Hansberry's daughter, they're the, she, he was the uncle of the girl that wrote 'Raisin in the Sun.' Speaker 1: Lorraine Hansberry. Speaker 2: Lorraine Hansberry, right. And so what happened with Chancellor now, I had read his book 'The Destruction of Black Civilization,' very impressed about being in school all my life not really knowing anything about my history, especially going back to ancient times, you know, and-- Speaker 1: Now was the book recommended to you or did you just see at the store or? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, the book I, I, I had met this girl who, I'm a sound man at the theater now and I'm doing my first show by myself at the Carter Barron [Amphitheatre, Washington, D.C.], which is the amphitheater here, and there was a show that I had got a bad write up the first half because I really knew how to splice tapes together but I really didn't know electronics that well, you know, hooking up the speakers. And the speaker sound system that, that I had borrowed or rented, from a, from a, you know, professional place really was for shows, not plays, which I found out later. So what happened is during the first half of the show, the show was going on and all of a sudden they started sounding like Donald Duck (making sounds). I said, oh, wow what happened. So when I run backstage Robert Hooks is saying "Oggi what's wrong, what's wrong?" So God told me to take the plug out of the tweeters and stick 'em in the, the mid-tones and that's what I did and it worked after that. But I did get a write-up in the Washington Post that the first part of the show was a little shaky but they got it together and, you know, the Washington Post was there that night it just so happened. So my first show that I did by myself was sort of like ugh, kind of rough, but I got through it. And believe it or not, when I did other shows, for some reason after I did that, the next year they said do you, do, we want you to do this so, you know, you wanna be the sound man again, I said yeah. But a friend of mine who was into cars, who, who knew how to fix cars would come down on the weekends and work with me 'cause he knew electronics, and he would sort of help me with the electronic part. But I knew how to splice and get the boom and the beat together-- Speaker 1: Now, now-- Speaker 2: --and all of that. Speaker 1: --something happened or somebody in, introduced you to, to the book at the-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --while you were doing the sounds. Speaker 2: Now, I'm a sound man, this young lady from California, she was, she, a lot of her friends was at Howard but she was from California going to UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. So when she came to town, she came to a couple of the shows and we started fooling around together, you know, became good buddies and she was into this vegetarian thing. So I'm saying, what, what is a vegetarian, you know, I ain't never heard of it before. So she said "well come on over." She had a sister that lived here or a cousin or somebody and we went to her cousin's house and she was fixing me this vegetarian meal, and I was sitting in the living room, you know, looking at the books and I pulled out this book, 'The Destruction of Black Civilization.' Now I sort of read about Egypt before, I'd heard about Egypt in New York. My father [Archibald Ogburn] had a book called 'Ancient Egypt,' and when I pulled it out the bookcase and looked at it then, what it said was, nature was good to Egypt. So I sort of fell in love with the place for some, before, it's because, just because of that one line. And so I'm looking at this book 'The Destruction of Black Civilization' and I'm reading it. I said wow, this is about Egypt and it's sort of like about Africa and Africans and built the pyramids and, you know, I'm like astonished. So I'm telling her, I said you're gonna have to let me borrow this book for a minute. She says look, I couldn't find that book in California and I found it up in Boston [Massachusetts] and, you know, you can't, you can't have it or whatever. So she said you can borrow it. And so she had about maybe two weeks to go before she was going back to UCLA. So I had the book, I have a loft bed in there, and I'd be up in the loft and I'd read a little bit, it'd be so profound I'd close it up and just, you know, I got a heavy imagination, you know, and, you know, and [Queen] Nzinga, who was military, she was the head of the Angola. She, she fought the Angola, the, the Portuguese in Angola, and she was the military suave and she would beat the, you know, the Portuguese. And, you know, so and now after that, you notice a lot of daughters were named Nzinga because of Chancellor's writing about it. And Chancellor was, would tell me that because of that book, a lot of people in the art world, it was so descriptive they could create art from, you know, reading certain parts of it. And so she said well no you, you, she agreed that I could have the book but when she was getting ready to go back, she came, now this is heavy now, she came and got the book from me on a Sunday, I'm reading about Egypt now, a friend of mine had given me an ankh in January, and I'm saying what is an ankh to him, he's an artist, he says an ankh is the Egyptian symbol of life, whatever that meant, you know. So that's when Egypt got planted in my head, and that's when I went to New York, see Ancient Egypt, and I pull out the book I see a jewel in it that I like and I say I want my boy to paint this jewel for me and whatever. Come back here I read Chancellor's book from a black perspective, and so I'm, I'm going crazy now. So I give her back the book on a Sunday, she goes back to UCLA. Story_ID: 178611 Speaker 1: That Monday I get a call from a guy that has a magazine called Soul Journey [ph.], and he asked me, "Do you wanna take a trip to Egypt?" "What? Of course, I wanna take a trip to Egypt." He says, "Well, we can't go, so we'll give you the thing." It was a fam [familiarization] trip from Pan Am [Pan American World Airways] was giving people a fam, familiarization trip to Egypt. So I'm on this trip with a lot of, what you might call travel agents but I went there representing this magazine. So when I get to Egypt, you know, you know, I'm shooting these pyramids and all this kind of stuff. And so when I get back I, I did, I do the slide, it was a bunch of slides. So when I get back, I'm listening to WHUR [Washington, D.C.], which is the radio station where I started my career, and I hear a friend of mine is interviewing Chancellor Williams. So I said whoa, this is heavy. So (unclear) his name was Clint Walker. He was a member of the New Gamma Alphas, no got the average, so I said Clint, you know, I wanna, where's Chancellor, I wanna meet him, man, his book influenced book blah, blah, blah, and I'm excited like well how did you know him, where did you, he said, "well Chancellor doesn't live that far from you, he lives at the Woodner" [Apartments, Washington, D.C.]. The Woodner's on 16th Street [Washington, D.C.] and I'm living here on 19th Street. So I said well, okay, he lives at the Woodner. So I find out that he lives there, so I write this letter, Chancellor: "I read your book, I've been to Egypt, and I have to meet you, I must meet you," you know, that kind of thing, let me know something one way or another, you know. So I says, so the Woodner was a place that would have apartments, it was a part hotel and part apartments, and the hotel part was with people that just came for a couple of weeks maybe taking a course or just was in town for a little while. So they had a desk like a hotel did, a front desk. So I went there with this letter and I said, "this is a special delivery for Chancellor Williams." So they said "well, why don't you take it up to him?" Aww man, I don't, I don't wanna take it up to him. I'm not ready to meet this man yet. So I did take it up to him and it was a long hall way where he lived. So I took it and stuck it in his mailbox and I turned around and I'm running to get away as fast as I can, and before I could get to the end of the hall way he opened the door and said, "thank you." Evidently they called him, called from down stairs and said, "a guy's coming up stairs with a special delivery." So when I didn't hear from him the next day I was upset, dang gone man. So a couple of days later, one of his assistants who called me says, "Chancellor wanna see you next Thursday between three and five." So I couldn't wait to meet him. So that next Thursday I fasted that morning, I didn't want no energy being used for nothing digesting food or anything, I wanted everything in my brain at that time working. So when I get to meet him he opens the door, how you doing and we shake hands and, and he goes down and sits in his seat, he sat in the corner, you know, right by the window. And he, the first thing says was, "Don't touch anything behind this chair" and I said "okay," you know, I didn't know what was behind the chair but eventually I found out it was like first editions of a book that he wrote in 1941 that was called 'The Raven' which was a biography of Edgar Allan Poe. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: You know, I have 'The Raven' in the bookcase here. And, and, you know, the books when I started looking at, I brought the book for forty dollars which was a lot at the time back, you know, '70s [1970s]. And what happened is he had-- Speaker 2: The, 'The Raven,' right? Speaker 1: The Raven. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what happened was he didn't, I guess, you know, after the copyright would run out after twenty years or so and another company had taken the book and had started, I guess they might have published it at, you know, whenever you needed it. 'Cause I guess technology might have been that good then that, because I did buy it for forty dollars, okay. So what happened, the reason that the book was a best seller in 1941, right? Right. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: Right. So what happened was they asked Chancellor, back in those days they did transcripts by mail, so he had to send the transcript, autobiography of Edgar Allan Poe, and they said well we want the, we wanna, we wanna publish the book, send a picture of you so we can stick on the back cover. So, Chancellor says well this should be more about, this is, this is about Edgar Allan Poe. So he sent the picture of Edgar Allan Poe like it was him. So they put on the back cover the picture of Edgar Allan Poe and got under it Chancellor Williams. And that's how it became a best seller during that period. Speaker 2: Yeah, well this is subterfuge I guess on a, on a lightweight level 'cause Chancellor Williams, being black-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --obviously, black-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --if he'd have sent his picture to a publisher--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: It might not have been the same. Speaker 2: --they probably would not have-- Speaker 1: It might have been different, you know. But Chancellor was smart. Now since we're talking about him, when he was in elementary school, he was like a pain in the neck because he was always asking questions. And he also had a teacher in the fifth grade whose father was a doctor. It might have been a, I think it might have been a white, a black guy. You know, I'm getting out of person because Chancellor would be delivering The Crisis and stuff, the doctor would order these, The Crisis which was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and a couple of, you know, I guess maybe Booker T. [Washington] had something out, whatever. And so Chancellor started reading these things and he got interested in and he says, "why are you, why am I, why are we using secondhand books after the white school gets through using 'em, why we get the secondhand books?" You know, why are we getting this and why aren't we getting that. So there was a guy that was Uncle Ned [ph.] who he was complaining to as a kid, and Uncle said, "well, you know, you, you're, you're African, you're from Africa." So he said, "is there a place called Negro in there?" And he said, "no it's Africa." Because he knew that the Chinese that lived in the town where they were, were from China, and the Germans were from Germany, and the Italians were from Italy, and so he was saying, "am, am I from Negro land?" He said, "no, you're from Africa," that kind of thing. Story_ID: 172461 Speaker 1: Chancellor [Williams] was sort of like a pain in the neck as a kid. Speaker 2: Now, now Chancellor Williams was born in 1893 from what I understand. Speaker 1: No, he was born in 1898. Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-eight [1898]. Speaker 1: He really didn't know when he was born but they called him a Spaniard. His aunts called him Spaniard, so he assumed it was at the end of the Spanish-American War, it was 1898. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: So that's what they used 'cause they didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to keep records on people born in South Carolina back then. Speaker 2: And Dr. Williams-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --lived until 1992. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Or as-- Speaker 1: When he died-- Speaker 2: His latter years he was blind, I just wanna put that in there. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, he was blind. When I met him he was blind. He would say partially blind-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --'cause mainly he didn't really know me, and he didn't want me to think that I could just do anything and, and I was cool. I worshipped the guy to be honest with you. Speaker 2: Now, now you were, the reason why we're going over this is 'cause the book was a big sensation when it came out, and people were, people of the political historical readers in our community were-- Speaker 1: He was in demand as a speaker. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. He was a speaker in--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: So I traveled with him. Speaker 2: --Tony Brown's Journal-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and all over the (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, I was there for that. But he-- Speaker 2: And, you know, so you were telling us about his upbringing, this, this you can go. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, basically he was sort of like a pain in the neck kid. And in high school, evidently they did a thing on Edgar Allan Poe which he didn't go for. He didn't, he didn't go for what the teacher was saying, so that's when he got the interest to do a biography on Edgar Allan Poe, was in high school. Speaker 2: How was his biography different from what we generally know about Poe? Speaker 1: Well, all I know is he went over the same area, Richmond, Baltimore. Edgar Allan Poe would like the, the drugs, you know, 'cause his writing was out (unclear), I really tried to read his writings, some of it I get, could deal with it but a lot of it was, you know, I don't know the, I tried to read it as I got older maybe I can learn, comprehend it a little bit better but he was a deep cat. And he, I think he got messed up on cocaine I think it was 'cause he get that from the drugstore back then. I mean even Coca-Cola and Pepsi Cola was, was spiked with all of that kind of stuff, you know, and eventually they sort of made it illegal and I guess they tuned it down. But my mother was addicted to Pepsi Cola, I mean she just had to have one, even today she got bring me home a Pepsi, she's a diabetic but Diet Coke, you know, Diet Pepsi but she wasn't into Coca-Cola but Pepsi Cola was her thing, you know. And because of that I used to take a lot of bottles back 'cause you got a, two cents for the bottle, you know. But Chancellor, after, you know, after he grew up I met him, I met him around by this apartment now, and he said don't touch anything in the back of this chair and, you know, can you work with me about fifteen hours a week. And I said yeah, no problem. And so I would take him to the store shopping. I got about two hundred or three hundred shopping lists that I kept of his, because in case, you know, I also have a lot of his papers, a lot of his original writings and a lot of his letters from John Henrik Clarke and them. And I really am ready to donate it, I was gonna donate 'em to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] but they act like they, you know, the woman well, even though she was a student of Chancellor's, she said that Chancellor's stuff wasn't legitimate because a lot of his stuff was from oral history and I said oh, well. She shouldn't be in the history department or whatever running the, the library section to be honest with you. So I nixed that. Speaker 2: And that that Howard University? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, he taught there twenty-seven years-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and she's trying to say that, you know, he, a lot of his research was oral. So I'm saying well, I, no use leaving it here 'cause she's a curator at the library, the research library, and so I said it wouldn't work, you know. And, then, and she said that the head of it wouldn't be there so I said later. I'll donate to this to somebody else, you know. And now people want it. You know, even [HM] Howard Dodson [, Jr.] said he wants it, you know, and he's over there supposed to be getting the library together but he's partying and having fun, he's not really doing anything, he's on an ego trip I understand. And I don't have no problem with that, he retired from the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] and, you know, this is, extra, you know, two-hundred fifty grand a year. Speaker 2: Anyway but, but you saved a lot of, 'cause you, so you worked with Chancellor Williams for-- Speaker 1: At least twelve years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, until he got real bad. And then I feel, he started fixing up his house, he had a house that he had left that was really built to be a motel but he had land next to it but he paid the taxes on the house but his ex, I don't think they ever got divorced but his wife lived, the second wife lived in it. His first wife died at childbirth, she had like about six kids or seven kids. The second wife had about six or seven kids. So I don't know if he had eleven kids, I never, you know, sometimes Chancellor wouldn't let the left hand know what the right hand was doing. 'Cause I didn't, I end up meeting one of his sons, whose birthday was the same day as his, December 22nd, and so they would go out together and I think his son, this particular son, would go on trips with him prior to me going on trips with him. But Chancellor didn't want the family into his business because, because he was blind they started taking stuff from him I guess, he felt, and that's why he said first, thing don't you touch anything behind this chair. Now, those first edition 'Ravens' ['The Raven: A Novel of Edgar Allen Poe'] go for like two grand, between eighteen hundred and two grand [thousand dollars] now on you, not YouTube, but what's the thing they sell, that sells all the, eBay. Speaker 2: eBay. Speaker 1: eBay. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: eBay but Amazon. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Amazon also sell 'em too. And you know, two grand, you know, eighteen hundred to two grand [thousand dollars] now, that the first edition. Story_ID: 172462 Speaker 1: So we traveled to the University of Mass [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], we, [HM Louis] Farrakhan had a thing for the elders out in California and I went out there with him and I stayed at my cousin's while I was out there. And I called him up that morning to find out where we were going, what time were we supposed to leave and the, and the hotel that we stayed at, the phone only rang time, and, you know, so he needed it to ring a couple of times so he could get to it. When it rang once and he didn't know where it was, and I'm calling him to find out what time we gotta leave. So when I get to the hotel he's already gone, I'm upset, I know he's going to kick my butt. So when I get to it, it's a thing that Farrakhan is having in Crenshaw [Los Angeles, California] on dealing with the elders. This was the thing where I met Queen Mother Moore [formerly Audley Moore]. Farrakhan was there, one of the, the head guy that was with black Jews, The Black Hebrews [Black Hebrew Israelites] that had gone over to Israel. Speaker 2: Prince Isaiah [ph.]. Speaker 1: He was there too, I believe, Hosea [ph.], right. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And, you know, they talked. They did a little spiel, it was definitely a Farrakhan event. And, and the next day, Farrakhan had other people doing the, the talk 'cause Chancellor was asking me who were the other people. At the time I knew but I, I can't remember them now. It might have been Asa Hilliard [ph.] or, you know, some of the younger guys who I wasn't familiar with that are into the black diaspora thing, you know. Of course, a lot of those guys, after, even a, a brother from this town Anthony Browder, you might have did him. Speaker 2: Browder, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. He, he, they, they were taking people to Egypt, you know, and Anthony Browder was one of them. Now Anthony Browder was trying to be into photography, and I would run into him and a guy named Kenny Dickerson [ph.] backstage at a concert. So when I came back from Egypt, he comes to me and he say, man could I see your pictures, I said yeah. So I'm showing him my slides and he borrowed a slide from me and everywhere, where ever he worked was, he was some kind of graphic artist. He blew up the slide, and at that time I didn't even know, you know, slides were blown up, how they blew up slides, so he blew up the slide, he blew up a couple of the slides and the next thing I know he was the Egyptianologist, he was bringing, you know, Dr. Ben and Yosef Ben-Jochannan, you know, that's Dr. Ben and John Henrik Clarke to UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], so for conferences and charging people ten bucks and whatever to come in. He had Vin Santamore [ph.], Vin Sertamore [ph.] was there, and, you know, I got a chance to meet Fran Sertamore [ph.] with Chancellor at the, at a, at a church in saint, saint, St. Augustine's Church [Saint Augustine Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.] was a, a Catholic church but they got into the African diaspora to bring black people into the Catholic thing, you know. So that's how that went. And so, you know, my thing with Chancellor, he got old, and when he was in the old folks home I went to visit him, me and Big Luke went to visit him and-- Speaker 2: So he had Alzheimer's you were telling me. Speaker 1: He started, he started out-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: I had noticed, I used to drive, he had a, he had a car, you know, and even though he was blind and he had a car for me to drive him where he wanted to go, to the doctors and mainly shopping and to the doctors. And when we went, we'd drive town to Lorton [Virginia] to the prison [Lorton Reformatory, Lorton, Virginia], you know. And he always, we'd go, we'd drive to RAP [Regional Addiction Prevention] Incorporated [Washington, D.C.], which was a drug rehab place, okay. And so one day I go to visit him, this is like one of the last days, and he said we're gonna, today is gonna be a little different. I said yeah okay, no problem. I said "well what we're gone today?" He says, "I want you to tell me what you don't like about me and I'll tell you what I don't like about you." I said "wow, that's deep." So I'm telling him, I says "look here, when I come here, I'm gone have to be who I am, I can't be nobody else and, you know, I just want you to know I'm a be who I am and, and if that's what you don't like, you know, as far as I'm concerned, you know, you all right with me, I ain't, I really don't have a gripe about you." So what his gripe about me was, when I got out the car I didn't lock it. It was the kind of car that you could push the button down and you close the door where they come up, you know, what I'm saying, you had to lock it with the key. I, you know, never had a car like that so I never knew that. So that's what he told me that's what I didn't like about you, you would leave the car open. You know, I said oh, wow, I thought he was gonna say something deeper. But, you know, so, after that, you know, we still traveled to Dayton [Ohio], Columbus [Ohio], definitely Massachusetts, Ohio, well, that's Columbus. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], man, it was a guy named John [ph.] somebody, he was pretty big in the history department at Ohio State but the way we got at Ohio State, it would be a couple of black organizations and a couple of the schools would get together and bring people like Chancellor and them in. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: They would, you know, work together on that, put up the money together, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'Cause one time we was some place with Chancellor and we went to a church, and this wasn't church, Chancellor's thing at all, this was up at Mass Amherst [The University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts]. We went to a black church and after Chancellor did his spiel, then the guy was saying well, you know, this guy, you know, he doesn't come around to places like this, you know, so they sent the hat around and, you know, Chancellor didn't like that, he, you know, he was about honorarium, he ain't about-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --passing the hat about, you know so. We had already got honorariums from I think University of Mass, and he was just doing this on the side, he didn't know what, you know. And sometimes he would be signing books, 'cause people would be lined up, and he said "I don't wanna sign any more books." I said "Chancellor, there's about twenty-five people still waiting to sign for you, to sign books." And then he would be pissed off 'cause, you know. And sometimes when the phone would ring at his apartment, he say I don't wanna speak to nobody. And I pick up the phone hello and it'd be his son, I says well, Chancellor, this is your son, you know, he get pissed off at me again. I told you I don't I wanna speak to nobody, you know. But this is your son I, you know, so a lot of times that would be where me and him, this old guy, he was, he was old enough to be my grandfather. I'm thirty-four, he's seventy-four. Story_ID: 172463 Speaker 1: Now you were like, kind of like living the life, you know, had a sports car, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Now but what was deep about it-- Speaker 1: --(unclear) photographer, you're meeting all the celebrities. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And now you're working with-- Speaker 2: But so it was a, but it was, it's what saved me. The music business was Sodom and Gomorrah, drugs, women, alcohol, sex all of that. And then I'm going from that to Chancellor [Williams], to Professor Williams and I'm, you know, I had to put outfits together which were really atrocious, if you saw them bow tie with a shirt, you know, plaid shirt and I'd have great, I always had a blazer, you know, and at that time bell-bottoms, you know, was happening. But I had a hard time putting uniforms together to go to these different colleges, you know. But-- Speaker 1: So what, what was, now his book was studied, I think more than any book ever written in the black community. So many study groups that that wanted to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --know about black history. Speaker 2: Outside of college. Speaker 1: His, his book actually was one of the few surveys of African history that you could get. Speaker 2: Well, Stokely Carmichael [later, Kwame Ture] used to be at his feet just like I was. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And anybody that joined the African Revolutionary Party had to read Chancellor's book. That was Stokely's organization. Speaker 1: That's the All-African People's Revolution [All-African People's Revolutionary Party]-- Speaker 2: Whatever, you know. I can't-- Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah. That's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. And so even Stokely was at Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when I was there. But I was closer to Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown] from, well I know this camera's on but, you know-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --getting blanged up. The '60s [1960s] was a lot looser than it is now. At Cramton Auditorium [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] you could sit in the back and, and actually smoke herb, you know, which is unheard of nowadays. I mean they'd lock you up quick, you know, if you even got caught with anything on Howard, they don't, no tolerance kind of thing now. But in the '60s [1960s] it was loose. You know, the Whiteys was doing the crazy stuff, and LSD and mescaline was happening. And, and to be honest with you, it seems like only the rich kids was into that, that went to Howard, the doctors' sons. And I became a good friend of a, Westerfield his father was an ambassador to Liberia, Sam Westerfield is his name. He became a doctor. And when he came to New York [New York] to go to Columbia [University] to med school, he stayed with me one or two days before his dorm would be ready, and he had gotten a brand new XKE Jaguar for, for, for graduation. And I drove it one time and then somebody stole it. He, I guess he went some place in Manhattan and they stole it, professional car theft ring stole it. And he was that cat that would pay like, you know, a grand [$1,000.00] a month back then for, for, you know, a young guy with a car like that insurance, you know, but he could afford it 'cause he was, came from a wealthy family, and they lived up on the Gold Coast. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: But me and him became good friends though. And-- Speaker 1: So, but this is like a switch, like once, once again is like a, you know, you got like two worlds you're living in here almost, you know. Speaker 2: But I loved it because I was comfortable in both worlds. You know, going to Howard, the sports car, you know, I wasn't a great student but eventually, you know, I did have to get it together to graduate. Story_ID: 172464 Speaker 1: Is there any particular conversation or story from Chancellor Williams that stands out that you remember that, that you can tell us? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, one of the stories had to do with Moses, the Bible story. He said that, you know, if Moses went up on the mountain and there were two platelets with, that God had written, you know, and Moses got these two things and he comes down from the mountain and he sees the people worshipping idols and, you know, and gold and all of that, and he said Moses wouldn't be throwing down the Word of God and break the Word of God, you know, 'cause remember Moses threw down the tablets, he broke 'em up. And another thing that, that Chancellor didn't go for was Mary the Virgin. You know, that was a problem that he had, I guess, with his mother who was an evangelist talking about the conception, I forget the word for it but it, you know, conception. Speaker 1: Yeah, he didn't, he didn't believe in the Immaculate Conception. Speaker 2: Immaculate Conception, you know, that was, he didn't go for that at all, especially a guy that had 11 kids, you know, (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. That was the story-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: He, he didn't believe in Immaculate (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, he didn't want to believe in Immaculate-- Speaker 1: And then we, he sort of, we sort of talked about homosexuality. We couldn't figure that out at all. He, he wasn't into that, you know. And, you know, he couldn't figure out where that came from. And see his generation they did, you know, that was the cats was more in the closet than out of the closet, and, you know, it started later on. You know, he had a lot of stories man that he told me and I would write 'em down. He one time he woke me up in the, three o'clock in the morning, you know, he don't know what time it is, he's blind, woke me, called me at three o'clock in the morning and says it's an emergency. I said what, I gotta, we gotta go to the bank today I got some women, some girlfriends coming to town, so he still was into the ladies, you know, and he was up in his eighties then. But, you know, he was a hell of a dude, very intelligent, and people loved him where ever he went. And, you know, I'll be with Stevie Wonder, and I'll be with Toni Braxton, I could be with anybody that was, you know, Barry White and you know, Jill Scott and anybody, but I would be with him, people said I just wanna touch him, which was a more, a lot more reverent kind of thing, you know. And when he went to Chicago [Illinois], he'd have a bow tie and look like Elijah [Muhammad] a little bit, you know. And that's when we met, you know, Khalid [Abdul Muhammad, formerly Harold Moore, Jr.], who was sort of banned for a minute because he said something about the Jews, and I guess put a lot of heat on the-- Speaker 2: Khalid Muhammad. Speaker 1: [HM Louis] Farrakhan-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --Farrakhan. And the other guy, believe it or not, that I, he became Farrakhan's foreign, foreign brother. He's the one, I'll think of his name in a minute, and it was another Muhammad [ph.], but what was his first name, but I had grew up, he lived across the street from my high school, so I had knew him already. Speaker 2: Is that Awallah Mohammed [ph.]? Speaker 1: Not Wally [ph.]. Speaker 2: Not Wally. Speaker 1: No. But-- Speaker 2: Not Larry [ph.]? Speaker 1: But this guy was the one that was more like the international guy for the, for Farrakhan. Speaker 2: Was that the one whose father was Simeon Booker? Speaker 1: I knew Simeon, no. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: No, no his father wasn't Simeon Booker. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Larry Prescott [Lawrence Prescott], was his real name. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was Larry X [Larry 4X] and then he had (unclear) Name--yeah. Speaker 1: Right. I knew him. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: He was one of the editors of Muhammad Speaks (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, he might have been 'cause his-- Speaker 1: --his aunt-- Speaker 2: --his first cousin-- Speaker 1: --The Final Call, The Final Call. Speaker 2: His first cousin was a Prescott. She was like the, on the radio, a disk jockey in New York [New York], now she's out in California. And I shot her wedding. She married one of my boys and, and, of course, I always would call 'em Larry 'cause I never remembered his real Muslim name. Speaker 1: Right, well he was called Larry X4 [Larry 4X]. Speaker 2: Larry X. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. And like I said, he lived across the street from my high school so. Story_ID: 172465 Speaker 1: So Chancellor Williams, there was a, his book was published by Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. And there was a crisis around money at a certain point-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --and you got a story about it, I think it's important to tell it because it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So what happened, you know, Chancellor wasn't getting his royalties and not, and it wasn't that he was (unclear) you know, was hard up for cash or anything because he taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] twenty-seven years and I guess he got a good pension and whatever but, you know, he wanted his money from the Third World Press. So what happened was he got a lawyer in Chicago [Illinois] to deal with [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] but he found out that the lawyer knew Haki and sort of had to get somebody else. And eventually Haki had to go to the bank to get a loan to pay Chancellor, and the bank told him well, we'll only give you the loan if you keep publishing his book 'The Destruction of Black Civilization' which Haki would have been stupid if he didn't 'cause that was his best seller there at the time. But Haki was into [HM] Dr. Ben [Carson] and those, and John Henrik Clarke, they also wrote books, I don't know if he ever published any of their books, I can't understand why he didn't. But so Chancellor sort of got his lawyers and Haki went to the bank to, you know, 'cause it end up being like thirty either thirty-seven or thirty-nine grand [thousand dollars]. And a woman came from Chicago-- Speaker 1: This, Janet Sankey [ph.] who passed away last week actually. Speaker 2: Really. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, I believe it might have been her. I got a picture of her, we can talk about that later. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And her giving him the check, you know, pick a picture. And so he was sort of satisfied. I'm saying wow, thirty-seven thousand bucks [dollars]. Seven years though, so that was seven years, you know, so you divide seven into thirty something. Speaker 1: (Unclear) I know I was at the press at the time and we were very depressed about it. I mean what, Haki's a great artist but not-- Speaker 2: Right. He was a poet basically. And, to be honest with you, the gallery that represented me here in Washington [D.C.] was in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], started by a Norman Parish but Norman Parish was really an artist. And he opened up a gallery so people would, black people would have a place to exhibit because there wasn't many places for us, but maybe a college. But the, you know, the National [Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.], I went to The National Gallery of Art, to try to have an exhibit. I went to the Corcoran [Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.] to try to have an exhibit but, you know, they were saying well, you know, sort of like they told Mary Lou Jones [Lois Mailou Jones] when she graduated from Mass Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] or one of those schools, and she wanted to teach up there, they told her like, you know, why don't you, you need to go teach your own people. And so she came and was teaching at Howard, you know. That's what they told her. She graduated, and I don't know what school it was Mary Lois Jones [ph.], you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know who I'm talking about. So that was it. So but Chancellor taught at Howard twenty-seven years and his mentor was William Leo Hansberry. And like I said, they had to teach under the umbrella of Greek mythology. And so, I wish I had taken a course under him, I understand that. Now what happened is I got Chancellor's papers in these folders, nothing, no big deal, I just, you know, I, Chancellor would give 'em to me and I would put 'em in the folders. So two of my boys that came by here had had Chancellor as a teacher, and I showed them the folder and they said, man you better put that in a, it was about, you better organize this stuff man, this is Chancellor Williams and, you know. I felt the same way they did I just took it, you know, for granted. I take a lot for granted. I can show a picture of Bob Marley, wow, you shot Bob Marley. Well, yeah no big deal, you know, and, you know, you go through that 'cause, you say, there's fifty people backstage but there's thirty thousand out front and you're one of the few people that's backstage. So it's sort of like, you know, people sort of look up, you know, to you because you have access to those kind of people-- Speaker 1: Yeah. So now this-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --is something in you, you can't, as time goes by especially can't take these productions for granted, papers or photographs and-- Speaker 2: Right. And so I got Chancellor's original handwritings for 'The Destruction.' You know, not the whole book. Now, I even knew the girl that typed it. She became a lawyer. Story_ID: 178612 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: David Allison Ogburn, known as Oggi. D-A-V-I-D, A-L-L-I-S-O-N, O-G-B-U-R-N. Oggi is O-G-G-I. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Brooklyn, New York [New York] at December 14, 1942. Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I was a freelance photographer for the record companies for forty years. And I'm retired now, just exhibiting those forty years' worth of pictures. Speaker 1: So do you ever take any freelance gigs today? Speaker 2: Not any more, not any more. Speaker 1: Not (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Even though a girl did call me up and ask me to shoot, shoot something, I was trying to tell her, and I owe her a couple of favors so I might have to break out the camera and the flash and do something coming up for a friend. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Basically. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: The twenty-fifth, yeah, 'cause my check bounced yesterday. Speaker 1: (Laughter) okay. Speaker 2: No, today might be the twenty-sixth, is it the twenty-fifth? Speaker 1: I think it is. I'm I-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it is the twenty-fifth. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It is the twenty-fifth. Speaker 2: It is the twenty-fifth, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And what year? Speaker 1: 2013. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Now, I gotta, you get a certain age you gotta think of these things. Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We're on New York Avenue in Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Skadden Arps Meagher [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom]. Speaker 1: Okay, we have to look that up. Speaker 2: Yes. So we're finishing an interview that we started on Monday, right? Out here in D.C. Story_ID: 178613 Speaker 1: And when we left off we were talking about the disposition or the works of Chancellor Williams, the archives that you hold of some of Chancellor's effects handwritten-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --manuscripts and such. And we're talking about-- Speaker 2: Some letters-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --that he, one of 'em was from John Henrik Clarke asking him to come to Hunter [College, New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --for some kind of lectures, you know. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: So letters from, even some from [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] and writing him to come out to Chicago [Illinois]. Another letter was from [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] where a young lady in the history department was inviting him. So I have a few letters and a lot of pictures, of course, and I put it all together in a loose-leaf book, all of his information. Story_ID: 178614 Speaker 1: We were discussing before we started rolling too something that would, a friend of mine had done some research and discovered the same thing that Chancellor Williams' relationships with the rest of his family were not, not very good. He had had like what, how many children, twenty? Speaker 2: I believe he had eleven. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: But, you know, sometimes he didn't, the left hand never told the right hand what was going on. But in the first, his first wife died in childbirth, and I think he had like six kids with her and Dotham [ph., unable to verify] was the last one that, that the woman died from having. And then he married another woman and I think they had like six, six or seven kids. But for some reason they couldn't get along at all. And, and believe it or not, Chancellor had bought a house that was really being built to be a motel, and I guess because they had all those kids he was, you know, buying a building like that, it really wasn't finished and he was gonna have it finished, and so I know down stairs was finished. And he decided at ninety years old that he was gonna move into that same house he had been paying taxes on and his, and his ex-wife or his wife, I don't know if even divorced, was still living there. And to be honest with you when I got those two together they were arguing then and they were in their, you know, nineties or eighties and, you know, it was just a, a bitter thing. And I know that the daughters really didn't like Chancellor that much at all. But Chancellor was worshipped by a community that loved him for his book. And, and basically, you know, he wasn't a mean person but evidently they just didn't work out. Speaker 1: So and you said that you're, you're, you had the occasion to call together the family and talk about it. Speaker 2: Well, well one time I, I got, I don't remember exactly when it was but it was after a Fort Totten [New York, New York], or Fort, one of them lived on the, the it was one of the daughters, she had, she had a rec room in a, in the apartment complex that she lived in and they were, we were all in the rec room, it was about twenty-five to thirty people of both families, and I guess they had known each other already and, and I was taking pictures and I was trying to tell them how, how great Chancellor was, I mean, you know, I was the only on that side of the table really saying that kind of stuff. They, even though they had gotten together, the daughters came over to me and said that in Chancellor's last years that they met him at the hospital or whatever and they were trying to let me know that, that he wasn't left alone or wasn't taken care of which, I really don't know at that point, I didn't sever our relationship but I would visit him at the, at the, I guess you could call it a, a older folks home, you know, where they take care of you. And he had his own private room, you know, which was unusual, usually they be a ward of people, a lot of different, but he had his own private room. And I, where he was they give him a lot of respect for who he was. And when I went to see him, I, well, well he was bald so I used to kiss him on his forehead. So now he, he has Alzheimer's and when I go in and I kissed him on his forehead he was saying you've always been, he always would say I was like a son to him. And me and him became real close 'cause his oldest daughter, before she passed away said when me and Chancellor sort of wasn't hanging out that much she said that she, he, he really missed me 'cause, you know, I would ride down the street and I'd see some fine girl and I would tell him that that looks Lenora [ph.], that was one of the, the little women that he would describe in one of his books, you know. I said she's fine like Lenora, you know. And, you know, so we, we, we had a, a great relationship even though sometimes it was conflict. I, I sort of mentioned to you, that one time I went over, he said, you know what are you, what I don't like about you, you know, tell me what you don't like about me, and, you know, I said well I have to be myself or I gotta be who I am and I can't really be somebody else, and what he didn't like about me is that I didn't lock his car. For a person that was blind he had his own car and he might have had the car ten years but it only had like 7,000 miles on it. And I would use it to take him shopping, take him to the doctors and, of course, we went to Lorton [Reformatory, Lorton, Virginia], and which was the prison, and we also went to R.A.P. [Regional Addiction Prevention] Incorporated [Washington, D.C.], which was a drug rehab place, and his youngest son was in a drug rehab place in Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: And I think his youngest son end up, eventually got shot one, you know. He was, you know, in the wrong place at the wrong time. So-- Speaker 1: Did, did any of his children pursue academia at all or, or a scholarship? Speaker 2: Not that I know not, not, not any of 'em. And one of 'em I did meet was, I told you, he had the same birthday as Chancellor, I can't even think of his name right now, but they had the same birthday so they used to go out on the, their, their birthday together which was December 22nd was Chancellor's birthday. Speaker 1: Okay. So they did have, he, he had a, he was, he interacted with him but they, they it's very little? Speaker 2: Well he interacted with just a certain ones. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, 'cause I found out one of his granddaughters told me that she used to travel with him. But I think because he was blind that he felt that they might have been taking things that they shouldn't have been 'cause I had mentioned when I first went there he said, "don't touch nothing behind that chair, you know." And I guess that might have caused curiosity, what is behind the chair, which was a bunch of first editions of "The Raven" that we talked about earlier. Speaker 1: Okay. And he, he wrote "Black Reconstruction in South Carolina" [written by John G. Jackson, not Chancellor Williams], several other books. Speaker 2: He wrote one of 'em, well I think he got his master's thesis, no his doctorate thesis was on storefront churches at American University [Washington, D.C.], because I did go over there and I did get the, a part, a part of it. I didn't get all of it but somebody was asking me about the storefront churches 'cause Chancellor wasn't too much up on the Daddy Graces [Reverend Charles Manuel "Sweet Daddy" Grace] and, and, you know, those type of evangelists who helped people with worship and, you know, one of 'em had long fingernails. He wasn't into those kind of people for some reason. He looked at them as I guess you might say on the order of Creflo [Augustus] Dollar [Jr.] today. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: You know, 'cause his name really wasn't Dollar when he was born but he changed it to Creflo Dollar when he started his ministry. And now his walk, now his wife was Taffi Dollar, you know. I don't know why she went for that but, you know. They live a glorious life. He has a, you know, Creflo has an airplane and all of that so-- Speaker 1: Right. I understand generally you're talking about the, so he was right about the Reverend Ikes [formerly, Frederick J. Eikerenkoetter II] and the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the people like that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And still it started on the storefront level but ended up-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, with a huge congregation-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: With a material kind of message. Speaker 2: Right. Which was a little different. Story_ID: 178615 Speaker 1: 'The Destruction of Black Civilization' [Chancellor Williams] still is a bestseller for Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois] today. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Chancellor Williams passed away in 1992. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you have any final reflections on, on Chancellor and his legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I feel that anybody that dealt with 'The Destruction' of all the books he's written, 'The Destruction' was the one that stood out. And, and I was overwhelmed by reading it myself. And I would take the book and read a couple of, you know, read about a certain part of it and I would just have to close it up and just, go 'cause, you know, I've been in school all my life and I never really knew my history, especially going back to ancient history. And I always felt that if these young people today, if they were educated in a way where they have some substance to, to lean on and to hold on to which gives them more of a foundation that they would, wouldn't be running around shooting each other on these corners and, and 'cause we're the only ones that really do that. And, and one of the reasons that Chancellor would say the reason would be that, well I was mentioning about an acculturation was the way that in order to be an American you had to be acculturated into this society and for some reason, you know, or I got into the Anglo Saxon which was anti-African and anti-black, and somehow we got that same mentality trying to be acculturated where other, where other ethnic groups could be Chinese and, and still worship being from China and, and Italians in Italy, and Germans from Germany. And so I was saying when he was young, he was pissed off at getting used books from, you know, they got the books after the white school used them. And his fifth grade teacher I had mentioned, was, saw his potential and he ended up being a, a paper boy deliverer or he delivered books, no he was a paper boy delivering papers but in the back of the papers were different books that were written by [W.E.B.] Du Bois or maybe, you know, Benjamin Banneker or whatever. And so the teacher, his fifth grade teacher's father was a doctor, and so when he delivered the, the doctor would order the books and Chancellor would read 'em cause Chancellor would tell me, even though he just, when he, when he left the eighth grade he was well educated, he would say, you know. And that's when he got into, you know, I guess in high school he, he didn't believe the story about Edgar Allan Poe the way it was told to him, and he followed that whole Edgar Allan Poe, he, Richmond [Virginia] and, you know, following the, because I think Edgar Allan Poe really came from an affluent, wealthy family and but, and he would, and he also ended up in Baltimore [Maryland] with, with some family 'cause that's where he's buried, and I guess on his birthday somebody leaves a bottle of either brandy or something, you know, at his grave which has gotten to be a ritual with Edgar Allan Poe. But Chancellor to me was very smart, and like I say he taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] twenty-seven years. And I had some friend of mine that were students of his, when they came to my apartment and they saw that I had his information in, in folders and they got on my case and that's when I put it all in one loose-leaf book, everything together with some pictures, I think I might have showed you how he looked when he was young, a picture that was taken by Scurlock, which was the number one photographer in Washington [D.C.] for a long time. Now I got to meet Scurlock, Scurlock's sons but Addison Scurlock was the father, and he shot all the heavy weights, W.E.B. Du Bois, and that picture that I showed you of Chancellor when he was young. Scurlock shot a lot of pictures up at Howard, and Howard University. But when Chancellor was, was teaching at Howard his mentor, when he was a student at Howard his mentor was Leo Hansberry. And Leo [William] Hansberry was, was, was mentored by W.E.B. Du Bois. So when I went to Ghana and I am at W.E.B. Du Bois' burial site, I felt it was a three-hundred sixty degree 'cause Chancellor mentored me and, you know. So I felt by being with Du Bois, you know, that I was, made the circle, completed circle. Now to be honest with you, Leo Hansberry's daughter is still alive and she's in the photography club that I belong to called Exposure Group [African American Photographers Association, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Is that a Gail Hansberry? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. And, you know, they had an aunt, she's a cousin I guess 'cause her father was the uncle of the one that wrote 'A Raisin in the Sun' Lorraine-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --Lorraine Hansberry, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 178616 Speaker 1: And you talked about how you got your start at WHUR [radio station, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Or your neighbor, you know, giving you a start. Speaker 2: Andre Perry, right. Speaker 1: But so I wanna ask, talk about now like what, it's, in '74 [1974] you're going like full steam here, you're shooting the photos of The Main Ingredient, [HM] Melvin Van Peebles, Dizzy Gillespie, Earth, Wind & Fire, [HM] Isaac Hayes. You saw the, you shot a Senate Judiciary Hearing, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes, I shot a Senate Judiciary Hearing for the impeachment of Richard Nixon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And Jon Lucien, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, Jon Lucien, right. Speaker 1: So just tell us about what you wanted to tell us about here in terms of '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Well what happened in '74 [1974], my cousin's former husband was working for a magazine out of New York called, I just know this was a to-- Speaker 1: Essence, Essence. Speaker 2: It wasn't Essence, it was another magazine. Speaker 1: (Unclear) not-- Speaker 2: I had it on the wall in a plaque. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: But they first had me shoot a cemetery in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And I went to the cemetery looking for a certain grave, and it was a cemetery that really wasn't groomed, right next to it was the Dumbarton Cemetery [later Mount Zion Cemetery, Washington, D.C.], which was the Caucasian cemetery, it was very groomed but the black cemetery was being taken care of by a church, a church had a hundred year lease to deal with the cemetery. The cemetery eventually became a historical landmark called the Women's, Women's Banjo Club [Female Union Band Cemetery, Washington, D.C.] or something. But the, the impeachment of Richard Nixon, the judiciary hearing had three black people, Congressmen, was Barbara-- Speaker 1: Jordan. Speaker 2: --[Barbara] Jordan, [HM Charles] Rangel out of New York, and the guy out of Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 1: [HM] John Conyers. Speaker 2: John Conyers, right. And so I was taking pictures of those judiciary hearings. But I also got a picture of this congressman named [William] Cohen. He eventually became a senator, and he end up becoming a secretary of the [U.S.] Navy--of the [U.S.] Army. And I had run into him a couple of times since the judiciary hearings. And he was married to a sister named, she was a news reporter on television. I can't think of her name right now, but I have to give it-- Speaker 1: Is that [HM] Janet Langhart [Cohen]? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She was married to Cohen, right, you got it. And 'cause she used to be at BET [Black Entertainment Television] a lot. And that's where I ran into him in the parking lot, I said, "Man, you look familiar, you know," and I said to Congressman Cohen, "I shot you at the judicial hearings for the impeachment of Nixon." He says "Oh, wow." I said, "What are you doing now?" "I'm a senator now." I said, "Oh, great," you know, shook his hand. And (unclear) he eventually became secretary of the Army, you know. And then, you know, Jon Lucien came to town just off the boat, I shouldn't say that, but he, you know, he was from Saint Thomas. And his name was like Gillicuddy [ph.]. He had a Irish name really. I don't remember what it was. Speaker 1: So he really, he had a, it wasn't Congressman Jon Lucien-- Speaker 2: No, it was McGillicuddy [ph.] or something very, very Irish. Speaker 1: Can it explain who he is now or maybe I should, I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, when, when he came to town he had come, he was a singer on the RCA [Radio Corporation of America] label. And the brother that represented the promotions for RCA was a good friend of mine, so he brought Jon Lucien to my apartment. So this is one of the artists that I got to meet real close and we kept in touch. Now I sent him a postcard when I was in Egypt, and I see he sent me a postcard when he was in Bali, you know, so. And when he performed and I would be around, he says yeah, I see Oggi [David "Oggi" Ogburn] over there and well he send me a card from Egypt and, you know. But he was a great singer yeah, 'Rashida' was one of my favorite tunes. And then I also got a picture of him with Jean Carne. They sang 'Jin, Jin' [sic., 'Gingi'] together, "Oh, Jin, Jin," and Jean Carn was-- Speaker 1: She was on that album? I mean she was on that-- Speaker 2: I don't think she was on that album but they would had a-- Speaker 1: They sang together? Speaker 2: They, they sang together at a club that Ed Murphy [ph.] owned, that same song 'Jin, Jin,' you know. And, and I had gotten to be good friends with, [HM] Dyana Williams was a good friend of mine from being at WHUR on the radio and we sort of hooked up-- Story_ID: 178617 Speaker 1: Now [HM] Dyana Williams she's a, she started off as a, on WHUR [radio station, Washington, D.C.] spinning records. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She was the inventor of the Quiet Storm as well. Speaker 2: No, she wasn't the inventor. Speaker 1: She wasn't the-- Speaker 2: The inventor of the Quiet Storm was really, it's really kind of thrown up in the air. There's a problem on writing the history of, about that but [HM] Cathy Hughes was running the station when Melvin Lindsey, who was hanging around in the music library well, somebody didn't come in and she asked him to go get on, you know, you're gonna have to fill, you fill in, you gonna have to go on the radio for so and so. They had somebody being the engineer and all he did was, you know, just playing records but it was called, he started something called the Quiet Storm. And the 'Quiet Storm' was [HM] Smokey Robinson's tune, and that would be the opening of his, you know, his show, of course. And he would play, and the Quiet Storm became such a popular show that it was taken on around the country. Because-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Because Vaughn Harper in New York [New York] was the Quiet Storm and the cats in New York, I have to tell 'em look, it started in Washington with Melvin Lindsey. And if you ever get a chance I have a video on YouTube of Melvin Lindsey because I had a lot of picture of him, playing, of course, the Quiet Storm was so popular and a lot of people really dug Melvin in this area. Speaker 1: This is a, the Quiet Storm is to put it delicately, bedroom music almost, the mellow sound. Speaker 2: A lot a-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: A lot of babies was born listening to the Quiet Storm, yeah so, you know. And so it really started in Washington [D.C.] and Cathy Hughes was really managing the station at the time. Now other people that was at the station would like to get to, they wanna get the history correct and sometimes they're saying that she wasn't, but she was there as far as I knew when the Quiet Storm took off, okay. And yeah, of course, Cathy owns about sixty stations now and has a TV One [Silver Springs, Maryland] also. And one of the things about Cathy is that she sent me an e-mail one day saying that we still here and we survived and, you know, the music business didn't take us out, whatever. And so I look at it as, as her as a good friend, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Were you, you around when she was going through her struggles and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Right. She started, she opened, she started a station over on in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], it was WOL which was the AM station. And at that time they were paying, playing forty-fives was always the hit stuff. And she, you know, she said she had to wash her underwear, you know, and spend the night and wash her underwear in the living room and have to have all this stuff straightened out by the time the morning men came in. You know, 'cause at one time the radio might have went off at twelve o'clock or one o'clock or something, I know TV [television] used to go off real early that's when I was doing photography, but Cathy Hughes really as far as I could see was the one that really took off with the Quiet Storm. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think when you're referring to this, she actually at one time couldn't afford to have a place to stay, she actually lived-- Speaker 2: In the station, right in, in her office. And said she had to wash her underwear and have it hooked up by the time, like I said the morning men came. But she was hooked up, well she was married to a guy named Dewey Hughes at the time, and they were doing the station at the time, but Dewey end up, I guess took off, he went to California. And when he went to California, her son went to California with him but he eventually came back and he's the president of, excuse me, he's the president of TV One and Radio One [Lanham, Maryland], now. [HM] Alfred [C. Liggins, III]-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Alfred Liggins. Now I got a picture of him, when he was ten years old at WHUR on the phone. They were trying to solicit I guess. They never really were like a public station begging for money but they might have been having some kind of campaign going on maybe for turkeys or something during maybe Thanksgiving holidays and he was ten years old, you know. Speaker 1: Another name comes to mind in this discussion now we, we jumped off the photography of Jon Lucien, but since we're on this train, well what about Petey Greene? Speaker 2: Petey Greene was a good friend of, not wasn't a good friend of mine, he was a good friend of my, one of my boys, Ron Sutton [ph.] who was really became, but Petey Greene was a very popular in the city because he represented the people. So even though, to be honest with you same thing with [HM] Marion Barry, he was popular because he represented the people. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) talk show-- Speaker 2: Right he was a talk show host but he also was a comedian. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I ran into him in New York [New York] at The Village Gate [New York, New York]. He was, I was down stairs, down in the Gate and he was upstairs doing his comedian thing. But I ran into him down stairs. But he had a TV show, they made a movie after Petey Greene, you know. But I really wasn't that close to him, I didn't know him that well. I did get pictures of him when I was, I would tell you I was Walter Washington's campaign photographer and Petey Green was hanging around at the time, and I remember the mayor taking his hat and turning it around, he had his hat on backwards maybe, the mayor was fooling with his hat and turned it around, you know. But that's-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: And as far as now, as far as taking pictures now, I got a call one time, I was living with this sister named Denise [ph.] which, as a matter of fact she called me today, I was living with this sister and I get a call from Larry Dunn. He says Larry Dunn, I'm Larry Dunn I'm with Earth, Wind & Fire. I heard we were coming to [Washington] D.C. to hook up with David ["Oggi" Ogburn] and Denise, that was prior to me changing my nickname to Oggi [David "Oggi" Ogburn], changing my name to Oggi mostly. My whole photography career I was known as Oggi. Story_ID: 178618 Speaker 1: But the family, you know, I also was president of the House of Ogburn for a while, which was my family, that's when I had to get a suit and present myself in another kind of way, 'cause, you know, the music thing I'm in leather pants, the silk shirts with my little scarfs and stuff but when I was president of the family I had a suit and tie. And it was a heavy responsibility because it's really, politicking is really deep, when especially when it's with the family. And we have a large family started, my grandfather [John Ogburn] started the organization in 1942, and in Brooklyn [New York, New York] at his church, Saint Cyprian [Saint Cyprian's Church, New York, New York]. And they also had a branch in Philly, and they also had a branch in Richmond, Virginia, and they had another branch in Suffolk, Virginia, and we also had some relatives in Connecticut. Now Connecticut was the last group to really come on board and as the president I went up there and we had our reunion in Connecticut which was the first, first time. Speaker 2: So the families formed an official organization called the House of Ogburn? Speaker 1: Right. Yeah. Speaker 2: And you were the head? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was the president, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My uncle told everybody he was grooming me for the job but that really wasn't my cup of tea but I, I did the best I could. I started the newsletter, and in the newsletter I sort of got into history and because of my relationship with Chancellor [Williams] I sort of got into ancient history to try to uplift them and inspire them that we have a, we have a history other, outside of slavery, because at one time slavery was the only thing that we could grip on, you know. But in Chancellor's book he said he was given a lot of recognition to the brothers to children of students of the sixties [1960s] because they were one of the, they wanted to know who their history was, what was their history and they also, and at the same time, Africa was getting its independence during that time. And while Africa was getting its independence, Chancellor had a good relationship with Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana. And there was a newspaper article that I had, eventually ended up with, that, where, where Chancellor talked about Nkrumah never got a chance to see a united Africa and was disappointed because of that. And, and, you know, he was a, he was, he was, he knew a couple of other African leaders which I'm not familiar with, but he traveled to like sixteen countries to do "The Destruction [of Black Civilization]" and a lot of it was oral. And one of the things he did while he was doing that, he said, he had to get away from the, the boog- bougie educated kind of blacks who they seem to look down-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --they look down on the others. So he had to get somebody that could relate to them without looking down and to get the information that he wanted. And a lot of times, you know, it was oral, it was a oral thing 'cause the, you know, in Africa they do have a, a griot that, you know, passes down the history and I see how to hook up with a couple of them. So you went to at least sixteen different African countries or was it a 106? I, I'm not on it too tough, but I know he went to a lot of places (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 178619 Speaker 1: Since we're back on Chancellor Williams, let me just ask this question 'cause a lot of people are, Chancellor Williams is criticized even though he was a trained professional historian with a Ph.D. and all that, he's criticized, 'The Destruction of Black Civilization' is criticized because of unsupported information in terms of, there's no documentation for-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --some of the things he says. Speaker 2: Which was oral. Speaker 1: Some of the things he says are well known facts to historians and they already know how to document, but for, and then some things, they don't know where he got this particular fact from necessarily-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so. Did he ever discuss why he produced a book like that or did he not have enough help? I know he was, I think he was his losing sight. Speaker 2: Well, what happened was he wanted to do a three book set, and he started losing his sight so he sort of condensed it all into 'The Destruction.' But he always felt that somebody would, will continue to, to broaden what he had started with 'The Destruction' to, 'cause he really wanted it to be like a three or four book set, and like I said he started losing his vision and he always felt that the future generations would take off, so at certain areas where he might have left off, yeah. Speaker 1: So to your knowledge, I mean did he talk about how he wrote the book? Did he basically dictate it into an audio device or something or how did-- Speaker 2: Well, I really don't know how he did it. I think he was doing it by hand 'cause I do have some of his handwritten stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was mentioning to you the girl that typed up 'The Destruction of Civilization,' I guess he had the yellow pad to, you know, I mean he did the long yellow pad things, you know, where he wrote a lot of it. Speaker 1: So would you say then, 'cause I get the impression that he was trying to publish it as fast as he could, you know, as much as he could-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Well-- Speaker 1: --and when it got out with, with, he wasn't so concerned about the footnotes and that sort of thing at that point. Speaker 2: Well but he, you know, if you read his 'Destruction' it has footnotes and stuff but there, at certain points there must have been some oral stuff, you know, where there, they couldn't factually pinpoint it but, you know, in Africa oral is, you know, they had, you know, the griots that's what they did, that was their job was to keep passing on the history, keep adding on and passing it on. You call griots right, storytellers or whatever? Speaker 1: Jali (unclear) Speaker 2: Well what is the other word? Speaker 1: Jali. Speaker 2: Jali? Speaker 1: Yeah, jali or jeli, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There probably are a whole lot of words for it-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --but, you know, but-- Speaker 2: But so, and another thing to he was saying that in Africa, when there was a problem, you know, the elders would settle it, you know, you would take your problem to the elders and they would work it out, you know, and between you and your wife or whatever, you know. And so a lot of the African tradition, well we lost all of that, you know, we back to Chancellor again, but we lost all of that. But, you know, I'm optimistic that there, 'cause at one time, you know, everybody was wearing Afros and dashikis, and now everybody is wearing dreads and, you know, Bob Marley started the dreads, and like I told you, I even had a ponytail which was corny compared to, you know, what, it wasn't ethnic but I said Ice-T had a ponytail and Ron Isley had a ponytail, so. But right now everybody is wearing dreadlocks or long braids, you know, stop cutting their hair, and the brothers look, you know, it's from African traditions, then they hook it up a certain kind of way. And so I don't know if it, if the Afro would ever come back, I know a lot of women are into the wigs and stuff like they're going crazy with nowadays, like Beyonce started. Well, it ain't just Beyonce but, you know, everybody is wearing wigs now or hair that's coming out of India but as far as the photography goes that's, Earth, Wind & Fire called me up. Story_ID: 435068 Speaker 1: You became friends with Jon Lucien and kept up with him during his whole career? Speaker 2: Right, right. And like I said we sent postcards to each other when we traveled. And what happened, he performed at Blues Alley in Washington [D.C.], so whenever he came down I would go by and see him, and I was noticing that, you know, he had a problems fooling around over the years and his health wasn't that great, you know, but he was losing his eyesight. And one time he was at Blues Alley, and one of my neighbors was there for her birthday. And she was with her boyfriend, of course, and I said Jon one of my girl, my buddies is out there and, you know, she wants to meet you and he said well, you know, I can't see. I said, hey man I'm used to Chancellor Williams, grab my arm, and I took him out there. He greeted her and she was so happy because she said she wanted her boyfriend to know that she knew important people, whatever that meant. No but Jon Lucien, 'Rashida' was one of my favorite songs and like I say, I caught a concert that he did, it was his concert and [HM] Jean [Carne] was there, came out to sing, 'Jin Jin' [sic., 'Gingi']. Speaker 1: It was Jean Carne. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Jin, Jin' well, the song was 'Jin, Jin.' Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And 'cause they both they had did it separately, and then they just did it together. Speaker 1: And Willie Bobo [formerly, William Correa] had a version. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Willie Bobo, my man. That's one of the first concerts I ever went to was Willie Bobo with Cal Tjader and [Ramon] "Mongo" Santamaria [Rodriguez]. That's, that's my first concert ever, you know. But so me and, Jean was tight with [HM] Dyana Williams who was, she started out at HUR [WHUR radio station, Washington, D.C.] on the air-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but she's the one, yeah we were trying to explain where she was before. That she was the founder of Black Music Month, I know that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She was married to-- Speaker 2: She wasn't married to [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble-- Speaker 1: Kenny-- Speaker 2: --but they had three children. Speaker 1: Three children-- Speaker 2: Right, together. Speaker 1: --by Kenny. Okay. Speaker 2: They might have been married but from my understanding they wasn't but, you know, how those things go. I don't wanna deny that, I don't know if they were married or not. So I was tight with her and she was tight with Jean. And so, I would think she, Dyana was tight with a couple of people because she was tight with Labelle also, 'cause I had a picture of one of the girls in Labelle, it wasn't the one that had her stomach out but the tall, thin one- Speaker 1: Nona Hendryx? Speaker 2: Nona. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I had a picture of Nona one time when she was performing by herself, and she had bent all the way back, her back and so I told Dyana to, I told Nona that I had that picture. So she said she wanted it, so I said well, yeah I'll send it to Dyana, and I sent it to Dyana. And Dyana and was my person who I'll give the pictures to and she would give 'em to whoever. 'Cause I had a picture of Kenny Gamble and [HistoryMaker] Leon Huff with Betty Shabazz, you know. So I sent it to Dyana and I know she, you know, hooked up Kenny with it, you know. And but me and Dyana was real tight and we still are a matter of fact. Because of her I had my first exhibit in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the October Gallery [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. She was hooked up with a girl named Sheila Eldridge were partners and they started something called International African American Music [Association of African American Music (IAAAM)] whatever and they would have a convention-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: --you know, they would have a convention. And that's when I had my first exhibit, really showing people my pictures and, you know, in the music industry, you know. And other than that, me and Dyana still tight today. And what happened, Dyana had gotten me, Ronnie Wright, who was the photographer out of New York [New York] that shot entertainers, and there was another brother out of California that's named is, his last name was Turner [ph.] who shot the entertainers out there, so Dyana had all of us, got together and we had a first exhibit in Philadelphia. Also there's a singer, who I can't think of his name right name, who also is a photographer that had a picture with Jon Lucien, they were tight. And he's, I'll think of it in a minute, but he was also part of the exhibit. And so that exhibit went to Atlanta [Georgia], and so I end up going down to Atlanta at the Am--, Amex Museum [sic., APEX Museum, Atlanta, Georgia]. There was the same exhibit that Dyana hooked up and from there, the exhibit went someplace else in Atlanta, and that was how that went. And still today, you know, me and Dyana keep in touch, you know, Facebook and all that stuff. Speaker 1: The APEX Museum [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: APEX. Speaker 1: APEX. Speaker 2: That's what it's called? Speaker 1: Right, right, right APEX. Speaker 2: I said Amex? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, a friend of mine-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: --has the Amex Theater [ph.], okay. Speaker 1: I think of it-- Speaker 2: APEX, right. Speaker 1: Well, I was told by the staff there, that this goes almost around toward Jean Carne actually visited Atlanta, has come in there and volunteered to paint showcases in overalls. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Wait a minute, she said she has that dedication and-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --love for what's going on. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --to do that. Speaker 2: --because-- Speaker 1: And I thought was remarkable. Speaker 2: Because of Dyana and, and Jean Carne's relationship, I run into Jean Carne one day, and she's with her son and her daughter, it must have been at one of Dyana's functions, and I'm telling her that, you know, my favorite song is 'Infant Eyes,' and she says and oh, that was my daughter here, you know, 'Infant Eyes' she says-- Speaker 1: 'Cause she was infant (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. So I said I also got a picture of you and Bill Carne [ph.], you was pregnant at the time. She said I was pregnant with my son over here. So I said well, wow, that's great. You know, so I be, when I do my little book I'll have that story in it if nothing else. You know, and other than that, Jean Carne was married to a friend of mine and they sort of split up now, and he's a big, I guess I don't know if he's a big time lawyer but he's a lawyer out in California now. And, you know, Jean, oh, and because of me sending her the picture of her and Jon Lucien doing the song together, she invited me to a couple of shows that she was doing with Doug [Carne], she said, 'cause she was telling me she wanted the picture of her and Doug 'cause they were getting ready to go out on the road again and do something, and they did. And 'cause she invited me to some African festival that they were doing together but she also was doing some, she also was coming to Washington by herself to be at Blues Alley. She invited me to come to that if I wanted too. And I, you know, try to keep up with the dates and stuff, I sort of missed it but-- Speaker 1: This is amazing I never knew they ever got back together to do anything. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Cause when-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --we interviewed her, I mean-- Speaker 2: This wasn't-- Speaker 1: She was-- Speaker 2: This was last year. Speaker 1: --surprised that I knew-- Speaker 2: Last year. Speaker 1: --about that work. Speaker 2: The last year. Speaker 1: She thought I was gone talk about the disco era. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And I was, I did talk about that but I-- Speaker 2: Hey, man 'Infant Eyes.' Speaker 1: But when I mentioned that era she was very moved that I recognized it. Speaker 2: 'Infant Eyes,' the words to 'Infant Eyes' just took me out. Just like 'Take Me to the King,' nowadays I'm into that tune, 'Take Me to the King,' I love it, you know, with Tamela Mann, whatever-- Story_ID: 435069 Speaker 1: Tell me this, what is your photographic, what are your preferences what-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: what cameras do you use? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean what did you use in the golden age of what you were shooting? Speaker 2: Okay. When I first started taking pictures, the first camera that I bought, now I had other cameras, but the first camera that I bought was a Nikomat. It cost me $172 in 1972, okay. And the first thing I did with that camera, I went to Albany [New York], a friend of mine lived in Albany, it was during the holidays. And since that time I was doing a gig and I met another photographer, HUR [WHUR Radio Station, Washington, D.C.] had hired me to do a gig for Atlantic Records [Los Angeles, California], it was HUR I was working for but it was an Atlantic Records press party. And they was a photographer there who was working for Atlantic Records. And me and him got to be friends and he end up working at a camera store. And he, and from my one hundred, well $272, Nikomat, I end up with a $500 Nikon through him. And the next thing I know, I had a Nikon F1, a Nikon F2. And when I first started taking pictures I didn't own a flash. So to be honest with you, some of my favorite pictures I did take without a flash because it gives you a different artistic present, presentation, you know. And the shadows and stuff just come out so much, to me, I like to shoot without a flash a lot of times but if you're on a job and you gotta get the picture you wanna make sure you got your flash 'cause, you know, you gotta get the right pictures to the people. But, you know, working with so many entertainers I would be with 'em all day, maybe two or three days at a time. So after I do the grip and grin at the radio stations with the Donnie Simpsons [reference to Donnie Simpson, a well-known radio disc jockey] and, you know, the baldheaded dude that's on a couple of different stations now, his wife was a, she does the exercise thing, the travel jock what's his name? Traveled from Dallas [Texas] to Chicago [Illinois] for a long time, he's on about-- Speaker 1: Oh, Tom [Thomas] Joyner? Speaker 2: Tom Joyner. I'm trying to think of right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Just, you know, taking pictures with the Tom Joyners. See the people that's on the stations in the mornings when it's big time because they're listening to the radio, people in the cars going to work so that's where they had the, they're best people sometimes. And then they also have the afternoon drives, I guess coming home from work. So once, I'm say, I got a picture of Sade sleeping in the back of the limousine. Matter of a fact I got a lot of pictures of artists sleeping in the back of the limousine because once they get out on the road it's really just go, go, go, and they gotta be friendly everywhere they go, they gotta act like the, you know, cheerful, and I know sometimes they're not that way. Now, when I was with a certain group which you might call the P-Funk [performers with George Clinton and the Parliament-Funkadelic collective] or whatever, they would, when we get to a station they would open up a bottle of champagne just before we go in and they would throw down the bottle of champagne and be all cheery, you know, for the day and they go from station to station. It was one guy in the group that had on a big thing of a donkey head, you know, and after a while, after drinking the champagne a couple of times he started, he couldn't breathe or something, he was going crazy with this donkey head on him so. That was kind of funny, but, you know, mainly traveling with the, with the artists was, was, you know, going to the radio stations and that afternoon we might go to a record store and in the evening we would go to the clubs because those are the places that they would wanna meet the people that were dealing with their music. Speaker 1: So a job on a certain day may take you from early in the morning to late at night? Speaker 2: Right. And but-- Speaker 1: And (unclear) Speaker 2: --but it was employment of enjoyment that I always kind of say. And, and it was my lifestyle, coming from New York [New York] I was prepared to hang out in reality. Speaker 1: So your recreation was actually folded into your job? Speaker 2: Right-- Story_ID: 435070 Speaker 1: Because, you know, so many people over the years would say, could I carry your camera bag or could I do this, especially after they see the pictures that I have, you know. When I shot Bob Marley, was at a hotel on Dupont Circle [Washington, D.C.], where anybody could have walked in off the street to meet him, you know. But it wasn't a secret let's put it that way. And, but the Caribbean people were there and those that, you know, were on the radio they knew he was gonna be there 'cause, you know, [Sugar] Minnott and a couple of other people that were from Jamaica they all came. And I took pictures with them with Bob Marley and he was very a cool brother, I mean, you know, very down to earth and feel really spiritual. And you could tell by his music he really was, he represent what he sang, you know. 'No Woman, No Cry,' you know. I should have shot the sheriff, but I could have shot the sheriff, whatever. Speaker 2: But I shot the deputy-- Speaker 1: --the deputy (laughter). But, you know, he was really worshipped in Jamaica. So, you know, and like I say, I got a call from Larry Dunn, he said he was with Earth, Wind & Fire, they came by, at that time they had a girl in the group called Jessica [Cleaves]-- Speaker 2: Jessica-- Speaker 1: Cleaves. Speaker 2: Cleaves, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, and Philip Bailey came with them, and so I met those three at first. And so I eventually had a party for 'em and, and so the whole group came to the party, the girl I was living with was from Puerto Rico and she made a chicken, rice and beans kind of thing, you know, so they had plenty of food and it was plenty of drink there. And a lot of neighborhood guys that lived in that little area where, where my apartment was from Nigeria, they came to the party, and people that I knew. It wasn't a big party now, it was maybe about twenty-five people and, you know, this was them starting out because they seemed like when they were on stage they were putting like pajamas, you know, tights and stuff. It wasn't like they had outfits, you know, as the years went by. So I also was a sound man in the theater, and I was telling Maurice [White] that, you know, I'm a sound man in theater, why don't they come up to the theater. And so Maurice was saying that they wanted to start doing some different things on stage, some magical tricks on stage, so they did come to the theater, all nine of 'em and they saw the show and the show was, had a, well the show was about weird music and how this cat was hanging in the end. So they went, after the show was over that went up on stage to see how he was, you know, how you could hang somebody and, you know, it was very informative. And so me and Philip became the closest out of all of 'em. And a couple of times I met Phyllis [ph.], I mean Philip in the hotel with his wife, and she had to pick out the clothes, what he was gonna wear and, you know, he was, but he had like three or four kids when he was like twenty-one or twenty-two. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: Those guys had a lot of kids. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: I know he got a bunch now. Speaker 2: Phil Bailey was, he had the high voice. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the tenor. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Now before him was Jessica was the high tenor. And I just, I was so, so surprised when he end up taking the high tenor part but he could do it, did it very well. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) actually was an alto. I don't know how, if she sung that part with Earth, Wind & Fire but she was an alto in Friends-- Speaker 1: The other group, right. Speaker 2: --Friends of Distinction. Speaker 1: But she also did the high notes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If you listen to the albums she was on, you will hear her doing the, the high stuff, you know. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: She was, she had a varied range in other words. When she was with that other group though she was going with [James] Jim Brown, the football player. Speaker 2: I didn't know that. Speaker 1: With Friends of Distinction. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And I understand he beat her up a couple of time so I don't know. I'll deny that (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. (Unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. So we with Earth, Wind & Fire and they did a couple of concerts, yeah. Speaker 2: Now, what film, were you shooting with Tri-X or something or what? Speaker 1: Okay. Tri-X was the first film that I used because that was the most sensitive to light. And you could, and since I didn't have a flash, a lot of times I would call, I would have to push the film. And what pushing is, under, overexpose, underexposing it and overdeveloping it, which gave it a nice little contrast, which I liked. And some of my famous, most pictures that I enjoy were done like that, which is Art Blakey, and my girl jazz singer, aw man, this is horrible, but I know I got Grover Washington [Jr.] that way, he was one of the first guys. And I got to meet Grover Washington after the first time I shot him, I went on the road with him for a while, and one of the things he said which was interesting he says, if you write a hit tune, you better like it because you gotta play it a million times. You know, but he was really a cool brother too. But your boy Jon Lucien was my man though and I'm sorry that he went blind and died but, yeah, 'Rashida' boy it's was her name, whew. Story_ID: 435071 Speaker 1: But were you talking about Nina Simone earlier? Were you trying to remember-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was a jazz singer, Betty Carter. Speaker 1: Oh, Betty Carter. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And, you know, Betty Carter used to have workshops at the [John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] for young people. I guess a lot of 'em came from the Duke Ellington School of the Arts [Washington, D.C.], you know. And she would give like workshops and, so, you know, these are things that I wasn't aware of. Just like when I saw the Jim Burns or somebody Bernstein [ph., unable to verify] on the jazz, I had no idea how many people that Art Blakey, the drummer, had brought into the jazz world through his band. And it, and he was one of the great, great drummers of all time, you know. Speaker 1: Now you, and let's see of, did, did you have a favorite performer that you shot, I mean or-- Speaker 2: Well, I started out-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: --I started out with Janet Jackson when she was fifteen, she was with her mother. And I could see from the early days that Janet Jackson was a hard worker. Because we went to a mall in Baltimore [Maryland] where there was a whole lot of kids, I guess school must have been out, and Janet didn't wanna leave without having signed everybody who wanted something signed, you know. And her mother was saying that Janet even works harder than her brothers did, you know. And so Janet, this was Janet when she was fifteen, and then I shot Janet again, you know, during her records, you know, her brother, Jackie [Jackson], was going with Paula Abdul or Paula Abdul was a friend of his, I'll put it that way, 'cause he was married, and because of his relationship with Paula Abdul, Paula Abdul choreographed all of Janet's initial beginning records which was very coordinated, you know, "One Nation" ["Rhythm Nation"] or, you know, and, "What Have You Done For Me Lately" and all that kind of stuff, had very good dance moves and was done by Paula Abdul but she came through Jackie, her older brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, did I mention all the Jacksons, you know, tried to do their own private records. And so Jackie came out first, his didn't do anything. Then Marlon [Jackson] came out, and his didn't do anything. But Jermaine's [Jermaine Jackson] records did do pretty good. And, of course, Janet was the other one in the family. La Toya [Jackson] tried to do something, I think I mentioned this to you, and I asked her, you know, her brother, Jackie, you know, La Toya was spending forty grand [thousand dollars] of her own money. At that time she was hooked up with sort of, supposed to be a mafia type individual and she was spending forty grand [thousand dollars] of her own money to promote her record. And I asked Jackie who had came out later with another Jacksons tune, I asked him, you know, what was she trying to make, how money was she trying to make with, you know, putting up her own money forty [thousand] grand. He says "enough money for life." And that's the first time I ever heard anybody even say stuff like that. But Jackie used to go to Italy every day, every year and spend thirty grand [thousand dollars] on clothes. And the reason he said he did, when you go to Italy, he said their clothes was a little bit advanced, and, you know, they didn't get here until later. And so I was saying what do you do, you know, thirty grand [thousand dollars] at the time when he was saying it was like a whole lot, might not be much nowadays 'cause custom suits might cost, cost you six grand or whatever. But he said he used to buy like three tuxedos, and I was saying wow. But, you know, I guess some guys go to all them award shows and, you know, in California and I guess anywhere, New York [New York], you know, the Grammys or whatever and so. And, you know, so and the last time I shot Janet was 2006 but I had shot her at least, at least ten times in those, since she was fifteen to 2006, 'cause she would come out with her records and be, you know, promoting her records. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And who else did I like shooting? Well Sade was great. She was exotic 'cause she was from Britain and had that that accent and her body was right too, and, you know, Toni Braxton. I mean I was shooting people that I was in love with but, you know, I never, one of the things, the reasons why I think I got over so well is, was I wasn't a groupie, you know, I didn't even take pictures with 'em most of the time. And I would sit up front with the limo driver because I didn't wanna be in the back with them, with their little small talk, where you coming from, where you going, and I didn't want them to look at me as being a pain in the neck. So really I got over in a lot of ways, I think I mentioned this to you before it's because when we went into a radio station and I would know everybody at these stations between Baltimore [Maryland] and Virginia and the manager, whatever. So man you seem to know everybody and I would tell em, I says, you know, he likes baseball, if you get him some baseball tickets, you know, he might deal with your record a little differently. And, so I would try to be as informative as I could with the record people and they began to like me and that's how come I did, the Mid-Atlantic was really my territory. And a couple of other photographers hated me because, you know, I had, I had sort of locked in and like I say, and, and not only did I have it locked in but I'm working for my friends. These people started out as students at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or worked in the record stores and because I treated everybody with the same way I wanted to be treated, you know, they, they didn't forget me when they got, when they got the jobs with the record companies. And so I sort of was the, the person in this area. And, it lasted for forty years. Even though it was a young industry, BET [Black Entertainment Television] was in this area. Story_ID: 435072 Speaker 1: And I might mention you had to go to BET [Black Entertainment Television], if you had a hit, if you had a record that you wanted to become anything, you had to go to BET, 'Arsenio Hall [Show]' and 'Soul Train' was the three people, places you had to go with your record (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So yeah, BET starts up in '81 [1981], and they really build their strength on music videos. Speaker 1: Right and where they didn't have to put up any money. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'Cause people couldn't, wanted 'em to show their videos. Donnie Simpson at one time had a box full of Reeboks jackets, and because I gave him a bunch of pictures that I had of him one time he gave me a Reeboks jacket. And believe it or not, I was in a grocery store with the jacket on and it was a friend of mine, his name was Lee, he owned part of WKYS [radio station, Washington, D.C.] and he also was out of Denver [Colorado], owned part of the Denver Nuggets it was, that was their foot, basketball team, whatever, Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --and he saw me with the Reeboks jacket on, and he said I just came from Boston [Massachusetts] having a meeting with Reeboks, you know. But he was owner of a, he was part owner of WKYS Radio Station and the Denver Nuggets basketball team. Speaker 2: What, so what's the most memorable gift you ever got from somebody (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Well, to be honest with you the most memorable gift I got was when I got my master's degree. I know that's not a gift but it was a gift. Speaker 2: From somebody that you (unclear)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Well, I guess Donnie with the jacket. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: You know, Teena Marie sent me a signed picture that I had, you know. I mean it really, you know, I really didn't get much. I mean just the lifestyle was great, going to the best restaurants staying at the best hotels, and riding around in the limousine. I mean for a person that came from Jamaica, Queens [New York, New York], who was, when I was came to Washington [D.C.] I, you know, that was like, you know, from being in the playground most of your, most of the time and playing basketball, you know, I mean limousines and, you know, Morton's [Steakhouse] of Chicago [Illinois], you know, at the power places, you know, where people ate, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, so this is like you're developing a rapport with everybody in the music industry. I mean, did, did you reach a point where everybody knew you? Speaker 1: Right, well, see-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --the music business is really small. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's not that large. I would go to California, I would hook up with a friend of mine who was a vice president at Motown [Records, Detroit, Michigan]. And, you know, Ed Eckstine was a big time vice president and, you know, every, the music industry is small. If you could also look at it as the, the actors, the black actors they all knew each other because they all got, go out for the same jobs. Now, did we, we talked about the D.C. Black Repertory [Company, Washington, D.C.] already though, but all of those people know each other. Like I said Lynn Whitfield came out of the D.C. Black Rep. And Kene Holliday, he was in 'Matlock' and was his sidekick and, you know, and Lynn did 'Josephine Baker Story.' And it was just, it was a great time for me because like I said it fitted into my lifestyle, I knew how to drink without going crazy, sort of knew, I just could control myself because a lot of people were out of control that get in that business. And a lot of times, you know, I, and even today I'm almost positive that the rehab places are overloaded with a lot of people in the music industry, just from the freedom that they have and all, it's a fun thing. You know, me, when I, my job was when they were promoting the records. And promoting the records is the fun thing, you're taking people to dinners and lunches and, you know. I sort of had a good relationship with the Sister 2 Sister Magazine [HM] Jamie Foster Brown, used to work at BET, and she eventually started her own magazine because BET wasn't really paying a lot of people a lot of money. But, you know, nowadays even on Facebook I could put a picture of Diana Ross with a bunch of the girls from BET, and I would put it on Facebook and, you know, those girls would say those were the good old days. Now I also worked at WHUR [Washington, D.C.] a lot. I worked at all the radio stations really in this area, in this market. When I worked with a, somebody like Tina Turner and Janet Jackson, or Tevin Campbell those are crossover artists, so sometimes we would and the pop stations also, and then we also went to the R and B [Rhythm and Blues] stations or whatever. And so you got, I got to meet so many people, and the relationship was always genuine because like I said I never acted, my head never got too big and I would take pictures of everybody. And that's another thing, you know, a lot of people wanted these pictures now that, the Internet is happening I'm getting calls from DJs [disc jockeys] that I guess, jocks that are in Florida saying Oggi [David "Oggi" Ogburn], they talk crazy, would you send me all the pictures you got of me. Yeah, they always say, well you should send a check up here, you know, we see what we can do, you know. 'Cause it really, when people say those kind of things it's a lot of research just to go back. But I have documented, I have documented and have myself really pretty, pretty organized. And the only reason I'm organized like I am today is because I had a job with General Motors, and that's the first time that I had file cabinets and, you know. So nowadays a lot of times, if I have an exhibit and a person wants a certain picture, I can go get to the negative or I can go find the, the digital tune, the digital picture in my computer. 'Cause nowadays, you know, you just a take a CD with a picture on it and that's what you take to get printed now because when, when, digital came in you didn't lose quality. You know, when you was dealing with tapes, you know, a tape you would--there'd be--lose a generation, you know, but with the digital stuff you don't lose any quality, it's stable (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now you-- Story_ID: 435073 Speaker 1: You mentioned before that you said, if somebody like for instance wanted a picture of themselves, one of the women who worked at BET [Black Entertainment Television] wanted a picture-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --with Diana Ross, you, you're inclined to just send that to 'em right? Speaker 2: Well, not, what I would do is I would send them the picture first-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --and maybe, because if they was a secretary or something I'm only charging maybe twenty dollars. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Where, you know, my, the most I've sent pictures was a thousand dollars was at exhibit, you know, when people are buying pictures off the walls. Speaker 1: Suppose I'm writing a book about Chancellor Williams, say I wanna a picture of Chancellor Williams-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --then, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Well, what happened recently was 'Unsung,' okay. And me and Miki Howard got to be good friends when she was work, we worked together a lot. And at the time that I met her, her first gig she was going with Gerald Levert. So when they did 'Unsung' they go to her and say we want pictures of what you got, so she sent them like seven pictures that she had gotten from me, and she told them that the production company that she didn't own the pictures that I did. And the production company said how much do you charge a picture, and I said a hundred dollars, a hundred-fifty whatever, and they sent me a check for the pictures. Now, recently a girl did a book on 'Soul Train' and I think, you know, she was a daughter of a friend of mine and she did a book on it, matter of fact she's going, up at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] right now getting ready to promote it at the book store, see I just got an e-mail. And, you know, I mean, but, you know, I have a manager to now and he sort of deals with that part, and he said how much should we charge? I said well she's my daughter's girlfriend [girlfriend's daughter], how much do they give up, you know, you still try to bargain and they started with seventy-five dollars a picture which is to me it's cool, you know, all you're doing is sending it electric, you know, well, you e-mail thing, which is already in my computer. But if I had to go in the darkroom and blow it up and all of that, you know, that's a whole different story, that whole different thing. Because, you know, that, they we've had the Exposure Group [African American Photographers Association, Washington, D.C.] which is a photography group were bringing people to let you know just how much it should cost or for the time that you're spending doing things, you know, taking it to the lab and back and whatever, all of that's, and, you know, they would like you to get paid for your time is the way they would do it. And there's even books about, Ascam [ph.] comes out with books to tell you what, what picture would cost for certain things with books for videos and stuff, and each year you get a new book and it changes, you know, the prices go up. And when you think about it, you know, you, I don't know what the video camera costs but Nikons now, you know, the ones I had they said were really amateurs even though, of course, they cost 1500 almost two grand [thousand dollars]. But to get the big, the real Nikon cameras it might cost you between two and five grand [thousand dollars], you know, they're really multi-computers. And the, but those kind of cameras are hooked up with Wi-Fi, you take the picture and it goes to your phone and right from your phone it goes to where ever you wanna send it. That's why a lot of the people overseas with news, I mean, you know, the news guys in the war zone or whatever, you know, that's, deep, you know, they have cameras like that. And plus those cameras can go through a lot of bouncing around kind of thing too. That's, you know, they're made that well, you know. 'Cause I had a Nikon lens one time, it was a long one, and I was shooting something of the capitol and I was running up to keep up with my crew, 'cause if you get separated from your crew sometimes it's hard, I think I was working with Jonas Savimbi-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And he was, he was an Angolan rebel leader, and he was being supported by the [Richard] Nixon Administration, the South African people. And the Angolan government was being controlled by, not controlled but was being helped by [Fidel] Castro 'cause, the Cubans troops was fighting, you know. And they were all really fighting over the diamonds, you know, a lot of, there was a lot of diamonds and the rebels had a lot of the diamond areas that they had taken control of, and it's a lot different than in America. We're not even, I don't think in America even, can even, can comprehend the stuff that really goes on in other countries. I sort of am interested, when I look at foreign news and see that there's really a lot of revolts all over the world that that we really don't know about. Story_ID: 178626 Speaker 1: Okay. Let me ask you about black photographers. I know you belong to some organizations and one of the things that you did back in '81 [1981] you actually met James Van Der Zee. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: A pioneer black photographer from Harlem [New York, New York], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And tell us about-- Speaker 2: Okay. The first time I met him he was speaking at the Association for the Study of Life of African American Life and History, which was a organization started by Carter [G.] Woodson, and he was on the program and it was him, Polk, Polk came from Tuskegee [Alabama] photographer. Speaker 1: Oh, P, P-- Speaker 2: H.P. Polk [P.H. Polk], was it H.P.? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Something P. Speaker 2: Polk-- Speaker 1: Polk, yeah. Speaker 2: --and Scurlock, son of Addison Scurlock, Robert Scurlock was in this picture, Roy Lewis who was a photographer, and Milton Williams was in the picture. And at that time, Van Der Zee was in a wheelchair and his wife, I had started Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] with her, she married Van Der Zee, she was thirty-four and he, Van Der Zee was ninety-four, okay. Now her brother was my doctor. So the doctor had Van Der Zee over his house, and had people come over to get their books, to buy the book of Van Der Zee's, he had wrote a book, and to get him to sign the book. So that's when I got a picture with him. And I also, Van, when Van Der Zee passed away I also went to New York [New York] and I stayed, I didn't stay at his apartment but I stayed in his, they had an old suite that was on the top floor, what do you call them things on the top floor, suites? Speaker 1: Penthouse suite? Speaker 2: Penthouse. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: They had a penthouse in one of the older buildings. And so I knew his wife, I say and he had, his funeral was at a big church and Noel Pointer was there playing, you know, was the violin. I think he was related to them some kind of way or to his wife, you know. Speaker 1: What was his wife's name (unclear)? Speaker 2: Aww man. Speaker 1: (Unclear) that's okay. Speaker 2: Okay. I'll--(unclear) and well, like I say I went, I went to his brother, her brother was, was my doctor and I went to the house and I got a chance to meet Van Der Zee and sort of read his book. You know, he was into music before he got into the photography thing, and it was interesting when, when you talk about cats like Van Der Zee, I don't know that, Roy DeCarava even was, was into. But when Van Der Zee was coming along, it was like you had to go to the, the, to the, to the drugstore really to buy the chemicals to make the photography stuff, to make the, mix the chemicals and stuff, that when I got into photography was already made together in a package, you know, but those guys had to mix their stuff together, and I guess if they wanted pictures a certain kind of way they'd have to do it more of this and less of that, whatever, you know. I guess they got into it that way. But when I got into photography, the only reason I survived in the photography thing was because I had my own darkroom and when you messed up the film sometimes you could compensate the picture through negative, through filters and different papers. Story_ID: 178627 Speaker 1: And I also got a chance to meet [HM] Gordon Parks. He had written two books that I had him sign for me. And the first time I met him was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], he was close to [HM] Samuel Yette. Samuel Yette wrote a book called 'The Choice,' and him and Samuel Yette were kind of like boys. And Samuel Yette had been to China, so Samuel Yette was having an exhibit at Howard of his China pictures and Gordon Parks was there signing his book. I don't know which one it was, it wasn't the green one, it was, I forgot what the one was, it was 'My Choice of Weapons' ['A Choice of Weapons'] maybe whatever one was, whatever book he signed I know somebody took it out of my house. I don't know who did it but somebody eventually took it 'cause I couldn't find it anymore. And so the second time I met Gordon Parks, he was at the UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], again I guess it must have been another book 'cause Roy Lewis was there telling Gordon that, you know, you got credit for one of my pictures and whatever. And the third time was when he was at the, the Corcoran [Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.]. He had donated some of his work at the Corcoran and he was a having a big exhibit there. And I did get a chance because I was hooked into this gallery with Norman Parish, I got a chance to get a chance to talk to Norman a little bit, and one of the things he, you know, that stuck with me was that, you know, even at my age I still love the ladies, you know. You know, so I said me too, I understand. You know, but, you know he, and one of his wives was the editor that's how a couple of his books got published and he also said he worked in the slop house in Chicago, I believe, you know, where, where the winos and stuff slept. It sort of reminded me of New York, Bowery, Bowery in New York was at one time, it's, I think it's not that way anymore, but the Bowery used to be where the slop houses-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were $25, twenty-five cent a night, you know, and that kind of stuff. So I, you know, I admire him, from Kansas. And, and then he, and eventually he, eventually hooked up with the somebody named Sykes [ph.] that was shooting farm workers and stuff and he got into that, and after that he got into Vogue or, or was it, he shot for a magazine-- Speaker 2: Life, yeah, Life. Speaker 1: --Life. He had a shoot, he shot the ghetto gang members in, in Harlem one time. And, and then, oh, of his classic shot was the woman with the, with the broom, you know, with the broom handle in the, in the Capitol [Building, Washington, D.C.] somewhere. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But he was a great influence. And when I got a job teaching photography I had, I didn't know how to talk three hours about photography 'cause I just learning it myself, so I would show films. And one of his films was 'My Choice of Weapons' ['A Choice of Weapons'], was talking about him and his camera. And another one was Edward Steichen, who was a heavy photographer too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Shot models and, you know, he, he was a heavy weight too, Edward Steichen. But those guys influenced me. And another one was Yousuf Karsh was another photographer who came out of Canada but I think I might have, you know, I showed somebody a, his book, I end up eventually get, buying a book and meeting him at the book store, and he had pictures of the Pope, these are portraits now of the Pope, the King and Queen of England, and he also shot [Fidel] Castro. He has Castro with his Army look and then he also had Castro without his shirt on, you know. And the same well, Leo [ph.] Leo Karsh [ph.], Yousuf Karsh rather, one of the pictures he took was of [Winston] Churchill and Churchill used to have a little stub cigar in his mouth, and so he walked over and snatched the stub out of his mouth and Churchill had a grimace, and that was one of his most famous pictures he said, you know. And so, and, you know, when you start taking pictures you don't know what's going to stick out and, and I was always nervous, is anybody gonna like it, and once people start liking your pictures and I had like girls said, you know, when I see your pictures I see more of a meaning, and not on no ego trip or nothing, but they would say to me things like that and maybe, I said well, you know, that's the way I would see things maybe a little different from other people, you know-- Story_ID: 178628 Speaker 1: --Did you ever employ like a trick like that snatching a cigar out of somebody's mouth or doing, or making a face or directing their attention (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, you know with a cat like George Howard who was a comedian, he's dead now but he was a horn player from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. You know, he would get at the radio station and act goofy and the girls, you know, they was, the personnel would be there would act goofy too. So I got pictures of him looking, you know, doing crazy things. And, and I, you know, I enjoyed, you know, I really, you get bored with the grip and grin but you gotta get that out the way and those are the ones that the record company wanted. Now what I'm enjoying right now with the photography is that, once I've given people the stuff that they wanted for the Billboard Magazine and the JETs [JET magazine] and stuff like that, I'm going through the same batch of negatives now and I'm seeing a lot of other pictures that I think I enjoy, that are even better than the ones that they even chose. You'd be surprised when you think you know what pictures people are gonna pick you never know. You know, they will pick out pictures that I would say, well I don't know why they got that one but this one is much better but, you know, everybody has a different opinions and Scott is shaking his head back there agreeing with me on that, you know, so. Speaker 1: True. Speaker 2: Yeah. So and I'm having one of the biggest thrills of my life right now is that I'm in, sort of like people asking me to exhibit at their galleries now. I got two exhibits that's getting ready to start. November second, one is in Alabama at the Montgomery Fine Arts Museum [Montgomery, Alabama]. And another one is in, out in Maryland somewhere, and it's like a two hour drive from Washington [D.C.] so a friend of mine who I've, who is a photographer also, said he has rented out a gallery for two months and would I be, you know, in the show and could I do a show for him. And I said, of course, you know, I'm, I'm out there to sell work now. You know, it's nothing, it doesn't do me any good keeping pictures in the drawer. You know, and I told him when I lecture the photographers, that's one of the things I tell 'em, make sure you're organized and, you know, when you start out you might be kind of sloppy keeping your negatives a certain way, well you wanna have all that stuff organized 'cause you never know when you gotta find that picture. Now I'm getting ready to have a meeting with the Library of Congress, two curators there, who I've been introduced to by [HM] Deborah Willis, who is sort of like the heavy weight in black photographers. And I have to meet the-- Speaker 1: Yeah she-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--my-- Speaker 1: --compiles these anthologies of-- Speaker 2: For black photography, right. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) black photography. And I know she was particularly focused on black women photographers at one point. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That nobody-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --had paid attention to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --before. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, now so she's-- Speaker 2: Well, she went to Pratt Institute [New York, New York] and she found out, her father was a photographer, he was a policeman but he also took pictures. So when she goes to Pratt Institute to learn her art, whatever, she found out that there was no books on black photographers, so that's when she wrote her first one. I didn't know it then but she did have my name in the book, at least. And the second time, the second book she did about, she did several books but the photography books that she did, I had the second one, I had a picture of Gerald Levert in it called Backstage Pass, which is one of my famous pictures now and, and I guess Process and the Doo Rags, which was a singing group which looked like the groups of the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] 'cause they, they had the process, you know. And the only reason that you could tell that they were a modern group is 'cause they had earrings, back in the '50s [1950s], you know, brothers wouldn't be wearing no earrings, you know, that, you know. Late '50s [1950s] I'm saying, really early '60s [1960s] is when all the groups, even the preachers had processes, everybody that was cool would have their hair straightened, you know. And, so all the groups, the Temptations, everybody had processes back then. And it would be kind of funny when I got to know a little bit about Frankie Lymon, the Frankie Lymon had a group, they gave one car to the whole group, they was young guys too, and they could go, I think once or twice a month to get their process redone 'cause you have to keep, keep it, keep doing it to, keep it looking good, you know. Story_ID: 178629 Speaker 1: --Now, you met James Van Der Zee-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --[HM] Gordon Parks-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and I know when I was at your house earlier you had photography by Moneta Sleet, Jr. Speaker 2: Right. Well, I got to meet him too. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: The reason I met Moneta Sleet was, a friend of mine, when I first got a job at General Motors I end up doing something for Ruth Allen King, who was with the, the Urban League and that's how I got the job with General Motors, but I also met a brother, he was a promotion cat for the "Ebony" and "JET", and I went to visit him, and I said yeah, I wanna get into photography, I'm just starting out, and he called Moneta. And Moneta came down, I guess he worked in, on Sixth Avenue [Washington, D.C.] where their company was, where their office was, and he came down and I got a chance to meet him. He said while you live in Washington [D.C.], you make sure you hook up with Maurice Sorrell. Maurice Sorrell was the cat that covered this area, okay. So and I ran into Moneta a couple of time when he had a job, you know, he had, when on the big jobs they would send him out on it. But Maurice Sorrell I ran into one time up on the Gold Coast in Washington [D.C.], which was like an exclusive black area where the nice homes were, and I said Maurice you live up here? He said, hell no I'm a photographer. You know, he was more into town but he had a nice modest house though, he wasn't in no ghetto or nothing he had a nice house, you know, anyway. Speaker 1: Was that, [HM] Chester Higgins [, Jr.] was (unclear) Speaker 2: Well, Chester Higgins, we got an award together at the same time and that's when I got to meet him. But I had looked at his photography books, matter of fact I had really looked at Roy DeCarava. I looked at a lot of people's photography books but, you know, but I did get to meet-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Roy, Roy DeCarava, now he's somebody that really, it's unusual that he has a, he makes his statement through his exhibits, he's a fine art photographer rather than a-- Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, because a lot of his pictures-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) doesn't really shoot celebrities-- Speaker 2: --were very dark. Speaker 1: --celebrities and-- Speaker 2: A lot of his pictures were dark, you know. And I guess he really, again, definitely wasn't using a flash. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He probably was using that Tri-X. Speaker 1: He uses like-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --blurred images. Speaker 2: Right, right, well, well see all of that is when you don't use a flash and the lighting isn't that great, and sometimes if it's used in really at slow shutter speed, that's when you're gonna get the blur, you know, what I'm saying. Or if you got a long lens to get somebody on stage and you're using a slow shutter speed, you're gonna see like a blur. And you could, you could shoot a normal lens at thirtieth of a second and it'll be all right but sometimes if it's longer than that, you know, 'cause our hands shake, and now they make lenses that compensate for that. My last lens that I bought, you know, it compensates for, you know, the shaking. You know, I forget what they call him a VR lens, just because it have VR on 'em means, you know, it compensates for the shaking if you, if it that's part, if you have that kind of problem. But as you get older, you know, your hands ain't as steady as they used to be and stuff to so, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, who's the, worked for the New York Times Don, Don [ph.], who was it, you know, who I'm talking about. Speaker 2: A photographer? Speaker 1: The New York Times photography, Don. His first name is Don but it was, there's a white and black in Chicago. One that sometimes the one's at the-- Speaker 2: Well, the only Don that I knew could, he was a art director for Arista Records [New York, New York], and that's not one-- Speaker 1: No, I don't (unclear) Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Umm-- Speaker 2: But, you know-- Speaker 1: Bobby Singstag [ph.]? Speaker 2: Okay. Now, I know him from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And the reason I know him is that we have exhibits together at the gallery in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --and he would come to town. Now I ain't gonna lie, he got some, he got some tremendous pictures. He got pictures of Joe Louis with a, with Babe Ruth, or he got Joe Louis, Joe Louis when, when I, you know, I really don't know the names of a lot of these white baseball players or even black ones but Joe, he got Joe Louis in the dugout with, you know, you might find a picture with him with Jesse Owens and Joe Louis, you know what I'm saying, he had some great shots. Plus he also got the Muhammad [Ali, formerly Cassius Clay], shot the, you know, the Muhammad Ali and their Muslim guys. And he had one of his shots of the one when the women are all in white kind of thing-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 178630 Speaker 1: I have to say even though you might be a great photographer and have great pictures, it's like what have you done lately? You know, 'cause (unclear) him and I looked at, you know, his father owned a couple of newspapers or, you know, so I looked at him should be pretty secure, but he said, you know, to make some of these trips I gotta sell pictures, if I don't, you know, it ain't like it is, you know. And he and I struggled, when you're freelancing you do go up and down. Now, I'm on social security and that kind of, I'm doing, you know, getting regular money now, but sometimes, you know, in the music business, I have to say they're not the best business people. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: You know, I guess you know, there's always been problems. Billy Joel's brother-in-law was his accountant and he ripped off Billy Joel. So it's a situation when people have access to money I think it's a human instinct to, I don't wanna say steal but I guess you consider yourself just that you owe it to yourself, maybe, you know, when you justify it. Speaker 2: Let me ask you this on that tone, in that regard, [HM] Ernest Withers of Memphis [Tennessee] got in trouble-- Speaker 1: 'Cause they said that he spied-- Speaker 2: --after he's passed away, now. Speaker 1: Right they start saying-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --that he spied. But what good, what of information could he be giving to people though. Now Maurice Sorrell, I told you had a picture of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.,] putting on his pants. So it was so, that's, those guys will be really in the hotel room or the suites hanging out. So, I guess they become friends. I mean Martin was, Martin wasn't that old, I mean he was a young guy to, you know, when he passed away. So, yeah, Withers they jumped on him after but I mean I'm trying to figure out how much information, 'cause Withers also had his art exhibit at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you know. And Jason [HM Jason Miccolo Johnson] I think was a good friends of his. I think Jason might even have came from Memphis, I'm not sure, but I knew Jason was really kind of close, with Mr. Withers. Speaker 2: Yeah, Michelow Jason. Speaker 1: Right, right Johnson. Speaker 2: Johnson, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, and you know, I'm trying to figure out what kind of spy, the only thing that he could tell is where they're gonna go or where to be 'cause that's what, you know, the photographers you have to know that, and maybe if they knew ahead of time where they were gonna be they could bug the room or whatever, you know. That's the only thing, I can't understand why they would even come out after he died, that he was sort of like a spy really in a way, or, you know. What, what do you call those guys? Speaker 2: They say he was a FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation, Washington, D.C.] informer. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And they had FBI files with, supposedly, with the amount of money he was paid and all that. Speaker 1: Right, which wasn't, well, you know, hey those things happen. And I'm (unclear) and more important I think he had a bunch of kids, I'm not sure how many kids he had but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when you got a family, you know, you gotta, you know, 'cause I, there was a DJ [disc jockey] called Al Jefferson who was a DJ in Baltimore [Maryland]. And I asked him, you know, did you take payola? And he looked at me very serious, I had to feed my family (laughter), you know, so. But Al Jefferson is one of my good buddies now, he's, about eighty years old now and he's been a, a good time cat. He's struggling but, you know, just like everybody else and he had a large family. Matter of fact we went to his house with Patti Austin, who is the goddaughter of Quincy Jones, she could sing her butt off, but she never really made it big even though she does all the jingles-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --she does a lot of jingles and stuff. 'Cause what happened, when I was work, working with her and her mother, she brought her mother with her and, you know, they must have been very close, and so we were riding around and they were in the back, I'm up in the front, my boy Andre [Perry], that I mentioned was riding, he was the one that was taking them around, at that time he must have been working for Arista Records [New York, New York]. Okay, he's the one that started me at the radio station, music director, but he eventually got into the music business. So he's riding around with Patti Austin and her mother in the back, and I'm sitting up in the front with him, and they're back there talking about stocks and bonds and, you know, she's calling up about her musical jingles that she gotta do because Valerie Simpson was doing jingles, her and her husband, Nick [Nickolas Ashford] and Valerie were doing all the jingles. Valerie got pregnant. So when Valerie got pregnant they asked Patti to fill in, and once Patti, you know, filled in they saw that she was so versatile as she was, that end up being what she did. That was probably where the bulk of her money came in. And, they only had like eight or nine people that does, does all the jingles in New York, you know. And, you know, and, and so it was very interesting. And we went Al Jefferson's house and did pictures, he had his priest was there, you know. And but photography exposed me to so much. And, you know, I was home one day and I had read Chancellor's book, okay. And I get a magazine calls me up, called Soul Journey and asked me did I wanna go to Egypt. So when I go to Egypt, I'm taking pictures of the pyramids, and the pyramids, and, you know all these other ancient things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear)-- Story_ID: 178631 Speaker 1: So I know you explained that off-camera to me, but I don't know if we got it on camera but, but kind of give us like, 'cause you, you ran by it so fast that-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that I don't think people will understand what happened. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now you had just been exposed to Chancellor Williams' book-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --written about ancient Egypt. And then-- Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Okay. But it all started when I told you a friend of mine gave me a ankh. And I asked him what is a ankh? It was a wooden ankh. I showed you the, you know. And he said it's the Egyptian symbol of life and that's what put in Egypt in my head. And I went home and my father had a book and Chancellor's book and, you know, and, and right. So a girl had come from California is the one who had, who was the vegetarian and, and was in, and it was in her, her, her library, her sister's, she had the book in her sister's bookshelf and, and she was in the kitchen cooking this vegetarian meal, which I had never heard of, didn't know what vegetarian thing was, so I pulled Chancellor's book out and I'm reading it and it's about Egypt but it was from a black perspective. Speaker 1: Okay. See now, I think you told us the rest of this story. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But now I'm talking about the story about how you got to Egypt, the, the-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --'cause these were your-- Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --you're enamored with Egypt. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: You've already read Chancellor's book-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then about the same time-- Speaker 1: I get a call from a magazine which was called "Soul Journey". Speaker 2: Now this is a black magazine? Speaker 1: A black magazine. Speaker 2: Didn't know that. Speaker 1: And they were asking me, did I wanna go to Egypt. And I said I, I would, yeah, I would love to go. So now, this is on a Monday, they call me would I like to go to Egypt? So what happened was, when I came back from New York [New York] and read some of my father's book, there was a jewel in the book that I wanted painted. So that Monday I give this canvas, I give, no, I give the picture to this artist to paint this picture for me. The magazine "Soul Journey" called me up and asked me do I wanna go to Egypt, I says wow, of course. And then Tuesday I'm getting shots, or Wednesday I was getting shots, Thursday I'm flying to New York and I'm flying to New York and on, and on Friday I'm taking off for Egypt. I got the shots on Wednesday, I'm flying to New York on Thursday, and I'm flying to Egypt on Friday. And when I get back from Egypt, the first person I met in the airport was Verdine White of Earth, Wind & Fire. And I said Verdine I just got back from Egypt, you know. And, you know, he was, you know, he was, he was a superstar so he wasn't giving me too much but even I knew, I, I was tighter with Philip and them more than Verdine, he was kind of distance anyway. And so, so, you know, when I come back to, I'm back in, so I'm New York, and from New York I come back to [Washington] D.C. and I hear Chancellor being interviewed on the radio by a friend of mine, okay. And his name was Clint Walker [ph.], I just spoke to him yesterday to be honest with you. And so I said Clint you, you just spoke to Chancellor. It's very few books that influence me. That, you, you could meet the author. You know, it's like meeting W.E.B. Du Bois or somebody, you know, after I read, you know "Souls of Black Folks", whatever. So Clint, Clint says well he lives around the corner from you and I, I know you told this story about-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we heard that story, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Where, where am I, where do you want me to go from here? Speaker 2: Okay. I, I gotta question now, I mean but, but this was a, you were, what you were telling me off-camera I think was that this was such a, almost a cosmic, you know, chain of events. You read about Chancellor-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You're reading about Chancellor Williams's-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --and somebody calls you and-- Speaker 1: --it seemed like it prepared me for the trip. Speaker 2: --do, do you wanna go to Egypt-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I mean you just read about it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And said sure, and the next thing you're there for free. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And you shoot pictures of-- Speaker 1: First class. Speaker 2: Now, what, what did you shoot in Egypt when you were-- Speaker 1: Okay. Well, there was a definitely the pyramids and, and the Sphinx, of course. And there was a lot of, the, the Aswan Dam [Aswan, Egypt] was something that they were taking, the, the, the things from down and they were bringing them up to higher land because they were getting ready to flood. Speaker 2: So they were moving-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: were getting ready for-- Speaker 1: This was in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Okay. They, they hadn't finished-- Speaker 1: --'70s [1970s] Speaker 2: --the project yet. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Abbasom bulle [ph., unable to verify]-- Speaker 2: --was what they call-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --up at the top. And we also went to Luxor [Egypt]. And while we was in Luxor, you know, I saw the, they called them temples at the time, which were really schools. It's where, you know, it, back in those days in ancient times, it was like an apprenticeship probably like I was seeing like in the theater. You know, it's an apprenticeship. And if you wanted to be into silver, you know, you go with the family that, it's usually a family that's doing the silver, or another family doing the bronze, another family doing the gold, another family doing the, the. One of the things while I was in Egypt though, that kind of blew my mind is that, you might see somebody that could be eight or nine years old with the mule and, and the buggy taking moms and pops to work in the morning, okay. And when they came back the, they would have like steps on the side of the mountain where they would be growing stuff. And you go to, the guys would go down on the Nile [River, Egypt] and get the water, and come up and be watering then they come, go down and get some more water from the Nile, they go up to the higher levels. I'm talking this is big, big places where they were growing food like, you know. And on the west side of the Nile was where the tombs and stuff was. On the east side of the Nile which they call the land of living, on the other side was the land of the dead. And on the land of the living is where they had the temple of Luxor, and the temple of Karnak [Egypt], you know, that they talked about. And, you know, I went to all of those and, and that's when I first saw obelisk, which was the same, same type of, of architecture as the, as the Capitol, I mean as the [Washington] monument in Washington [D.C.]. And that's when you realize that the, the largest thing in, in, in Washington was really African architecture, which was, you know, the monument. Speaker 1: So, so the, the trip confirmed like what you read in some ways to-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I mean, you know, well it just reinforced what I had read. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And by reading the history, like I was telling you, having known that kind of history about, you know, our people, it gave me, it got me to the point that no man was greater than me. Not that I was on an ego trip or anything that. And because of that attitude, I wasn't kissing butt when I was with, well me and him talked a lot, Barry White, he was a heavy dude in history, he, he knew history, just like Common was, was, was pretty good with the history thing too. But when you get with cats like Jeffrey Osborne, you know, these are entertainers and, you know, you talk about other things. I got kind of tight with him. I shot his daughter's birthday party, Sugar Ray Leonard's sons came to that, son came to that with his friend, you know. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: But you say, now I didn't know this, Barry White was into history? Speaker 1: Yeah. He was into history pretty good. Speaker 2: And so was Common the rapper? Speaker 1: Common, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: You know, and even today Common is pretty smooth. He ain't really, you know, one of the guys that they look at as being, you know, really trashy kind of guy. He's sort of like on the level, levelheaded brother-- Story_ID: 178632 Speaker 1: Tell me this. Now this is a question that occurred to me, something you said earlier we were talking about, I think, Mr. [HM Ernest] Withers made me wonder if, did you ever have occasion to shoot something that people wanted, wanted to get back from you, didn't want you to show it or didn't want anybody else to see-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --willing to buy it back from you? Speaker 2: No, I didn't-- Speaker 1: 'Cause they didn't want it, want it shown? Speaker 2: No, I've never been in that situation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Even though one time a radio station asked me to shoot, this is when [Former-President Jimmy] Carter was in office, his, a [Bert] Lance, I forget the Lance's, Lance was either his Secretary of State, Lance was one of them, one of the higher offices. Speaker 1: Bert Lance, yeah. Speaker 2: Bert Lance. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And he was in the Executive Office Building [Washington, D.C.] and I went in there, and I'm shooting him while the radio station was interviewing him, and they wanted the film, which is something that I never did and if, if you struggling, you know, so you would give up the film. But I had backed up so much while they were interviewing him, I knocked over all of these flags that he had by his desk, (laughter) you know. And, you know, they recording like we're doing now and, you know, that was an embarrassing kind of situation. And well, another embarrassing situation, I don't know if I mentioned it, I think I did about the Cher, singer Cher, I shot her. Speaker 1: Oh, no you didn't. Speaker 2: Okay. Well Cher came with a whole troupe. She was performing at the [John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] and she was staying around the corner at the same, same hotel that Richard Nixon caught busted in, what was that called? The-- Speaker 1: Watergate [Hotel, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: The Watergate, right. And so she was staying at the Watergate and she was performing around the corner at the Kennedy Center. So she called me up, I think it could have been one of her guys but he said he was Cher, and it just so happened another girlfriend of mine was at my house, I said pick up the other phone, Cher's on the phone, you know. She said I want you to shoot my troupe, a troupe, whole troupe because I wanna put it on a Christmas card. And I said yeah I'll be at the hotel at a certain time and I was there, okay. The whole troupe comes down and Cher's in the middle and, you know, everybody's all around her and I got my flash ready to take the picture and the flash didn't go off, boom, and I'm, this never happened before and the flash still didn't go off. So I got, said later for the flash, but these little kids was out there taking pictures with these throw away cameras and somebody in the troupe said there your flash is over there, you know, that kind of thing. But I knew how to shoot pictures without a flash from the mere fact that I had learnt without a flash, how to push film, how to underexpose and overdevelop it. So it came out great, you know. And I think it was a slide anyway which (unclear) pretty good. And so I sent 'em to her and, you know, she was satisfied with 'em. But Cher was down to earth now, even though she was a superstar we, she would walk up the street, of course, with a bodyguard in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and was going in and out of the different shops-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --you know. And again (laughter) it's the same girl, same girl who was the birthday when Jon Lucien, she was working in one of the stores in Georgetown and hey, you know, I want you to meet you Cher, you know, and she says oh, wow this is exciting, you know. But she lived in my building, you know. And so that was, that was fun and Cher was down to earth, you know. And I got pictures of her in her limousine, of course, you know, I'm sitting up front, I didn't wanna be in the back. And that was, you know, Cher was, was, you know, interesting. And one of my friends, Gwen [ph.], who used to be a girlfriend, was the one that worked for I guess, Casablanca Records [Wilmington, Delaware] at the time that's who Cher was under, you know. And Woody [ph.], Woody was another friend who was working with the guy that had the Bee Gees out of England. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And I didn't never got the Bee Gees though but I got a lot of the groups that came from England for a minute, you know. And Junior was out of England. And, of course, Sade was out of England. And, it just interesting when you meet these people from all over the world. And it was a group, was a girl from England who was very friendly and she sang a lot of Motown songs, I can't think of names right now, but I got pretty close with people. I'm, you know, I wasn't a nasty guy and I say I wasn't, you know, I was, I treat people with respect, I treat 'em the way I wanted to be treated and that took me a long way. Story_ID: 172466 Speaker 1: Tell me about NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters]. You worked for them for a dozen years, right? Speaker 2: For twenty-four years. Speaker 1: Twenty-four years. Speaker 2: NABOB was the Nationally Black Owned Broadcasters [sic.]. These were the people that owned radio stations and the people that owned the television stations. It was started in New York with Percy Sutton and he eventually passed it on, the presidency to his son, Pierre Sutton. And they would have an awards dinner every year in Washington, and they also would have a conference every year piggybacking the Congressional Black Caucus dinner, okay. So at several of the NABOB events, you know, I did it for twenty-four years, one of 'em, that I enjoyed that I thought was exciting was when Patti LaBelle was getting an award and Chaka Khan was the entertainer of the time, at the time. And so Chaka's on the stage singing, you know, she had so many hits over the years, and all of a sudden Patti's in her seat, you know, doing a little wiggle. And the next thing, you know, Patti is standing up on the podium, standing up dancing to the music, and all of sudden you see shoes flying up in the air, and the next thing I know Patti had went around and she was on stage with Chaka now and they're singing together. And professionals like those two, they can sing together and know how to make it work and not come across clumsy or whatever. And so eventually they got Patti back to the podium so she could get the award, you know. And so another time, Patti was the entertainer for Janet Jackson. So Janet Jackson was on the podium to get this award but Patti was on stage and performed. So after that show was over, somehow Patti had on a thing where her bosoms was really, the majority of the bosoms was sticking out of her, whatever she was wearing. So whenever that picture came about they would say, did Patti have a wardrobe malfunction. I says, no, that's the way she looked at the time. And I took pictures of Janet Jackson and, and [HM] Jamie Foster Brown from Sister 2 Sister magazine, you know. And a lot of times, a lot of events that I did I would sell the pictures to Sister 2 Sister magazine. When I first, when they first started the magazine, I was giving them pictures. And then after a while they started, once they got, you know, get going, they started doing things. And, you know, another time, another person was getting an award was Cassandra Wilson, who I really fell in love with you and I didn't even know who she was, but I was taking pictures of her. I knew she had blonde dreads and was from Mississippi, I guess I found that out afterwards. And when I got home, having all, I have a bunch of CDs, and I found a CD by Cassandra Wilson, and that's when I found out how she sound and what she sang and I became a fan after that, you know. But then again there's a brother from England who's an actor now, [Idris] Elba, what's his name? Speaker 1: Idris Elba. Speaker 2: Idris Elba. I mean he got an award from NABOB and the women went crazy, you know, they love him, you know, so. Nowadays, if I put his picture up on Facebook, you know, I get a lot of compliments about it and, you know, how can I get one, kind of thing. And I don't have a, you know, my attitude is I don't wanna keep pictures in the drawer, people will never see 'em. You know, I tell a lot of photographers that, I mean, because a lot of people are paranoid about their stuff getting stolen the way you can do stuff nowadays with the digital and, and, you know. Well it, this is the way the future is. I mean this is, you gotta go along with the program, you know. I was with a young photographer who had a camera that you could, you know WiFi, take a picture, and it he could send it to where he's shooting the people on stage and he's sending the picture to the manager whose backstage waiting for him to come off stage, you know. Speaker 1: It's going directly to-- Speaker 2: Right, and so-- Speaker 1: Uh-- Speaker 2: --the technology has expanded and, you know. But NABOB, it has, because of NABOB my collection is very big. The first woman that became a senator and she was out of Chicago [Illinois] or Detroit [Michigan], I forget her name. Speaker 1: [HM] Carol Moseley-Braun. Speaker 2: Carol Moseley-Braun. I got her hugging and kissing the great general from the Bronx [New York, New York], [HM] Colin Powell, you know. So NABOB got me in, brought it, brought my collection a lot of politicians like, you know, Floyd Flake out of New York. He matter of fact, [HM] Floyd Flake was a Congressman for the area where I grew up in. And he was tight with another Congressman that came out of Baltimore [Maryland] who was the head of the, national, I think he became president of the, you know, a mind is a terrible thing to waste, he had a-- Speaker 1: United Negro College Fund? Speaker 2: Right. Was it [Kweisi] Mfume? Speaker 1: Was it Mfume? Speaker 2: Kweisi? Yeah, he's, he's from [Washington] D.C. isn't he? Speaker 1: It was Baltimore? Speaker 2: Kweisi, oh, is he? Speaker 1: He was from Baltimore. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And he ran, matter of fact, he was a program director at the Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] radio station. I got pictures of him before he became a politician, well he probably was politicking all along, I think the radio held, helped him become a Congressman, you know, but him and Floyd Flake used to hang out a lot. And, you know, of course, Floyd Flake, you know, he built a great big church up in Queens [New York, New York] and, you know, he sort of runs that whole little area. And I just met so many good people that I wouldn't have met ordinarily or I got pictures of people who I would, never would have gotten because, you know they, they gave awards to like I say politicians, actors, you know, [HM] Ruby Dee, Alfre Woodard, not Alfre Woodard but Angela Bassett. Story_ID: 172467 Speaker 1: Angela Bassett got an award, [HM] Ruby Dee is on the podium and I guess, Angela Bassett was gonna give Ruby Dee her award, right. So Ruby, Angela Bassett gets up and says I was a young person in Florida, I guess that's where she might have came from, and I was influenced by this actress who did this poetry and blah, blah, blah, and it end up and it was Ruby Dee. And Ruby Dee she says, what. And she starts crying, I didn't know that I influenced you and, you know, that kind of thing. And they were doing the boohooing and giving her the award. She's chillin', I'm taking pictures and stuff. So I get a call one night, now I say all them actress and actors know each other, and me being in the D.C. Black Rep[ertory Company, Washington, D.C.], know a lot of actors. So I get a call, I come home one night around ten o'clock and I'm laying down on my couch getting comfortable, I might have been drinking a glass of wine, and I get a call from Angela Bassett. She says "this is Angela Bassett." I said "wow, really." And she says, "yeah. I just wanna let, you know, I want that picture of me and Ruby Dee. Ruby Dee had influenced me in my younger days and I want that picture." So I said "no problem." And it just so happened that when I, when Ruby Dee, when Angela Bassett was at NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters] dinner, I asked her did you know a couple of the actresses that I know, I can't think of their names, do you know, Lynn Whitfield, but it really was Kiki Shepard, do you know Kiki and all these people. So she said, yeah I know them, I know them. So she went to Kiki and got my number. Okay, that's how she end up calling me. And so I put the picture in a nice frame and I sent it her. And I get a Cartier letter back from her that I'm a have to have framed with the picture eventually, you know, this is my letter from, you know, Angela Bassett. 'Cause she, you know, she was doing "[Waiting to] Exhale" and, you know, she burnt up her old man's clothes in the movie, remember that, (unclear) look funny. But she, she is a great actress anyway though, and she did Tina Turner thing, you know, "What's Love Got To Do With It". And so, you know, I have to admit sometimes when I'm with the ladies I'm really, people that I'm really in love with but I never let 'em know that. I still act professional and that's what kept me, kept me grounded because a lot of photographers would blow it because of being groupies. And, and, and that's why I got the respect, a lot of respect from most artists that I worked with because, first of all, I wasn't a knucklehead. Story_ID: 172468 Speaker 1: You know, I was with a chauffeur one time and we were in, with Alexander O'Neal in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. The chauffeur was on the dance floor, you know, he was boogieing and everything. So the guy from the record company says, you know, hey, you know, you, you having a, you all right? You know, I see you having a lot of fun. He says, hey just as long as I'm in that car when y'all ready to go, I'm cool. So when we get ready to go, he's in the car sleeping. He's in the, behind, you know, the driver's seat and he's sleeping. And I take a picture of it, Alexander O'Neal is standing and pointing at him, and I take a picture. I didn't know the record company guy was gonna show it to his boss 'cause he got fired behind that. I felt bad, you know. And I would never, I never would show anything that was gonna be degrading anybody. I remember I showed you a picture of a little boy that was really living in a alley, you know, in a empty building with his family, they lived on the second floor. And these young cats could really climb up and down this little things that was holding up the porch in the back. Speaker 2: Yeah, the back porch rail. Speaker 1: Back porch rail. And I really didn't like to put that picture out there 'cause I thought people would make fun of 'em saying they look like monkeys but that picture ended up making the Washington Post, you know. And nobody made fun of it so I was happy about that. Story_ID: 172469 Speaker 1: And, you know, and I feel that I've really been blessed in a lot of ways to have, first of all Earth, Wind & Fire's calling me up and these are like one of the best groups in the land for the last forty years really, they celebrate forty years like I'm celebrating forty years. To meet a historian like Chancellor Williams, a writer, bestseller in 1941 about a '[The] Raven' about Edgar Allan Poe, this great historian and I'm traveling with him meeting the other, [HM] Yosef Ben Jochannan and John Henrik Clarke and the brother that wrote 'They Came Before Columbus[: The African Presence in Ancient America]'-- Speaker 2: [Ivan] Van Sertima Speaker 1: Sertima and just, and, John Johnson, John Jackson [ph.]. And, you know, I got pictures of these guys together and when I put these pictures on Facebook then it's a whole nother generation of individuals that are coming at me, which has nothing to do with entertainment, they're into the history thing. And there's a lot of them, in that black diaspora that are into that. They're still wearing dashikis and, you know, and got groups. And like I said Stokely Carmichael's [later, Kwame Ture] organization, all revolutionary-- Speaker 2: All-African People['s Revolutionary Party]. Speaker 1: All-African People Revolutionary Party-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --everybody that joined that organization had to read Chancellor's book. And Stokely would be, he went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at the same time I was there, and I was there when he was there. Stokely came on campus one time when them riots was going on in Washington, and he was on, at the Douglas Hall, he stood up on the steps and he said, don't let anybody come out here unless you got a gun, and he pulled out a gun that must have been ancient, had a long barrel, it looked like something that, you know, one of the coppers on "Cassidy" might have had back in the day, and he put it away real quick and disappeared 'cause he knew, that, you know, they had all kind of people out there looking and watching that was undercover, you know, so he disappeared real quick. But I end up being good friends with [H.] Rap Brown. And but I've never got into the political thing. I really got into the political thing when I met Chancellor when I really got into reading the book and it opened my ear to something that really I didn't have any concern about when I was younger. I was more into partying. I had a little sports car at Howard. And just being a bad boy but managed to get through, you know, managed to get through. And I really feel blessed to have graduated and have two degrees from Howard University. This is a, some of the things that I look at in my life as being miracles because I wasn't a great student. Speaker 2: Do you have a-- Story_ID: 172470 Speaker 1: --Well I have to say one of my favorite pictures has to be the three historians, Chancellor [Williams], Dr. Ben [HM Yousef Ben Jochannan], John Henrik Clarke but I also have a picture with those three with John Jackson. But when I took that picture, I didn't have a flash or nothing and I just, the first time that they had a four hundred color film, for all that color film you had to use flashes or bright lights, so I had this four hundred color film and I managed to get one good picture of all four of 'em and, and when I put it in the computer I had to adjust it and photo shop to really make it something. And a couple of people in, on Facebook have taken the picture and they put it as their main picture, you know, but I, I don't have no problem with that. My attitude about certain things, if, if, it's gonna uplift and inspire anybody, that I don't have no problem giving it up. Speaker 2: So let me ask you this now, in terms of income, what was the most lucrative picture you ever shot? Speaker 1: Well, recently I had an exhibit in Detroit [Michigan] and [HM] Shirley Woodson [Reid] was the one that's the head of the NCA up there, National Conference of Artists, Michigan Branch, and I was selling the boxers. I have a picture of Joe Louis, Jersey Joe Walcott, no, they were at Joe Louis' grave, Jersey Joe Walcott, Muhammad Ali [formerly Cassius Clay], Joe, Joe, Joe Frazier, Sugar Ray Leonard, and Michael Spinks together. And that's a picture that sold for a thousand dollars. Another picture that sold for a thousand dollars was the, the historians. [HM] Cathy Hughes bought "Process and the Doo Rags". Now, the way I got the process, the picture of "Process and the Doo Rags" was at Pat [ph.], Cathy Hughes fortieth birthday party. And I blew that picture up and there was, evidently there was some kind of relationship with Peking, China and Washington, the sister companies or something, because that picture went on exhibit in, in Beijing, China. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And when it came back, Cathy bought it from me for a thousand dollars. And this is when I first started selling pictures. And it was a big picture though, it was about sixteen by twenty. And, and, you know, the most I've, you know, a thousand dollars. And now I got a big new picture that I have blown up bit, bit, blown up real big, that the gallery is trying to sell for 2200, you know, but I'll take eighteen, you know, it's, it's a big wheeling and dealing kind of business. Speaker 2: What, what photo is that and, and how big is it blown up? Speaker 1: Well it's blown up to maybe about fifty-five by forty, real big, and the frame is twice, the frame costs me five hundred bucks just doing that. The picture getting blown up was like a hundred bucks but it was a, a fellow that has a couple of blotters at his house that taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], that teachers at Howard but I think he say he's not there anymore because when the new president came in he sort of got rid of the part-time workers for, you know, economic reasons. But, you know, right now Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] bought a bunch of pictures from me and I think that was three grand [thousand dollars], you know. Speaker 2: Were they, what were they about? Speaker 1: Well it was about Philly [Philadelphia] people. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Like when I told you that [HM] Kenny Gamble and [HM] Leon Huff meeting Betty Shabazz. Plus I went up to Philly a lot and (unclear) and one of their main DJs [disc jockeys] at the DAS [unable to verify] was Butterball. And I also used to do a conference, conference every year for Impact Magazine which was in Atlantic City. That's where I got a chance to shoot a lot of groups when they first started was like Boys II Men, you know, started there. And, you know, just groups that that really wasn't known at the time. I can just think of Boys II Men right off the top of my head, but it was a, and, and Alyson Williams. And they would have a lot of, a lot of the rap groups, that's when I got a picture of LL Cool J as a young boy with, Russell Simmons was a young guy at the time, those two, but that picture was taken out of me shooting Blue Magic. They were in the picture with Blue Magic. Speaker 2: And, you know, I just took those two out and that's all they wanted was those two. And that was in a book about, I think I showed you about those that came to America that did great things. And [HM] Russell Simmons was picked out because he started the, the record company along with a clothing manufacturing company. And so Impact was very influential. I shot there for about nine years and that was bringing all the entertainers and record people together, you know. I've shot pictures, and Frankie Crocker used to be the, in New York [New York] was, was, was a super-duper guy in New York. And ten years later, he's in Philadelphia at a party and nobody, you know everybody treated him like he was just regular. You know, it's kind of funny how, what have you done for me lately, you know, it's that way in the music business too. Story_ID: 172471 Speaker 1: Was it hard when you first got started to, and I notice you when you see people shooting for the first time, when they first get a camera whether they're, they're amateurs or, or, you know, whatever, they tend to be shy with it. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: And they'll shoot, they'll be standing way back from somebody. Speaker 2: Well, what happened-- Speaker 1: But was it hard for you to, to-- Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you an example of that was when the Jacksons came to town, they came with their own photographer, I think I already said that though, Michael [Jackson] said he didn't get a picture yet, did we say that on camera? Speaker 1: No, now go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay, what happened when the Jacksons came to town it was a cat named Milton Allen [ph.] and Sheila Eldridge, they both worked at the radio station but they were sort of in the promotion part of getting concerts so they were sort of in the, the beginning doing that kind of stuff. Sheila end up with her own PR [public relations] firm and Milton works for gospel stuff now. So the Jacksons are in their getting their pictures done and they brought their own photographer with 'em. See when you're big, big time you, you go with the, the people. So their photographer was with him and he was taking pictures and I was shy back then, I wasn't as aggressive. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: You know, and again you don't know what to do, you don't want 'em yelling at you, whatever. So when, when, when their photographer got through taking pictures, you know, Michael looked up and he says he didn't take a picture yet, you know, he had his, you know, that's his voice was high, of course. And that's when I took a picture of them, you know. Now when they were being interviewed, I might have been taking pictures but when it was like setup pictures, you know, I wasn't, you know, I was letting their picture, you know, I don't wanna interfere or, you know. 'Cause I told you, one time Gladys Knight came to town. She was doing a movie called 'Pipe Dreams' with her husband. At that time she was married to a guy who eventually, I think he was related to either Stacy Lattisaw knew his niece or somebody-- Speaker 1: Is that Barry Hankerson? Speaker 2: Yeah, Barry Hankerson, you, you, you know. Barry Hankerson was married to Gladys Knight and they did a movie called 'Pipe Dreams.' So they had a little baby, they were traveling with the baby, I guess they had a nanny 'cause we, when I'm with them somebody had to be watching the baby. So Gladys comes out to the, there, there's, it's probably a suite we're in, and she's in the back room, the bed, you know, the back sleeping area, and we're in the front part, you know, with the couches and stuff. So when she comes out with the baby, she's smiling and I take a picture, then she says, "Who told you to take a picture, who gave you permission to take a picture of the baby?" And I said, "Ooh, I'm sorry," I, you know, whew, I've been with 'em a couple of days now and I'm sorry. So eventually, believe it or not, she was in town and I went to the hotel that she was staying in, her daughter was her manager at the time, this was years later 'cause the baby's twenty-one now, okay. And I took that picture and I had her sign it for me but she was sleep. I, I speak to her on the phone that night and she says come by in the morning but, you know, she's night people don't be getting up in the morning. So when I come that morning, I end up talking to her daughter. Her daughter calls, yeah, she's, she's knocked out, she's, you know. So I said, would you her sign these pictures for me, you know, okay. I gave her two pictures, one for her and for me. And when she left, she left it with the hotel, you know, concierge, whatever those guys are called. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so when I came back I got the picture. Story_ID: 172472 Speaker 1: But, you know, that was an incident that was kind of strange. But most times, you know, when they're into promotion like when Brandy was a young kid and she was doing her first record, and now I'm taking pictures of her, I like taking pictures of 'em in their natural form but Brandy was always aware of the picture, of the camera and every time I was trying to catch her naturally, you know, she would, she would mess up my picture in other words. But I end up shooting Brandy quite a few times. Now Brandy had the hit record but she was running behind his group called it was three girls called, (singing) boy, I wanna say Gap [ph.] but it wasn't the Gap but it was these three girls whose record wasn't as big as hers. And we were at BET [Black Entertainment Television] 'cause at, you know, BET did like three shows in one day, so they have different groups coming in on the same day. So Donnie Simpson, even though he was on five days a week, was only working two days doing the shows, he do three in one day, two in one day. So the group, group was, I almost had it, it started with a G, it was three girls, but she was, she was running behind them saying, can I polish your nails for you and, you know, she was fifteen and they were like older and but they, they were hot, I can't think of their name but they had a hit record out that, you know. It's really sad how, how you only have like one-hit wonders there's plenty of those too. And nowadays if the record doesn't catch on in two weeks forget it, you know. And a lot has to do with, nowadays payola used to be going to the radio station paying either the program director and the music director those guys or giving them trips to California, drugs, whatever. But nowadays they want you to be, they want to be on YouTube. That when you pull up YouTube that want their record to be ones that you see first. 'Cause I had a young boy who, who was, began his singing career, he was going at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] but he was writing songs and they were doing him up, you know, nowadays you can be in your basement with the right equipment it sound great, you can, record. So he had, he had a, a million hits on YouTube and I said, how would you do that with some, you know, you could hack certain things. There were some cats in the University of Chicago that was, that hacked into YouTube and had his record on top where he had a million hits. And I was saying how did you do that, you're not even a star? So I said nowadays when I go on YouTube, I see Rihanna. He said well Rihanna's record company they got money to put her stuff out front. So that's the way that, I'm, I'm assuming that's the way the new payola is, is you gotta have 'em on the Internet at a certain place so when somebody comes on the Internet your stuff is up front. And YouTube is where you go, mainly for the music I guess or whatever, you know. Story_ID: 172473 Speaker 1: Now do you miss, now you're retired now. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Do you miss-- Speaker 2: In a way I do because, you know, there are so many new people that are out there now. I would love to have pictures of Rihanna. I did get Beyonce and, you know, her old man. And, you know, and, and you know, I already told you about I was doing sort of like a lecture at a salon about art when the, the Williams sisters [Venus Williams and Serena Williams] was starting to, starting the tennis clinic [Southeast Tennis & Learning Center] out in Southeast [Washington, D.C.] with [HM] Cora [Masters] Barry, who was former mayor-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --married to [HM The Honorable] Marion [Barry]. And I wish I was out there taking pictures of them but I'm at this thing doing what I had to do. 'Cause me and Cora was good buddies. And Cora is how I end up being, she was a boxing commissioner and that's how I end up being around, you know, a lot of boxers for a while, champions, you know. They would come around and her boyfriend at the time, was Jersey Joe Walcott. He was the boxing commissioner out of [New] Jersey, you know. And [Larry] Hazzard, Hazzard end up being the boxing commissioner out of Jersey after Joe Walcott died. And, you know, boxing is sort of crooked in a way because what happened, [Butch] Lewis was the promoter of [Michael] Spinks, I think he was promoting, he was promoter of the fight, and he was supposed to fight Mustafa Muhammad and it was a lot, Michael Spinks, it was a championship fight. And it didn't come off. And this is where, where I would have been able to jump in the ring after the fight and taking pictures but the fight didn't come off because I think the money got funny and was, and Mustafa, he sort of pulled out of it and so there was no fight. It was kind of deep because everybody was at the boxing arena ready for the fight to go and it never came off. It was, and Marion Barry put a lot of money behind that fight 'cause it was the first time in Washington [D.C.] they had a championship fight, you know. So I worked for the, I been so blessed man work, working for the boxing commissioner 'cause I like boxing. I got to meet Michael Spinks quite a bit, you know. And it just so happened his, his, the promoter Lucas [ph.], Lewis, Butch Lewis, his daughter was producer of 'Video Soul' at BET [Black Entertainment Television], you know, so I keep in touch with her now. And she's trying to become a cook on television, her and the girl that married the basketball player Johnson [ph.], he didn't dunk when he should have, but she was the hostess of 'Teen Summit,' I'll think of her name in a minute, but her and, and Seeder [ph.] are really tight, they, they wanna do a cooking show together now, you know. But the girl who I'm talking about married a basketball guy that played for the [New York] Knicks and he should have dunked his shot when he didn't and they lost the championship on something, you know. But I've just been a blessed individual I'll be honest with you. Story_ID: 172474 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: I really can't think of nothing, even the things that didn't go right, I was able to sort of work my way out of it or, you know, like I told you one time I shot sixteen rolls and eight of 'em was developed in the wrong, I put the wrong developer, I put the fixer instead of developer. I was so comfortable with developing film that once you relax you gotta stay on top of that, and so the ones that came out bad I, I, I hung on the ceiling, had 'em hanging down so I would never make that mistake again. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: But, you know, I really don't have many regrets. I, I really don't even understand how I did all of that traveling without a car because I was working for my friends and they knew I didn't have a car, and they would send a limo to my house in the morning. And like I say you just having dinner with the, with the, with [Gerald] Levert and his father, they were doing a thing where those two companies had gotten together and they had dinner with, over at Morton's [Steakhouse] of Chicago [Illinois]. And another time Keith Washington and the guy that's the head of Maze-- Speaker 1: Frankie Beverly. Speaker 2: --Frankie Beverly were doing a thing together, I guess they were on the same label on a, and they had a dinner for both of them at the same place, and during that same time that they were having that dinner, right up the street two blocks away, Muhammad Ali [formerly Cassius Clay] was signing books because Bingham [unable to verify] was having a photo exhibit. If I had of known, I would took the, you know, everybody around there for a minute, you know. But I really didn't know that that was going on at the time 'cause I would always go into these galleries trying to have exhibits, and this particular gallery did photographs, and but he would have photographs of all, of, of the photographer that ran, that traveled with, the with The Beatles or my favorite group, what's the other group besides The Beatles out of England? Speaker 1: The Rolling Stones. Speaker 2: The Rolling Stones. You know, I really like, I was into their stuff, you know, really heavy. I remember going to the, the, going to The Village to the Village Gate or whatever or the Circus, and they had The Rolling Stones, they kept playing over "Satisfaction", you can't get no, you know, that was the dance at the time, the jerk or whatever. I think that's what we saw on the, on dance, on (unclear) "American Bandstand". But as a, growing up as a kid though Jocko Henderson was a, was a DJ in Philadelphia at DAS, and he would travel to New York to do a dance show. So I got a picture of him and the other baldheaded fellow you just mentioned earlier the travel jock-- Speaker 1: Uh-- Speaker 2: --together. You know who I'm talking about, the wife who was the exercise person? Speaker 1: Oh, gosh I had it a minute-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I got a picture of those two guys together because I say really Jocko Henderson was the first travel jock and Tom Joyner was the-- Speaker 1: Tom Joyner, right. Speaker 2: --Tom Joyner was the travel jock too. So I got a picture of them together. You know, I say these are the travel jocks. And I had told Tom Joyner, I said he was a travel jock before you and, you know. Tom Joyner has a big ego though, you know. I don't think he wants that out there, he's the travel jock. Speaker 1: No, don't mess with him. Speaker 2: Yeah, don't mess with me. I got sixty stations-- Story_ID: 172475 Speaker 1: We always ask this question too, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, the main thing that I think that I have been geared into my life through Chancellor Williams is a working together kind of situation. I told you I was president of my family and I tried to get them to do certain things together, say start a, let's start an insurance plan, let's start a co-op plan, you know, everybody brought, everybody brushes their teeth, let's start buying stuff in bulk, you know. And also a friend that I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] with was a doctor and him and his family in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] started a credit union, and they were on the cover of Encore, not, that, Encore was the magazine that I first worked for-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and got the picture. They were, there was a picture of Essence, it was on the cover of Essence that this family had started a credit union. And I gave it to the heads of the family, at the time I was just a doing a newsletter, and I had, you know, that was my job just to do the newsletter but I loved it, you know. 'Cause I would take a picture of Jeffrey Osborne with a cousin. I had a picture of my daughter with Stacy, Stacy Lattisaw. I had them, these kind of pictures in the newsletter. And I gave it up because the head of the House of Ogburn, you know, saying let's, we need to start a credit union and, you know, eventually after they had their meetings, they just gave it back to me and it never came up again. But then again I say maybe it's best that we didn't have a credit union and a lot of money 'cause, you know, the money thing would have probably got funny, somebody would have probably tried to steal it, a cousin would, you know, it would have been kind of chaos. But the organization has been together since 1942. And we getting ready to have a reunion next, not this year but next year, every two years we have it. And it changes from New York [New York] to Philly to Virginia, you know. And we don't go to Connecticut any more but we're really thinking about having one in this area 'cause there's a lot of Ogburns in Maryland. And my whole thing is unity, like Queen Latifah said in one of her songs 'Unity,' you know. And, you know, I could be down on the [National] Mall [Washington, D.C.] with some African group that they had bought over here, which is showing us their culture, building drums, or it's carving them, and they would always look at us and say unity, unity. So it's a thing that, you know, Marcus, Marcus Garvey was the first black to get an organization together that had more blacks under one, under one, under one umbrella than any other organization, more than NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored Peoples] or the, you know, all these other, or CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or whatever. I think slavery had messed us up a little bit, you know, where we don't really work together like we should but we've come a long way, we've come a long way really and we still have a long way to go. And like I say, I have a picture and the exhibit it's gonna be in Montgomery, Alabama. I'm not sure but isn't that where Rosa Parks didn't give up her seat? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, and now they gonna have pictures of, you know, Nelson Mandela and Chancellor Williams and, you know, they, they put a (unclear), you know, and they're gonna have the Dr. Ben [HM Yousef Ben Jochannan], and all of these are gonna be on exhibit at the Fine Arts Museum [Museum of Fine Arts] in Montgomery, Alabama, you know. So, I think things have changed a lot too. And I think the younger generation, their racism or their attitude about race is a lot different from their parents because if it was like their parents, [HM President Barack] Obama wouldn't have been elected. So I see things happening, getting better but it's a slow process. Story_ID: 178633 Speaker 1: Once again if you look back at everything you've done to this point, what do you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: I guess it would be photography, I can't deny that. I'm known more for photography, not even here but I've, you know, I'm selling pictures in Europe now. I've got a connection through Skype with a, with a, with a person over there who really, whose name is Ogbourne. And he's the one who started a thing called a journal on the name Ogburn, came from the village where he, he, he grew up. And his name is Ogbourne, O-G-B-O-U-R-N-E, and you know ours is O-G-B-U-R-N, even Jeffrey Osborne name came out of that to. And what, what was the question again? Speaker 1: Well what would you consider today to be your-- Speaker 2: It would be photography right now. Speaker 1: --legacy? Speaker 2: And I was saying, I was selling 'em over there because of Skype. I have a friend over there now. And when I went over to England, I also went to a person who was sort of like a stock photographer. And, you know, he got a couple of pictures from me and, you know, every now and then a check will come from there when he would sell 'em. And so photography is really the backbone of my life. And Dr. [Chancellor] Williams was the second. You know, and I also, I talked to Robert Hooks now a lot, and he was the one that started the theater thing. So it'd have to be photography, photography and Chancellor Williams, those would be equal, you know, because by me still spreading his word through the Internet and stuff, I've met a whole nother kind of people that are into the African diaspora mentality. And so I have to really say photography and that because I'm still doing a lot of Chancellor stuff even though I'm retired from photography. And I'll probably be doing Chancellor after, you know, my photography thing has died down because those kind of, those kind of pictures last forever, you know, the, the Nelson Mandela, the Desmond Tutu, the Rosa Parks. And, you know, a lot of that stuff is really history also. And whether I, it's a combination of history and photography as you can see. And the theater comes, it blends in there some kind of way, even though the theater was, I was a sound man which was entirely different from taking pictures but since I knew the shows so well I have a lot of great pictures during that period to. And, you know [HM] Robert Hooks tells me now that he regretted that they didn't video a lot of the stuff that they did 'cause they did a show called "The Blacks" [ph.] at the [John F.] Kennedy Center [for The Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.], which was really a big deal, you know. And so I was the one that really documented that part of the theater stuff in stills. So I've been a blessed individual. And, you know, if they write about me, I think they would talk about my photography, they might mention my relationship with Chancellor Williams, and possibly behind all of that they might say he also was a sound man in the theater. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about your, now, do you have any children? Speaker 2: I have a daughter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she's in her forties. And I'm really trying to get my nieces and nephews involved in my collection 'cause they, we're sort of, they're not, they're into their own little world, young people, you know. They don't even know their history, you know, about Rosa Parks, a lot of the generation that came up so far after it. But what happened, I was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] doing one of their colloquiums that they were dealing with a artist, and I was, and the son of an artist was there and I was saying, you know, I'm trying to get my family more involved in my, in my art work and my collection, and what he said made sense. He says, "why don't you give 'em some pictures?". So I gave my niece a picture of Rosa Parks and she loved. And I had an exhibit in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and she came down on the train by herself to see it. So I think I'm getting ready to now, to start shipping out to people, my cousins who, who I love, just to let 'em, you know. And the pictures that I'm sending 'em are like Mandela and they're saying wow and, you know, stuff that are blowing their mind. Even a lot of these entertainers will blow their mind who I'm sending out to them. I never shot Marvin Gaye, everybody ask me that. And I never shot Miles Davis. And when I was shooting Miles Davis, he kept his back to the audience and he said you couldn't use a flash, and I didn't have a ego then, I was shy then but, you know, well the heck with you. And, you know, everybody wanna know, where, do you have anything of Miles Davis. But I did [unclear], you know, Art Blakey and the, you know, and [James] Mtume's father was one of the Heath Brothers [a musical group comprised of Jimmy Heath, Percy Heath, and Albert "Tootie" Heath]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, and-- Speaker 1: [Unclear]-Heath and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, three, the three Heath Brothers. And Charlie [ph.] Heath I think was his father, James [ph.] Heath, I don't know which one was, one of 'em was his father. And Mtume was on Miles Davis' record, him and your boy from Detroit [Michigan] who's played the bass, Michael Henderson. And they played on 'em, they were my favorite record which I called 'Jack Johnson' by Miles. That's one of my favorite tunes. And they were playing on that, you know. My man was playing bass and Michael was playing bass on that. Story_ID: 178634 Speaker 1: And I also worked with Ray Parker, Jr. Now Ray Parker, Jr. was interesting from the point of view that he was making more money paying background singers than college professors. You know, they were trying to get him to go to college and stuff and he says, well, Ma I'm doing background stuff now making plenty of cash at Motown [Records, Detroit, Michigan], you know. And so, you know, after a while, 'cause I even look at Jay Z and those guys, you know. They were hustlers in the projects and eventually they got in the, learnt how to, you know, dealing on the wrong way, then they started dealing in the right way but I wonder how much education do they really have, you know. Because there was a little beef between [HM] Harry Belafonte, and it really wasn't a beef between Harry Belafonte and Jay Z, but the music being made it seemed like it was a beef. Of course, once it got of hand they were saying that Jay Z should be kissing, you know, Belafonte's shoes for what he did for the Civil Rights, you know, what he's done. And basically when, when, when he was coming up as a, as a Civil Rights worker and helping [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [,Jr.] and them, supporting those guys, getting 'em out of jail and stuff, all of these actors were sort of, you know, Frankie, not Frankie Laine, but, you know, I lost my heart in San Francisco, Bobby Bennett [ph.], what's his name? Speaker 2: Tony Bennett. Speaker 1: Tony Bennett, not Bobby Bennett, but Tony Bennett and all of those guys was part of the, you know, I call it the Freedom, Freedom Marchers or whatever. And they were saying with the, what's going on today with all of you entertainers with, and athletes with all this big bucks or are you still trying to uplift and inspire and motivate your people? A lot of them are doing things in their community and a lot of 'em don't even want to get the advertisement, you know, because that's not what they're about. But, you know, there's just so much that I'm appreciative of, I feel blessed. Speaker 2: Do you think that, I mean are you making arrangements now, are you trying to make arrangements for your, the survival of your collection? Speaker 1: That's why I'm having a meeting with the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.]. I was thinking between, okay, Howard University [Washington, D.C.] is where I got two degrees. They bring down Howard Dodson from the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] to sort of get their library together, and I thought if he was getting it together Howard might, might get this stuff but that's written off now. And I also was thinking about the Schomburg. You know, the Schomburg was another place. And [HM] Deborah Willis has introduced me to two curators at the Library of Congress. And I feel right now, once I meet them and I find what pictures they want or what pictures they're gonna get or what pictures they're gonna purchase, 'cause I have a lot of pictures that nobody else has because I was the only one there. And a lot of times I was telling you about it, the last picture that I, 'cause I was telling you about Ellis Haizlip's niece trying to do a documentary on her uncle, you know, Ellis Haizlip-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --who was (unclear) Soul. And so I had a found a picture on, one of my slides had Betty Shabazz, [HM] Roscoe [Lee] Browne, Jukebox [ph.] Roscoe Browne, Jr., whatever-- Speaker 2: Roscoe Lee-- Speaker 1: Lee Browne. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And in back of Betty Cocker [ph.], Betty Shabazz, was Ellis Haizlip. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so that was just a picture that, you know, I never looked at being anything important. So I sent it to, that ain't my answering machine is it, that's not my, well, I sent it to Deborah Willis to give to her. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And, you know, Deborah Willis after she sees it, you know, Oggi you got so much stuff. I said you need to meet the girls, the curators at the Library of Congress. And the Library of Congress was, if it works out right that where, where, it might go. And nowadays I could put all my pictures on a couple of CDs or whatever, and my daughter could have a set, the Library of Congress could have a set, the Schomburg could have a set. The way you could do things now. So I'm thinking on that order. Even Howard might have, you know, you know. I, you know, but my legacy I think will be taken care of, you know. I'm seeing to it now. I got a manager and like I say, I'm looking into it, you know, seriously. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I think that future generations will be enjoying my pictures many years to come. Speaker 2: Now I got one last question, but is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to make sure we mention before I ask my last question? Speaker 1: We talked about the theater, we talked about NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters], we talked about the radio station. What's the last question, sock it to me. Story_ID: 178635 Speaker 1: All right, well it's similar to legacy but it's a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered mainly as a brother who treated people the way I would want to be treated. And I know that that has carried me a long way in my life because of me treating people in the record stores and people at the radio stations and people that were really minor people at the radio stations, they, they owe, I treated everybody with respect and because of that, I sort of get respect from all of those people...