 Story_ID: 664252 Speaker 1: I'm nervous (laughter). Speaker 2: No. Let us begin. I will slate and say that I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Today is October 7th, 2016. We are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York]. And I would love for you to tell us your name, spell it and tell us your birthday please. Speaker 1: Fabulous. So I am William Ellis Porter II, aka [HistoryMaker] Billy Porter. That is W-I-L-L-I-A-M, E-L-L-I-S, P-O-R-T-E-R, Roman num- Roman numeral II or Billy Porter, B-I-L-L-Y, not I-E, P-O-R-T-E-R. Speaker 2: And what's your birthdate? Speaker 1: My birthday is September 21st. You need the year? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 664253 Speaker 1: Let's start with what we call People magazine kind of questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Quick ones. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I'm going to get real colored. Speaker 1: That's all right. Speaker 2: Fried chicken and collard greens (laughter). Speaker 1: Yum. Speaker 2: I'm a walking stereotype. Speaker 1: (Laughter) What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Season? Speaker 2: That's an interesting one. I would say spring and fall because it's like you can--it's temperate, but also warm very often. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: You know the vacation destination is really new for me because I haven't taken a lot of vacations in my life. But I would say at this point, one of my favorite--well the sun is my favorite place, the beach, is my favorite place. Fire Island here in New York, it's so close so that's one of the places that I've been very often, but I would say the beach, any beach. Speaker 1: Okay, got it. And do you have a favorite quote or saying? Speaker 2: "To thine own self be true." Speaker 1: Very good. Speaker 2: And it follows, "As the night, the day thou canst not be false to any man." It's one of my favorites from Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]. Story_ID: 664254 Speaker 1: Okay, so I wanna learn about your family-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and we'll do both sides of your family, but let's start with your mother. If you would tell us her name, her birthday, where she's from? Tell us about her? Speaker 2: My mother is from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. She was born in Pittsburgh and raised in Pittsburgh. Her name is Cloerinda Jean Johnson Porter Ford [Cloerinda Ford]. Speaker 1: And how do we spell Cloerinda? Speaker 2: C-L-O-E-R-I-N-D-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-- Speaker 1: And what's her birthday? Speaker 2: Her birthday is January 21st, I don't know, 1945 I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother was born with a condition that was actually medical malpractice, so when my grandmother [Martha Richardson Johnson] was ready to have her, there was no doctor around. And at that time they had these shots that they would give to sort of hold the baby, I'm not sure--I don't know what they're called any more, they've since been banned. But they gave my grandmother the shot and then the doctor came before the shot wore off and he sort of forced my mother out and it, it did something to her nervous system that now even still to this day has yet to be diagnosed, like they can't diagnose it. They don't know what it's called. She is now in a nursing home because through the years she's lost all mobility. So she is at the Actors Fund nursing home [Lillian Booth Actors Home, Englewood, New Jersey] right now, which is you know a very hard thing for me. But, you know, she's a woman who in spite all of that, until she was seventy years old, she's seventy-one now, until she was seventy years old really, you know, fought it. You know she was, she was always the person to live beyond that, you know she got out of bed every day and when it went to the cane or the walker or the wheelchair or whatever the progression was, she remained present and she fought. She fought until she couldn't fight any more, so. Speaker 1: So as a child, or even as an infant, how did it affect her? Speaker 2: She always had a compromised gait in her walk. It, it, it affected her walk first, how she walked first. So it's sort of like around that polio [poliomyelitis] time, you know it was kind of like that kind of effect a little bit, you know. And then as the years progressed, it became more neurological, like nervous system. She got a tremor, a shake, you know and then, you know being able to grip, being able to move things, being able to feed herself. You know it took a long time, it took a really long time for it to take effect in a way that, you know, has gotten us to the place where we are, which is she needs twenty-four hour care. Speaker 1: And you say it, it essentially was medical malpractice? Did they try to fight it back when she was born (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was 1945. There was no fighting that, there was no fighting it. I, I don't even know if there was even an awareness that it could be fought, you know. And for us it really couldn't be fought, you know, at that point. Yeah, it's been interesting (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But they did know, but they did know, they realized at birth-- Speaker 2: They knew. Speaker 1: --that--what had happened? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Does she have siblings? Speaker 2: She has two sisters; twins, Karen [Karen Johnson (ph.)] and Sharon [Sharon Johnson (ph.)]. Speaker 1: And are they older or younger? Speaker 2: They are eight years younger. Speaker 1: Okay, so she's the oldest? Speaker 2: She's the oldest and, you know my, my aunt Sharon stayed in Pittsburgh. She has one, two, three, four--she has four kids; two girls, two boys. There's a boy and a girl, Stephanie [ph.] and Chris [ph.] who are of my age and generation, and then, you know, like fifteen years after that she remarried and then had another set of kids; David Johnathan [ph.] and Alicia Sims [ph.]. She married a man by the name of David Sims [ph.]. So that's my, that's Sharon. Karen went into the [U.S. military] service when I was about six or seven years, in the '70s [1970s], and she got stationed in Alabama, got married, had two kids and ended up staying there. She has just since moved back to Pittsburgh, literally like six or seven months ago because she lost everything in that flood down there recently. And she was thinking about coming back anyway and that just, you know. Story_ID: 664255 Speaker 1: What was your mother's work? Speaker 2: My mother [Cloerinda Ford] couldn't get a job because of her handicap. So, you know she, and she's a worker, you know she really is a worker. So she sort of threw herself into activities, giving back, you know, church. She was always very active in the church. She sat on lots of handicapped boards, you know for, for advocacy. Trickle [ph.] was one of them. It's, it's something in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] called Trickle. You know she, she engaged herself you know in, in such an astonishing way, to me, for a person who, there was really nothing for. She got out of bed every day. She got on that ACCESS van (laughter) you know. She used all those coupons. She learned the system too. That was one of the things that was really interesting to me is that she learned how to get the aid that she needed to live. She married twice. She married my father. Actually she married my father, William Ellis I--you know it's sort of, it's a, it's a bit of an interesting story for me. You know, my father married her on a bet. You know they went to the same church and he bet his friend that he could seduce the church cripple and it kind of went too far, ended up marrying her and had me and, you know then he resented her for it. And so, you know, that road of, you know, beating her and beating me and, you know he told everybody in the neighborhood that she was a witch because, you know how she--of her physical condition. He, you know, he sort of turned people against her because that's how we as humans do. And she had the wherewithal and the strength to leave him and she-- Speaker 1: What was his--oh, that's your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) William [William Porter I], that's my-- Speaker 1: And what did he do? What was his work? Speaker 2: I didn't really have a relationship with him. However, the last thing I knew him to be was a janitor, like the head of the jani- janitorial division at Pitt- University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], that's sort of the last contact I had with him. Speaker 1: But he, he was gone when you were a little boy? Speaker 2: She left him when I was like one-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --maybe two. You know because he was violent and--with her and with me and she was like, "That's not gonna, that's not gonna really work out" (laughter). Story_ID: 664256 Speaker 1: So she moved back with my [maternal] grandmother [Martha Richardson Johnson] and my aunt Dorothy [Porter's maternal great aunt, Dorothy Richardson Majors], which I guess we will talk about as well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --because grandma and Aunt Dorothy were huge, you know, factors. And it's so complicated, it's really, really complicated because, you know as a gay man, as a gay black man growing up in a very Christian home, whether we want to own the reality that it's nature and not nurture (laughter). You know, it's like I was five years old and I was a sissy. You know I was running around in dresses and, you know wanting to put my aunt Karen's--my aunt Sharon's [Sharon Johnson (ph.)] high heels on and, you know, wanting to play with dolls. And, you know, they sent me to a psychologist to see if they could change this behavior. And after a year of counseling, every Wednesday at six years old, the, the, the counselor you know told my mother [Cloerinda Ford] as the assessment, "Oh he's fine, you just need to get a man around the house, you know, that'll help him." And within a year my mother had married my stepfather, Bernard Ford [ph.]. You know this psychologist said all of this stuff in front of me, and so leading into the relationship with my mother and my new stepfather I was really excited because I was gonna have a man around the house that was gonna teach me how to do these man things. Speaker 2: 'Cause you thought that was important? Speaker 1: Yeah, because I wanted everybody to be--you know I could see the terror on all of my family's faces every time they looked at me and every time they saw me. I didn't understand what was wrong. I knew something was making everybody uncomfortable and I just didn't want anybody to be uncomfortable anymore, so you know I wanted the man, I wanted to learn, I wanted to--I was open. And then my stepfather proceeded to molest me for five years, sexually so-- Speaker 2: Five years? Speaker 1: Yeah, from the time I was seven to the time I was twelve. And the way that it happened is really interesting as well because prior to him it was just me and my mom essentially and, you know I would have nightmares and when I would have nightmares--I had this really wonderful relationship with my mother where she would come in and lay in my bed, not utter a word, just her presence, and I would feel calm, I would go back to sleep. I'd wake up the next morning and she would be gone and everything would be okay. The first time I had a nightmare in the new house, in this new configuration, she sent the man in. So for me, when the touching and the molestation began, I just thought that was--those were my man lessons because that's what he was there for, yes, you see? So-- Speaker 2: And you were seven? Speaker 1: I was seven, but I was also naturally gay, so the idea of a sexual awakening in- inside of that configuration was fine, because that's what I naturally would have wanted. It happened too early, but--so it's a very complicated time (laughter). It's very complicated, it was very complicated. Yeah. I didn't know we were gonna get into that so early. But (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Me either, it's okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean but that--it's sort of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Sure. Speaker 1: --you know in terms of the family history that's, that's how it happened. Story_ID: 664257 Speaker 1: So I want to--we're gonna come back to this, but I wanna go backwards with your family-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to your, your grandmother, your mother's parents-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and it's, I really want to know as far back as you can go in your mother's family. Speaker 2: This is so interesting because there were only women in my family, and when I think back to it, I talk about this all the time, something happened. I don't know what it was, but by the time I got here, there was grandma-- Speaker 1: What's grandma's name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Martha Johnson [Martha Richardson Johnson], Great Aunt Dorothy Majors [Dorothy Richardson Majors], Karen [Porter's maternal aunt, Karen Johnson (ph.)] and Sharon [Porter's maternal aunt, Sharon Johnson (ph).], and my mother [Cloerinda Ford]. I am forty-seven years old, these women never talked about the men in their lives. Martha Johnson, Dorothy Majors, they were both married, their maiden names are Richardson, never once, never once did they talk about the men in their lives. I don't even know my grandfather's name. They uttered his name maybe twice in my life. The only thing I know is he was shot in the back coming out of a bar, that's it. Something so tragic happened and so devastating to them emotionally that they would not even utter the names of the men in their lives. Speaker 1: And did you ever dare ask? Speaker 2: I, I didn't know to ask. You know I was going through so much of my own trauma that I didn't even know. I didn't even know to ask. You know my sister [Mary Martha Ford Dieng] who is ten years younger than me, now has just been trying to go through and excavate stuff because they're all gone, you know, grandma and Aunt Dot are all gone. You know, they're gone so she's trying to piece things together and we're trying to find out what it is, you know. I don't know. I really don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when, when they were--so they lived together? Speaker 2: Yes, my entire life. Speaker 1: No dating, you never saw-- Speaker 2: Not a thing ever. Not a man around ever. Speaker 1: What was their work? Speaker 2: My grandmother was--(pause) (gesture). Speaker 1: You don't know. Speaker 2: I know one of them worked at Western Psych [Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] as a jan- a janitorial supervisor. Speaker 1: And did they have a house? Where, where did they live (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes, the big house. The big house in Lawrenceville. They owned it. It was a one, two, three-- Speaker 1: Lawrenceville is where? Speaker 2: Lawrenceville in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. It's close to the downtown area. It, it was a--yeah, it's a neighborhood in Pittsburgh. It was a three bedroom--wait one, two, three four bedroom and an attic. Had a dining room, a big kitchen, a living room and a basement. Like it was a house-house. And it sat on, it sat on sort of like an incline, kind of a hill, and it was a huge hill that--and it, and it sat on the top of it and lots of stairs to get to it and I was mowing that grass on that lawn by the time I was eight years old with the lawnmower (laughter). Speaker 1: That was your job. Speaker 2: That was my job. They taught me a great work ethic, they really did. Yeah, I haven't thought about a lot of this stuff in a long time. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's good. So tell me--and can you go farther back in terms of, did your mother or aunt ever mention any other members of the family, generations before them? Speaker 2: Never. We have a picture of all the ladies. Once again it was all the ladies. It's like great-grandmother, great-great-great-great--and then they're all--I have a picture of that. But even with that they never told us who they were. They just said those are your ancestors. Those are your--you know. Speaker 1: And they were all women? Speaker 2: And they were all women, (laughter) which I, you know, in retrospect as I got older I--that was just something that I made note of. There were never any men. No men. Story_ID: 664258 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father [William Porter I]? Speaker 2: The only thing I know about my father, my biological father, you know I spent time with him when I was--the last time I spent any significant time with him I probably was about nine or ten. He had remarried. His new wife had three kids. So he was a stepfather with three kids. He was from Wellsville, Ohio. He had a bunch of brothers and sisters. A bunch of uncles. A bunch of, you know, aunts and uncles and stuff. Speaker 1: Did you know any of them? Speaker 2: I knew them at that point. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: You know, I had, you know, Aunt Lola [Lola Porter], which I think is really interesting considering the character that made me famous and (laughter) gave me so many accolades is Lola [in 'Kinky Boots,' Cyndi Lauper and Harvey Fierstein], which (gesture). Aunt Marcia [Marcia Porter], they had some kids. I spent a summer, the last summer I spent in Wellsville with my father trying to have a relationship with him, the only thing I remember is him badmouthing my mother [Cloerinda Ford] the entire summer and feeding me junk food all day, every day. So by the time I got home I was like thirty- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Junk food? Like what? Speaker 2: Like McDonald's and Hardee's and Burger King like every meal was a, was a-- Speaker 1: Fast food? Speaker 2: --fast food meal. So I got back home and I was like twenty-five pounds heavier than when I left, and my mother was like you're never going there again. Speaker 1: And how long had you been there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I said I never wanted to be there, I never wanna go there again (laughter). Speaker 1: How long had you been there? Speaker 2: For the summer, for a couple of months. That was my mother trying to-- Speaker 1: So this wasn't something you did every year? You did it that year? Speaker 2: I did it that year because my mother wanted me to have a relationship with my father. Speaker 1: And how old were you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know my mother never spoke poorly of my father. She was, she, she's, you know, she never spoke poorly of him. You know, and he was a dick but (laughter) she let me come to that knowledge on my own. Speaker 1: How old were you when you spent the summer with him? Speaker 2: I think I was like nine or ten. You know maybe even a little bit younger. There were like two times. It was like that time and then a number of years later when I was maybe eleven or twelves, I tried again. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Wellsville, Ohio, what kind of town is that? Speaker 2: Nowheresville. Speaker 1: Is it rural (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's like, it's so rural and it's, it's black rural. It was at the time, and we're talking the '70s [1970s] at the time, I haven't been back since, so I don't know, but like, you know, population of eight hundred, like that small. You know maybe two thousand at the most. Speaker 1: And so were they primarily farmers there? Speaker 2: You know, I'm too young to actually know what they did (laughter), you know I was too young to really know what they did for a living, but it was rural and it was quiet and it was, it was like Mayberry [North Carolina], it was like 'Mayberry R.F.D.,' like it was-- Speaker 1: Except they did have fast food? Speaker 2: They had fast food. They fast--well they always had fast food (laughter). Speaker 1: Well (laughter)-- Speaker 2: McDonald's always finds a way to get there (laughter). Speaker 1: Your--what do you know about your father's parents? Speaker 2: Nothing. Speaker 1: Nothing. And you don't--you can't go back in his family? You don't know? Speaker 2: I don't know. I spent time with my grandmother, her name was Lola [Lola Porter] as well, when I was there that summer. That's really the only part of it I know. I do know that my father had lots of brothers and sisters, like nine or ten or something like that. And at a very early age, there was a woman who didn't have any children in the area who (air quotes) adopted him and like took him away and raised him from the time he was like twelve or something. I do know that. So weird, you know it's like you don't--I, I never even thought about it. I never even thought about that the hi- the historical significance of where I come from because it always had to be so forward moving for me. (Pause) Because I guess I didn't wanna get stuck. Story_ID: 664259 Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Pause) The nightmare. (Pause) The nightmare when he [Porter's stepfather, Bernard Ford (ph.)] came (crying)--I don't remember anything before that really. I see pictures, you know, I see a couple of Christmas pictures that I remember a little bit in between. You know I remember, actually I remember living in the Hill District. I remember leaving (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: --in Pittsburgh, I remember leaving--my mother [Cloerinda Ford] leaving my father [William Porter I] going back to her house where she was constricted, where she was, you know limited, where she was put in a box for fear, you know they--it's like she was handicapped, she wasn't allowed to do anything. And she left that and tried to live on her own, and we lived in the projects in the Hill District. I started the first grade and I was just bullied, bullied, bullied, bullied every day. Speaker 1: From the beginning of school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From the time I started, from the begin- from day one and I remember going to a school, there was a hill in front of the school, there was a spoked fence that had spokes at the bottom and the, the hill came down and then it dropped off for some strange reason. The grass didn't go all the way to the spokes. Somebody punched me in the face, I rolled down the hill and I got--my head got caught in between that space, and it split my head open in the spokes, and I had like nineteen stitches on the side of my head, you can still sort of see the scar. That's one of the first memories I have. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: Six. Speaker 1: And why did they bully you? Speaker 2: Because I was gay. Because I was a sissy. I mean I can't--I don't know any other reason. You know in retrospect I would think that would be the only thing. (Pause) What else would it be? You know what I mean? Story_ID: 664260 Speaker 1: You were telling me about the kids at school bullying you and teasing you, and you also mentioned about dressing up in your aunt's [Porter's maternal aunt, Sharon Johnson (ph.)] dresses and that whole thing, how did your mother [Cloerinda Ford] react to what you--how you were behaving? Speaker 2: She recoiled in horror and sent me to a psychologist. Speaker 1: Oh, so that's-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's what happened. Propelled by, you know, her, my family's deep rooted religious belief structure. Speaker 1: And you were at what age when you went to a psychologist? Speaker 2: Six. Speaker 1: And when do you recall--what's your earliest memory of wanting to dress in women's clothes and all of that? Speaker 2: It wasn't--it's not a memory, it just was. It just happened. I saw them and I put them on. It was like three--you know like it wasn't, you know I didn't plan it. I just saw a closet one day and I saw these things that I wanted to play with. I would say three or four, you know. Speaker 1: How did your mother dress you? Speaker 2: I don't remember her dressing me. I always remember having my own idea of what I want to wear. Like that's my earliest--is going to Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and picking out Garanimals. "I want that, that, that, that and that," you know. And Dorothy, aunt Dot [Porter's maternal great aunt, Dorothy Richardson Majors], was the fashion plate of the family, you know, I learned from her early on. She always said, "Get what you want. Save your money and get what you want and buy it right the first time, and then you won't have to keep buying it. Because if you get the lesser version, you're only gonna go back and get the version that you wanted later, so now you've paid double. So wait," (laughter), "save your money and get what you want" (laughter). And that has served me so well in my life, I always stop, you know. But yeah, I was, I was always--I always had some sort of fashion sense. I was the one who would go to the East- you know go buy a Easter suit and scan the store. I could scan the store, any store that I was in and point to the most expensive item in the store. I just could, like, you know my mother was like, "Yeah, you got champagne taste on a beer budget. You're gonna have to have a job for the stuff you want" (laughter). It's true, it's very true. Speaker 1: So from the beginning? Speaker 2: From the beginning, yeah. Story_ID: 664261 Speaker 1: As a child, where you recall growing up, what of the sights, sounds and smells do you remember? Speaker 2: (Pause) Nature. There was a lot of nature interestingly enough in the city [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], lots of parks. I spent a lot of time in the park, you know, grass, trees, dirt. You know, when we moved with my stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)], chlorine because literally we lived next to the pool, the city pool that was in my backyard. So I would always tell people we had a pool because it was in my backyard. It literally was in our backyard. I had to go around the corner to enter through the city entrance, but we had a pool in my backyard (laughter). And we had a field in my backyard so those were, those were things that were always, always present. Grandma's [Porter's maternal grandmother, Martha Richardson Johnson] food, the food. You know there was always food, there was always the smell of wonderful, wonderful, mainly soul food--no always soul food (laughter). Speaker 1: So like what? Speaker 2: You know like that fried chicken and collard greens that I love so much. Macaroni and cheese. There was cobblers and, you know, the Thanksgiving smells, the stuffing and you know the string beans with the potatoes in it. You know the one smell that I didn't like was the chitlins, and as I got older and started doing the cooking myself, I banned them from my, I banned them from my home (laughter). I remember, I remember doing Thanksgiving dinner, I was probably sixteen, fifteen or sixteen and I was sort of in charge of it for the first time, and it was at my stepfather's, you know, where we ended up living. And the rule was you can have chitlins, but you got to cook 'em at your house, and warm them up at your house, and put a lid on them before you bring 'em in here. There will be no fire underneath them (laughter). There will be no lids coming off of them. I do not want to sit around, eat my Thanksgiving dinner with a room that smells like shit. I'm not interested (laughter). Speaker 1: They loved you for that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No they hated--they were like, "You so high sadity, you think you that," you know. It was like, yeah I'm not eating chitlins. That's a generation behind me y'all, sorry. Story_ID: 664262 Speaker 1: Who were your friends back then when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Are you talking--are you speaking of-- Speaker 1: When you're a little kid. Speaker 2: When I was a little kid. May- you know I had like extended family, so when my mother [Cloerinda Ford] married [Porter's stepfather, Bernard Ford (ph.)] and moved to the new neighborhood, which is East Liberty [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], it was interesting because we moved down the street from a family who ended up being our extended family. You know, so the Richardsons side of the family would have a huge Thanksgiving thing at their house that also happened to be up the street and around the corner. I didn't really realize that that's where we had gone for Thanksgiving prior to moving there and when we moved there, there were, there was--the Brocks [ph.] had a, a son, Avis Brock [ph.] had a son who was my age. So I hung out with him a lot. You know, I didn't really have many friends at that time, early. It wasn't until the sixth grade and I was bused, you know it was desegregation the second time, so they bused us, I was bused like a half an hour away to-- Speaker 1: And this is about what year? Speaker 2: This is '75 [1975]. I was bused to Reizenstein Middle School [Florence Reizenstein Middle School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and it was the first time I was in contact with people that didn't look like me, i.e. white folks. I had an aptitude that put me in classes that were accelerated. Speaker 1: And this was at a school that was already an accelerated wasn't it? Speaker 2: There were accelerated portions of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, which is what I'm, which is what I'm getting to, which was, you know, they had the desegregation component, but then once you got to the school they separated people by aptitude. So if you're going to the black schools from kindergarten to the fifth grade, where, even then you know were substandard, by the time you got to be integrated into, in with the other students who had better education up until that point, you were still separated. So here I am and I'm, because of my aptitude, I'm in classes--there's thirty people in the class and me. All white, maybe one Asian and me, or maybe another black girl or maybe another black boy. And in the other areas, in other sections of the building were then all the black people. So it's like, it wasn't, it wasn't working (laughter). I didn't know at the time that it wasn't working, that integration wasn't working, but all I knew is that I didn't have any friends and now here I am in this room with all these people and we're all uncomfortable (laughter) because we've never had to interact like this before. Story_ID: 664263 Speaker 1: This was pre-Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], so there were still governmental programs that were in place that were trying to be of use. The afterschool program situation was something that I was able to latch on to. And when I say afterschool programs, they gave us the book for afterschool programs the first day at school [at Florence Reizenstein Middle School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], it was this thick (gesture). There was so many things that you could do. You know, and the afterschool program was on Wednesday and like everybody would stay after school, and there were more people in the school after school than there were in, like, you know. So I read it and I was scouring and there was a thing called Reizenstein musical theater, and I didn't know what theater was but I knew I sang in church. And I knew I was musical and I liked to sing, so I went to the meeting. And at the meeting we were informed, Betsy Schmidt [ph.] informed us as to what a musical was and that we were having auditions the following week, so you could come in and sing whatever you want for the audition, which you would then be cast in a role. And we would rehearse every Wednesday through the top of the year and then in February we would ramp up those rehearsals for more than one day, and then at the end of March we would do four performances of this musical ['Babes in Arms,' Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart]. Speaker 2: And so this was in junior high school? Speaker 1: This is in the sixth grade. I didn't know what it was. It was the day before my birthday. The next day, my [maternal] grandmother [Martha Richardson Johnson] and my great aunt [Dorothy Richardson Majors] took me to see the touring company of 'The Wiz' and I was like, "Oh my god, this is a musical, this is a musical." And-- Speaker 2: Was that just happenstance? Speaker 1: It just was happenstance, it was just happenstance. And so at the end of the show, you know Dorothy, the character Dorothy, sings "Home," (singing) "When I think of home, I think of the place where there's love overflowing," and I was decimated. Like (laughter) I was in my seat, I couldn't move. I was completely decimated and-- Speaker 2: And who was--in the touring company who was playing Dorothy? Speaker 1: Lillias White, who is now a friend of mine. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, so I went to my music teacher the next day and I said, "I want to sing this song called "Home" from the--for the audition next week. I don't know how to get the sheet music." And Rhoda Arnold [ph.], I can't believe I remember her name, Rhoda Arnold got me music. She figured out a way to get me the music. I don't know how she did it. I think it was--you know there was a store called Volkwein's Music, which was a big store on the North Side in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], which is the Andy Warhol Museum, the building is now the Andy Warhol Museum. I think she went down there and got like--got me the album and the--and she got the sheet music for herself. I auditioned the following week, the cast list went up. It was literally a hundred people in the show, every single thing was double cast, except me. I was like ding, ding, ding, ding, ding. I'm the only one out of all these people that gets to do this show four times in a row (laughter). I don't have to share the part with anybody? So it was logged in my head that I might be good at this. This might be something that I can do, like just to make friends. And I did, all of a sudden I had friends, you know people would hear me sing and I had friends. People wanted to be my friend. People stopped wanting to beat me up (laughter) and wanted to be my friend, you know. Speaker 2: So it was dramatic. Speaker 1: It was a dramatic shift in like how I could exist in this thing called childhood and middle school (laughter), which is just so traumatic sometimes. Story_ID: 664264 Speaker 1: You know so then that summer was the summer that 'Dreamgirls' was on Broadway and I was washing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what year is this now? Speaker 1: This is '81 [1981], the summer of '81 [1981] I think at this point. Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981], yep. Speaker 1: And I was literally--and everybody knows this story because I talk about it all the time. But I was washing dishes and the Tony Awards [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] came on, randomly once again, I didn't know what the Tony Awards were. They came on, I saw people in performance on a stage like I had, like I had never--it wasn't a television show. They were on stage singing and dancing and all of a sudden without knowing it they announced 'Dreamgirls' and there they were. Speaker 2: And had you heard of 'Dreamgirls' before? Speaker 1: I had never heard of it. I had never heard of it and I had not made--from 'The Wiz' to the musical that we were doing, which was 'Babes in Arms,' Rodgers and Hart [Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart], traditional white folks. I didn't make the connection that this was something that I could do for a living. Seeing 'The Wiz,' it didn't--I was just doing this show [at Florence Reizenstein Middle School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and I was singing 'cause I could sing. But it wasn't the way that I sang, you know I came from a Pentecostal church, I didn't sing like, you know. So it didn't register that that was an option for making a living. And then I saw 'Dreamgirls' on television and Jennifer Holliday sang "And I Am Telling You I'm Not Going" in the same way that I sang in church, you know. And it was like (makes sound), you know like it was so crazy. And I literally, once again literally was like a ball of like weeping, like emotion in the corner like not knowing what this was. Story_ID: 664265 Speaker 1: And you know growing up in the church there's this--the spiritual component in my life also started early on because I could sing. And you know the, the spiritual leaders with--as well intentioned as they were at that time, would look at me and prophesy over me. You know they could sense that there was something special about me. You know there was a calling on my life, you know. And yeah okay. The unfortunate part about that is that the limited nature of where these people existed only allowed for them to understand that a calling on my life meant that I was supposed to be a preacher. (Pause) And it became very clear to me early on, even though not having the language for it, that yes I received the calling, but it's not from a pulpit, it's not a traditional calling the way you think it is. I didn't have the language for that at the time, but there was something inside of me that knew that. And as I was being pushed to preach-- Speaker 2: And you're at what age when they're pushing you to preach? Speaker 1: Ten, eleven, twelve. You know I think I preached my first sermon at twelve. Speaker 2: So you did preach? Speaker 1: I preached one sermon and one sermon only. Speaker 2: Okay. What was it? Speaker 1: I don't even remember. I just remember being on the pulpit and every word that came out of my mouth felt false. And every part of it felt false, and I came to my mother [Cloerinda Ford] and I was like, "I don't wanna do that ever again. I don't wanna do that." She was like, "You don't have to son." Something felt false. And then I knew, (laughter) you know seeing Jennifer Holliday I knew, I was like it looks more like that. I don't know what that means because I don't have access to any of it, but it looks something like that. Speaker 2: So let me ask you about th- with the church, as these church elders were prophesying over you did they have anything to say about your being effeminate? Speaker 1: Of course. Of course and they were going to rebuke that demon, and bind that demon, and get that demon out of me. So it was coupled-- Speaker 2: They said this to you (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of course, all the time. There wasn't a moment that I went into church, into a sanctuary, from the time that I was eleven to the time that I actually left the church at sixteen, where there wasn't somebody condemning homosexuality from the pulpit. There was not one time in all of those years. The topic didn't even have to be that, but there was always, there was always an off the cuff remark or, you know, something that was about the homosexuals. And we're talking the '70s [1970s] at this point. We're talking '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s] you know, and I didn't--you know, so here I am wanting to be the best person that I can be, living in a home where I'm being molested, and then people are telling me that I'm wrong, that I'm a sinner. Story_ID: 664266 Speaker 1: And you also have to remember it's 1981, '82 [1982], I'm twelve years old. I'm sitting at a table having dinner with my family and the first news report comes out about a man in San Francisco [California] dying of a gay cancer [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. So now I'm twelve years old, I'm having sex with my stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)] and I think I'm gonna die. Speaker 2: How--with what frequency was he raping you? Speaker 1: Multiple times a week. Speaker 2: Your mother [Cloerinda Ford] didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was like--I called it an affair. I called it an affair until I was like twenty-five years old (laughter) and went to therapy. He was like, "That's not an affair honey. You got to change that language." Speaker 2: He convinced you that this is what you should do? Speaker 1: It was just what I was, (makes sound) yeah. Speaker 2: Did your--how did your mother handle this? Did she know? Speaker 1: She didn't know until I told her when I was sixteen. Speaker 2: How could she not know? Speaker 1: That's my point. (Pause) That's my whole point. When it came down to it, when it came down to the choice for me of staying in the dysfunction or saving myself, that was the point for me. "All you people are sitting around here and knowing that this is happening, and if you don't know you need to be ashamed of yourself because you're not paying attention. But you want to condemn me for the things that is actually natural? So I'm the sinner? And I need to respect my elders?" You know, it came down to confrontations like that. I was like, "Y'all are crazy. This is crazy. In any configuration it is crazy and I'm out, 'cause if I don't get out, I will die, literally die." Speaker 2: When did you know that it was wrong that--this, what you called then an affair? Speaker 1: The, the news report. When the news report came out and they were talking about gay and they were talking about homosexual, and I didn't really have the language, I went to the dictionary and looked it up and I was like, "Oh my god, I'm doing all of this stuff, this is all this thing, I'm gonna, I'm gonna die." Like that was the moment (snaps fingers) that it all shifted for me and I stopped it. Story_ID: 664267 Speaker 1: But I was in, I don't know if it's denial or, I don't know what you would call it, the trauma of it, I didn't even revisit it until I was sixteen, fifteen or sixteen and I was working at an amusement park, Kennywood park in Pittsburgh [sic. West Mifflin, Pennsylvania] doing shows. And my stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)] and my mother [Cloerinda Ford] and my sister [Mary Martha Ford Dieng], who was like six at the time, six or seven at the time, came to see me. And my stepfather and my sister went off to go on a ride, to go on like a, like a water--where they would sit in the thing and peddle in the water and I remembered everything. Speaker 2: So you had suppressed it for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had suppressed it, a number of years. Speaker 2: So the abuse went on for how long? From when to when? Speaker 1: Seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven. So from like seven to like eleven or twelve. Speaker 2: So pre-puberty. Speaker 1: Yeah. And then I totally like literally forgot about it for like four years. And it was my sister, seeing my sister with my father, seeing her age, remembering that that was the age that it started and it just all came flooding back. And then that's when I told my, that's when I told my mother. Speaker 2: What did she say? Speaker 1: I don't remember what she said. She believed me, but she didn't do anything. And I think because of her handicap, because there was no--there didn't seem to be any version of the story where she could exist and support our family without his help, that I let her off the hook. Speaker 2: 'Cause she had previously had to go back home-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and that was the confining-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. And so I think because I had lived to be sixteen, I'd watched her life, I had understood her hardships, there was a part of me that felt like, well, I'm almost out and I know that I can get out. I have the wherewithal to get out. I will be getting the fuck out of here, so you stay, don't worry about me. You know because I think I was going into like my junior year of high school [Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and so at this point, I knew what the trajectory--you know I was gonna go, I was going to New York [New York], I was going to be a star, I was gonna be a recording--like it was like I knew what it was gonna be so-- Speaker 2: Thanks to Jennifer Holliday (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yeah, so she didn't have anything and so I sort of--I let her off the hook. Speaker 2: Did you worry that your stepfather might attack your sister? Speaker 1: That's, that's why I was--that's why I told her because she was so Pollyanna, my mother was so Pollyanna and so naive and so guarded that it wasn't even something that she would even, it wouldn't even come to her mind. So I had to make her aware of it. "Watch out for that motherfucker. Watch out for him because it happened to me. I don't know if he's gay or an equal opportunity child molester, watch out for him." I had the wherewithal to know that (laughter), I had the wherewithal to be able to say that and-- Story_ID: 664268 Speaker 1: You know the configuration of our house was also good for me too because, you know it was a, it was a house, but it was three different apartments, so we lived in the first floor apartment and then he built a bedroom for me in the basement, and the side door entrance didn't even have to go into the house. So I never had to see him. He worked from four to twelve [o'clock]. I didn't get home until after five. I never had to see him. Speaker 2: And he built this bedroom for you after you, after-- Speaker 1: He built this bedroom for me because there were only two bedrooms in the house, and once my sister [Mary Martha Ford Dieng]--and my sister and I shared a bedroom up until we shouldn't be sharing a bedroom, and so he made--they made a bedroom for me. So from sixteen, you know so essentially fifteen, sixteen, seventeen I never had to see him. I could go to school, you know, and I made my schedule such that I wasn't even ever in the house. You know at that point I was waking up at six a.m., getting on a bus at seven to go to Taylor Allderdice High School on Squirrel Hill [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which, you know, for all my academics. By noon I was on a school bus being transported to the other side of town to go to the creative and performing arts high school [Pittsburgh Creative and Performing Arts School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] where I did all my, you know musical theater and dance and acting training until 3:30 in the afternoon. And then I'd get on the bus and go downtown Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and take three or four dance classes until like 9:30, 10:30 at night. Get on a bus to go home, eat the left- you know they would have had dinner, so I warm up the dinner, eat dinner, do my homework, get in bed by two and start it all over again. So I was-- Speaker 2: You were preparing? Speaker 1: Yeah. I tell the story of driving, getting my driver's license and how I never touched the wheel of a car until I went for my driver--I went for my first driving lesson with stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)]. I knew I had to get out so bad that I literally watched the rhythms of how people drove. From the turning on of the car (makes sounds), to the shift (gesture), because the gearshift was here, (makes sounds), the palm over (gesture), how you--all the way to reverse (gesture), parallel parking. The first time I got in a car, I drove so perfectly my stepfather was like, "Where have you been driving? Whose car have you been driving?" I could drive the first time I sat in a car, never having been behind a wheel, that's how bad I had to get out. Story_ID: 664269 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to your stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)] for a moment. Remind me of the years that you said he abused you? Speaker 2: From seven to like eleven or twelve. Yep. Speaker 1: And how did it end? Speaker 2: It was after the moment of that first acknowledgement of the gay cancer [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and--that I heard on the news. That first interview and I just stopped it. I just said, "I don't wanna do this anymore." And it was over. You know and it's interesting to me because that's why I called it an affair for so long. You know it's easier to understand abuse when it's forced, when it's dangerous, when it's violent. But it was never dangerous, it was never violent, it was never presented in a way that I could not say no. Speaker 1: So you had been convinced that this is what you should be doing? Speaker 2: That I was having an affair (laughter). Speaker 1: And was it ever said that, "Don't tell your mother [Cloerinda Ford]," or it was just implied? Speaker 2: That was something that you just knew. It wasn't--it wasn't implied, it was just, you knew not to talk about it. I don't know what that was about. I don't know why I knew that but-- Speaker 1: Your mother was in the house wasn't she? Speaker 2: Yeah. In the next room, across the hall, in the next room. Speaker 1: This is before your sister [Mary Martha Ford Dieng] was born? Speaker 2: No, well yes, yes, yes. But continued after she was born. Speaker 1: So where was she? Speaker 2: In, in the other room. We only had two bedrooms. So she was in their room because she was two. She was one and two. By the time--the latest was two 'cause she's ten years younger than me. So the latest it went on was two. So she was in the bassinet, or the crib in their room. Speaker 1: How do you feel that--that relationship that you have with your stepfather affected you in your--as you matured? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You got a few days. You know it, it has been everything. You know there's not a day that goes by that it's not in my brain. I don't know my life without it. And the only thing that I've tried to do is figure out emotionally how to use it to my benefit and not have it destroy me. So there's been years of therapy. I'm still in it today. I wish it wasn't so haunting, you know. I'm finally at a place in my life where I can have a relationship with another person, a sexual relationship with another person that is functional. You know it's taken a lot of work to get to that, you know and it takes a very specific kind of person on the other end who can embrace that and all that comes with it. I'm very blessed to have finally found that relationship [with Adam Smith]. Speaker 1: What were the relationships like when you first started having your own relationships as a-- Speaker 2: I found that the ghost of that, whatever that is, was always in the room with me (laughter) when you're trying to have sexual relations, it's always in the room with you. And there shouldn't be another person in the room when you're having those intimate moments. Story_ID: 664270 Speaker 1: You described yourself as a predator. What do you mean? Speaker 2: (Clears throat) After that time with my stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)] I found that as I then came into puberty and wanted--needed to explore like everybody explores, I would find vulnerable boys who I could seduce and have my way with them. And you know same sex, like when you're younger, and you're younger, and you're in puberty and you're playing around and, you know, you're exploring, everybody does that. And so that was that happening when I was younger while simultaneously you know being in the situation with my stepfather, but then after that I just knew how to do it in a way that the younger kids didn't because I had been seduced. So I could seduce people and it wasn't--seduce little boys, and it wasn't until you know I was--me and my cousin used to play around a lot, and I remember I think we were fourteen or fifteen and it hadn't happened in a while and I just needed to seduce him. It hadn't happened in a few years and I just, you know, I was set out to seduce him and in the process of actually being in the throes of whatever that--you call that, I saw his face. And he was so terrified and I was like, "Oh my god, I can't do this." Speaker 1: How old was he? Speaker 2: We were the same age. He might have been a year younger than me, two years younger than me but I just said (makes sounds), "No, no." And I never did that again. I don't talk about that often. Speaker 1: Did you apologize? Speaker 2: Um-hm, I did much later in life. You know when we were adults and it was clear that I was gay (laughter) and I was out. I apologized, and he didn't even remember, which I'm so thankful for (laughter). He didn't even remember. Story_ID: 664271 Speaker 1: Did you ever confront your stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You want all the drama don't you? (Laughter) Do you want the story of the confrontation? Speaker 1: Sure, please? Speaker 2: I guess that's why we're here. Yeah, I was a senior in high school [Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. I had been accepted to colleges already. And I came home late one night from a church concert and, you know my mother [Cloerinda Ford], like the tension in the house--so I told her when I was sixteen and then it went unchecked and not talked about for about two years, a year and a half. But the tension in the house was like this (gesture). I created a schedule so I wouldn't have to see him ever. But then when I did see him it was like (gesture), and I just I didn't wanna have anything to do with him and it was all good. So I was out one night and I came home and you know it--historically in the family I would go to these church concerts and be hanging out with family, and I could get home from, you know, the eating part at two in the morning. And she knew where I was, I was at church, you know, so it was--and I was with adults, you know, young adults but I was with adults and that was cool. So I did that and I came home one night and it was probably two in the morning and I saw all the lights on in the house and I was like that's weird, you know, the lights are on. And so I walked into the house, and like I said earlier, I could usually go into the house and not even have to go through the side door and just go directly to the basement without having to see anybody. But I walked in the house, the side door was open, the lights were on. I wandered into the kitchen, and then wandered through the hall and wandered into the living room and my mother was just sitting up, and she picked a fight with me about being late. And I was like, "You knew where I was. Like what is going on?" And she was really talking loud and she was really like (gesture). And it woke my stepfather up who then came into the room and proceeded to think that he was going to reprimand me, with a belt even. Like it escalated to the point where it was like he pulled out a belt. Speaker 1: Had that ever happened before? Speaker 2: Well, he had, you know he had--younger, you know when I was younger I would get, you know, punished or beaten or whatever, like they did at the time. And, you know he pulled his belt out and I said, "If you hit me you better kill me." And it was heated, heated. And she said, "Tell him." Wanna know where I get my drama from? She planned that whole shit 'cause she couldn't take it anymore. "I can't take it anymore, I can't take it, just say it." And I said it and he denied it, and she said, "You can't deny it, I know you did it." And he was like, "He just wants to break us up. He just wants to--." I was like, "I don't have any investment in that. I have no investment in your relationship with her. I have no investment in your relationship with me. I don't care about you at all. I can't get out of here fast enough. Understand that and know that. This has nothing to do with you and everything to do with how fast I can get out of here, and the only thing that's keeping me here is that I need my education. So you don't have to worry about me." Like it was that kind of conversation. And when I think back at, you know when I think back to it, it's like I was seventeen years old. Nobody at seventeen years old should have to go through that. Nobody. And that was the end. You know it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he have any more to say? Speaker 2: What could he say? What could he say? You know my last words were, you know he said something like, "Oh you'll respect me in my house." I was like, "Listen," (laughter) "the only person that deserves my respect is this woman. You mean nothing to me. I'll be gone tomorrow." Like what do you do with that when you're, when you're hearing that from a seventeen year old? Like what are you gonna say? "You don't have no money. You don't have nothing to give me. You've taken everything away from me and you have nothing to give me. That's where we are. The conversation ends" (claps hands). Story_ID: 664272 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you do next? Speaker 2: I finished school [Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and then went to college. Speaker 1: When were you able to move away? Speaker 2: I would say, this was April, by the end of May I was back working at Kennywood park [West Mifflin, Pennsylvania]. And I lived near the park, so I got an apartment with friends for the summer and then I went to college in August. Speaker 1: Where did you go to college? Speaker 2: Carnegie Mellon University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and never, you know, and then-- Speaker 1: Now, I read that you wanted to move to New York [New York] right away-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but what, what happened to make you go to Carnegie Mellon rather than move? Speaker 2: Okay, let me finish the first thought-- Speaker 1: Sure, um-hm. Speaker 2: --which was I get to Carnegie Mellon, I am there the spring of my sophomore year, my stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)] dies so we can come--we can go--come to that. In high school I was on my way to New York City, I had wonderful angels in my life; Peggy Hughes Ruslander, who was the head of the drama department, and Lenora Nemetz who was also teaching there at the time but she--she's a Broadway girl and you know she had her first Broadway break understudying Gwen Verdon and Chita Rivera in 'Chicago,' the first time in the '70s [1970s]. They caught wind that I thought I was moving to New York (laughter) after high school and they put the kibosh on that. They put the kibosh on that. They literally grabbed me by my neck and was like, "You're not going anywhere. You're going to college, you're gonna get some training, you're gonna know what--you know you can sing and you can dance. Every time you open up your mouth it's, 'I wanna kill myself.' You gotta go learn how to act, you gotta get some training, you gotta figure out what you're doing and know what you're doing so that when you get there, you can work and work consistently." It was the best thing that anybody ever did for me. One of the best things that anybody ever did for me. "And you're going to Carnegie Mellon down the street." And for me I didn't even have the, you know it's like talk about access, I lived fifteen minutes away from this school by car for my entire life, had no idea. It was one of the best theater schools in the country. One of the best training programs in the world, had no idea. Speaker 1: No one in your family had gone to college right? Speaker 2: No, I'm the first person to ever graduate from college in my family. But let alone with a bachelors in fine arts. Who does, who does that (laughter)? You know I didn't even--I, I wasn't even aware that there was a, such thing--I didn't even know that there was any such thing like you can do something like that. Story_ID: 664273 Speaker 1: How did you pay for school? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Once again, you know being a beneficiary of the pre-Reagan era [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], (laughter) you know when people wanted to help other people, that time in the world. You know there were grants, there were loans, there were scholarships and we were so poor. You know it wasn't until my stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)] died, and I had been working in the summers, and I saw his tax return as we were like packing up his shit. He made twenty-one thousand dollars a year supporting four people. I made twenty-one thousand dollars a year, the summer prior at nineteen years old doing the summer job [at Kennywood, West Mifflin, Pennsylvania], you know what I mean. I made close to, I made like seventeen thousand dollars. I was like how do you (laughter), like you know, like it just, you know, it put so many things into perspective, it put so many things into perspective. But yeah that's, that's how I made it through school. And I came out with a twenty thousand dollar bill. It was twenty thousand dollars a year to go there at the time. I came out with about a twenty thousand dollar bill and I paid that off in ten years. Speaker 1: And you, what were the years that you were at Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987] to '91 [1991]. I graduated in '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Who was at school at the same time you there? What you know Carnegie Mellon is this magnet for great talent. Do you remember who else was there? Speaker 2: Who was there? I mean there were lots of like people who work in the business but, but no, no one from my era-- Speaker 1: Wasn't Renee Elise Goldsberry there? Speaker 2: Renee was there, Renee Elise Goldsberry was there, she was a freshman when I was a senior. Ty Taylor who was the front man for a band called Vintage Trouble was there. You know, all of the, all of the people who were working from my era are more like character actory theater people, television character actory theater people, you know but like break out stars it's like that--there's a generation behind me that came in, when I went back to teach, those people were there, Josh Gad and Zach Quinto [Zachary Quinto], and Christian Borle, and Katy Mixon is one of my students, and Leslie Odom, Jr. is one of my students, and Rory O'Malley, and did I say Leslie? Patina Miller, won a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for 'Pippin' [Roger O. Hirson]. You know, I've been associated with the school for a long time so you know I've seen a lot of different generations of people come out of it. Story_ID: 664274 Speaker 1: When you finish--well before you leave Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] are there any key memories that stand out for you in your time there? Speaker 2: What I remember simultaneously with the good and the complicated, because the training was astonishing, I mean what I learned there and what I still go back to, it's amazing. You know, but it was the '80s [1980s], and there was, there was and still is so much homophobia. And because there wasn't an archetype in the marketplace that looked like me at the time, the training that I received and the sort of focus became how to make me not gay. So once again (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's back to the same thing. Speaker 2: --it's always back to the same thing. It's like I'm not doing anything to make this happen. But I remember sophomore year in voice and speech, you know I've always had a pretty high voice, speaking voice and singing voice. In sophomore year of school, you know I was put on final probation because I was told that my speaking voice was too high for the American stage and I would never work. (Laughter) And it was like okay that's cool. But the good news for me was being black, being poor--always had to fight. It wasn't a big deal, I was paying the twenty thousand dollars, "If my voice is too high for the American stage, I'm in class every day and your job is to make it lower. Do your job. I'm not fighting you, I'm not saying you're wrong," even though I think you're wrong, "I'm not saying you're wrong, I'm here to learn." And I've immersed myself into that learning tank. "So do your job." Speaker 1: So you were willing to learn what they want-- Speaker 2: Yes. I wasn't fighting them. It came out of the blue you know. This came out of the blue. We got a new voice--we got a new voice and speech department--teacher wise my sophomore year. She smiled in my face all semester telling me how great I was doing. And then out of the blue I get, I get a final probation letter not having (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So there had been no probation letter leading up to this? Speaker 2: --not having any warnings, not having any. You know, I know my rights, mommy and daddy are not writing these checks for me. I'm writing these checks for me. I marched right into that office. I was like, "No, this won't work. This is not gonna work. I'm not going anywhere. You're not kicking me out of here. You're gonna do your job and teach me how to be better. That's what we're doing." Speaker 1: How were you earning the money for school? Speaker 2: I was working during the summers and, and squirreling some stuff away. I had a work study program so, you know, I would work in the office at school when I could get time. You know the schedule was crazy, so I didn't have a lot of time. And I was also working professionally on the side, you know, like I would have little like singing jobs on the weekends that I would get a little money here and there, and you know so I, you know I was a hustler. Speaker 1: And you were courageous. Speaker 2: I guess, you can say that (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, to go in and stand up for your rights when you get this final probation letter-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I had my mother [Cloerinda Ford] who I watched stand up for her rights as a handicapped women her whole life. Nobody fought for her but her. So I got that from her. I got that fight from her because I watched her do it all the time. You know government programs are about who can last the longest you know. It's about how much red tape will you go through to get this, you know. And my mother went through all of it to get what was deservingly hers. So I learned that ethic (laughter). I leaned that fight from her. So if you call me courageous it came from her. Speaker 1: Did you, after your stepfather [Bernard Ford (ph.)] died, did you help her financially? Speaker 2: I have when I could. You know being in show business, you know there were times when I could and there were times when I just couldn't, you know. But I did, I didn't help her as much as I--I didn't get famous early enough to buy her the house that I wanted to buy her or you know whatever. I didn't get famous--what can you do? I, I didn't have that kind of financial success fast enough for that, but we did okay, we do okay. Story_ID: 664275 Speaker 1: When did you move to New York [New York]? Speaker 2: So the summer of my sophomore year [at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], that very same year that I was told my voice was too high for the American stage and that I would never work, I decided to come to New York and spend the summer in New York because I wasn't get- the traditional theater jobs, summer stock jobs in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and out of that sort of tri-state area were not working out for me. I wasn't getting hired you know, too dark. Speaker 1: Did they tell you that? Speaker 2: No, it was just the point--it was just--that's the reason because, you know if it, there was anything I understood it was my talent. That's the only thing I understood, was that I had the talent. And I could look at the landscape and go I'm getter than these people. I'm just as good if not better than all of these people and I can't get hired at all. So how about not focusing on trying to get hired in Pittsburgh and focus on trying to get hired in New York. So I had friends in my class at school who lived in New York and I came to bunk out on their sofa with their family for a couple weeks here and there, and I just started trying to learn the city. I said well if I'm gonna work in McDonald's, I can work at McDonald's in New York and learn the city and go to auditions. I was already getting Backstage magazine, which was the trade paper. I was already getting that in high school [Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. You know I went to Chicago [Illinois], you know I lied to my mother [Cloerinda Ford] and went to a 'Dreamgirls' audition in Chicago from the Backstage magazine that I was receiving in my mailbox in Pittsburgh. You know like (laughter). And so I didn't, you know I, I was spending the summers--and I was going to every audition I could. Backstage came out on Wednesday nights at midnight, I would pick up the magazine, I would circle every audition and I would just show up to all the auditions. There was no diversity happening. There were not jobs--you know there was not a lot of jobs for me to get, but I was going to everything and putting my face in every--you know putting my face in everybody's face would could give me a job. And I ended up finding myself at a 'Miss Saigon' audition, open call, thousands of people, you know, you sing eight bars of a song. And I got called back, and call back after call back after call back, I booked it. So I spent the second semester of my senior year in the original cast of 'Miss Saigon.' Story_ID: 664276 Speaker 1: What role are you playing in 'Miss Saigon'? Speaker 2: I was in the ensemble. Speaker 1: And this is a big Broadway production? Speaker 2: Huge. The biggest of its time, the 'Hamilton' ['Hamilton: An American Musical,' Lin-Manuel Miranda] of its day. Speaker 1: And what year is this? Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 1: So your entry into New York [New York] theater, you're still in college-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you're on Broadway? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How did you-- Speaker 2: Two years later--two years prior they told me my voice was too high for the American stage and I would never work. Speaker 1: How did you balance your time when you're finishing school but you're--? Speaker 2: Well it was an internship and the way that Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] works is the first two years are really, really based in like training, you don't perform at all. You, you do crew and backstage stuff for the shows that are happening. And then junior year and senior year, focus more on reintroducing you and reintegrating you into performing. So senior year is all about--I mean you have class, but it's also mainly about your performing so I just got a-- Speaker 1: You got a gig (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it was an internship and I got credit. Speaker 1: And you got paid? Speaker 2: And I got paid (laughter). Speaker 1: Where did you live? Speaker 2: I lived on 44th Street between 9th [Avenue] and 10th [Avenue], 449 West 44th Street. It was a brand new, it was the first, one of the first doormen buildings in Hell's Kitchen [New York, New York] prior to what it's become now, you know you really couldn't walk up and down 8th Avenue. Like you didn't go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, was this the Strand [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: No, but it's around the Strand. The Strand is 43rd [Street] and 9th. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Got it. Speaker 2: But the Strand had just opened and this was the other one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I lived in that building in a little one bedroom apartment for ten years. Speaker 1: Wow. What was the, what was the rhythm like for being in a Broadway production? This is, you know this is your introduction to New York theater. Speaker 2: It's eight shows a week, you know, and I think that's the part that a lot of people who don't understand theater don't get. You know we live in a culture where the arts is generally for fun. It's generally something you do extracurricularly, and so even when you train, even when it's what you want to do and you train for it, the idea that it's a job doesn't really come in to play until you're in the job. Because it's always extracurricular and it's the thing you do to make all the other stuff go away. You know like my schoolwork, it's like well if I do my schoolwork then I can do this. If I get good grades then I can do the thing that I wanna do. So this was always the main thing, the schoolwork was always the main thing. You know so now all of a sudden you're doing eight shows a week, I'd never done something longer than a week. I've never performed in a show longer than a week. I mean the summer stock, you know the summer stock stuff that I did maybe was a week, maybe two. Working at Kennywood park [West Mifflin, Pennsylvania] I did that stuff for the summer. But like the idea that like, oh, every day at 7:30 I gotta go to work, and two times on Wednesday and two times on Saturday. Oh, and that's the moment where it really separates the men from the boys. I did that show for a year and you get fortified. You gotta, you know, you get your rhythm, you get your space; you know your body is your temple, you know because if you don't go to work you don't get paid, that's the other part of the theater. You don't get no sick days really. You don't get sick days like that (laughter). Speaker 1: And what--this is in 1991, as part of the ensemble what are you getting paid? Speaker 2: At that point I think it was like eleven hundred dollars a week or something. Speaker 1: So that's a lot of money. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a lot of money to live on. You know I was making like sixty, seventy thousand dollars a year I guess, close to that you know. Speaker 1: So coming out of college, well you're still in college (laughter). Speaker 2: Um-hm (laughter), until May. Speaker 1: Right, but for an actor to start out essentially making somewhere between sixty and seventy thousand is very good isn't it? Speaker 2: I was doing okay. Yeah. Speaker 1: In your apartment, were you living by yourself or you have a roommate? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You were by yourself? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I started with a roommate but that was like for two or three months and then I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 664277 Speaker 1: And then, so you, you were in that performance for a year, when did you compete in 'Star Search'? Speaker 2: At the end of that year. So essentially it went, I got 'Miss Saigon,' I was doing the show, Hinton Battle, who won the Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for playing John in that show, his third, was speaking one day about 'Star Search' and how he had a connection to 'Star Search.' Speaker 1: And at this point how new is 'Star Search'? Speaker 2: 'Star Search' is in its tenth year at this point. Speaker 1: Right, so it's very popular (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I had--so it was popular, well the popularity had waned. It had gone, it had gone into syndication so it wasn't, you know, it wasn't on primetime anymore. It was on syndication so you had to find it. But it was still on, and I had been mesmerized by 'Star Search' for years, and Sam Harrison [sic. Sam Harris], the first one, and I wanted to be on 'Star Search' and all that. If I got on 'Star Search,' I'd get a record deal, I'd be famous like Sam Harrison and all that (makes sounds). So I had done the Broadway thing, I'd done the training thing, I had forgotten about 'Star Search' because you know 'Star Search' is, you know, that's, that's commercial, that's not serious drama. That's not serious. And he was talking about 'Star Search' and I was like, "Wait, you know, you know about 'Star--,' like well who do you know at 'Star Search'? I wanna be on 'Star Search.'" He said, "You wanna be on 'Star Search'?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "Give me some videos, you can be on 'Star Search'." I got him some videos, because I--at that point I had been doing, I had already been doing my own concerts in New York [New York], you know because I came to the city and I was in the chorus of 'Miss Saigon,' which ultimately at the end of the day once the show was up and running meant that I was in the back in the dark. I didn't come to New York City to be in the back in the dark. (Laughter) It was all good, the pay check was good, but l was like, "Well let me now, what can I do?" And it was right at the height of the AIDS crisis [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and people were doing all these benefits and raising money for Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS, which was a pretty new organization at the time and said, "Oh, well I can be a part of this and like, you know, give back while at the same time trying to move my own agenda forward." So I would put these shows together and I was doing these concerts and I became a very, very popular concert artist around town with--even within the first year. So I had videos of me performing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where were you performing? Speaker 2: I was performing at Don't Tell Mama's [Don't Tell Mama, New York, New York]. I was performing at Steve McGuire's [ph.]. It was like, I was entering into the cabaret world because that was really the only thing there was. I would go to open mic nights, you know all around town. So you know, anywhere I could sing, I would sing it as loud as I could, as high as I could, for as long as I could. I would leave you know the show at 10:30 and I'd go to Don't Tell Mama's and sing 'til four in the morning like for years, like every night for years. You know because for me it was also practice. It was like if I can get up in front of the room of people, a smoky room with people just chattering, talking, talking, talking and stand up and sing a song and silence the room, I'm doing good and so I would practice. I would practice new material. I--that's where I would try it out. Story_ID: 664278 Speaker 1: So I had these videos and I just gave them videos of my shows. I got the telephone call, I went out to, to California for a weekend. So it was literally, I got there on a Thursday, Friday we filmed the last two shows of the season, so I was on the last two shows of the season. I won both shows, made it to the semifinals, which was Saturday. So the semifinals and the finals were on Saturday. I won the semifinal, I won the final. I came home and was back in the show ['Miss Saigon'] on Monday (laughter). I came home on Sunday, was back on the show on Monday. Won 'Star Search' over the weekend, was at (laughter) the show on Monday. It's so odd, I haven't really talked about this. I laugh--when you think about it, it's like oh okay. Speaker 2: So what did you win? Speaker 1: A hundred thousand dollars, which after taxes is like thirty-six. That was a huge blow. And it was the end of the year and what they would do is they'd cut the check at the first of the year. So they have--so they hold on to all of the money and get the, the-- Speaker 2: The benefit, yeah. Speaker 1: The benefit of it and then on the first of the year I get the check cut. So now I have to pay all the taxes on it 'cause I didn't have any time to shelter it. Or wait, no, no, no, they hold it 'til the end of the year, the hold it and they cut the check on the 31st. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So I didn't have anywhere to shelter it (laughter). I had to pay taxes on it for that prior year. That was awful, that was awful and I should have bought an apartment with it at the time. But you know, I'm black and poor, I didn't know what to do. It just sat in my bank account for--you know, and I just lived on it until it was done because of show business, you know. It's like, oh I can just put this in a savings and when I don't have a job I can just live on it. Speaker 2: Was--you described that 'Star Search' at this point was not as easy to find. Did it benefit you in your career that you won it? Speaker 1: No, not really. It wasn't really that at the time. It had passed-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --it had passed that. It was a nice title but it had surpassed the point when it was ever gonna like give you a recording career. That's what I thought it was gonna do, which is why I wanted to do it because I wanted to be a recording artist but, you know. Story_ID: 664279 Speaker 1: So in '92 [1992] and '93 [1993] you are an und- understudy for 'Five Guys Named Moe' [Clarke Peters]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The role of understudy, how, what did you have to do? Speaker 2: So 'Five Guys Named Moe,' essentially you have swings and you have understudies in a Broadway show. They sort of do the same--they need to have the same skillset. A swing is someone who covers people in the ensemble, what I was in 'Miss Saigon,' if I called out of a show the swing would replace me. An understudy or a standby; there's three. An understudy is a person who covers a lead. So if one of the leads goes out the understudy goes on. Generally that person is also in the show. So it's like a chess game. So the person moves up to the lead, replace, replace, replace. A standby is someone who essentially covers a star. So like they're generally not in the show and they just stand by for the one person. So if Bernadette Peters is out, this person goes on. Or I can say that for myself now. If I'm out, somebody goes on for me (laughter). So that's what I was. I understudied three people. So I had to know three major roles and at any given time I would have to-- Speaker 1: And did you have to do it? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes. First time I went on was the day of the L.A. riots [Los Angeles, California]. I'll never forget it and I had to go, you know, I was understudying a character who tap danced and did a tap solo, and then at the end of the tap solo did what's called tour splits. So you jump in the air, you spin on yourself and then you come down in a split. And I had to do five of those. And I wasn't really, that's not what I really did and I told them sort of at the audition that's not what I did, but I was, you know, I would go to dance--I was going to dance classes, I was stretching. I wasn't a big split person. So you know luckily I, from the training, learned all the parts on my own. I didn't wait for anybody to teach me because I knew that was never gonna happen. And the fourth week of previews the guy who was doing it couldn't move. He had like, he just couldn't get out of bed, and I went on and I'd been practicing and I was so proud of myself and I launched into the tap dance and I did four tour splits and then I did the fifth one, came down and ripped my hamstring. And I remember having to go to the chiropractor in between shows, limping up 8th Avenue to the chiropractor for him to get me ready. It was a Wednesday matinee, to get me ready to come back and do the night show. And when I came out it was like 6:30 and 8th Avenue, people were closing up all the windows and I was like what's going on? And there was no Internet or anything, and by the time I got to the theatre it was the L.A. riots and I realized, oh I have to go on even if I'm injured. Okay there will be some new, I gotta, I gotta make some changes here and learn how to take up for myself. Yep. It was a really interesting time. Speaker 1: And what did you do? Speaker 2: They changed the tour splits for that night and I went on and then I just refused to do them anymore and that was, that was a big fight, that was a fight, that was an ongoing fight for at least three or four months. So much so to the point where I said, "I'm not doing it. I need a career after this. I'm not gonna destroy my body and not be able to dance anymore. I'm not gonna do that. So I told you at the audition that this was not my specialty. If you need to release me please do, please do, but I'm not doing it." And it was a forti- it was a unified front because the guy who actually had the role was saying the same thing. Speaker 1: 'Cause he was out, he couldn't move (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause he was out for the very same reason, um-hm. Yep. Story_ID: 664280 Speaker 1: The next year you played Teen Angel in the Broadway revival of 'Grease' [Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Actually, let me back up. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In '93 [1993] at the end of 'Five Guys Named Moe' [Clarke Peters], 'Angels in America' ['Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes,' Tony Kushner] debuts on Broadway. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you see it and it has an effect on you? Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: Do I have the time wrong? Speaker 2: Well the timeline is sort of, you were, you were right with 'Grease'-- Speaker 1: You're doing 'Grease' first? Speaker 2: --because I'm doing 'Grease' at the time. Speaker 1: Yes, okay. Speaker 2: And so I'm doing 'Grease' at the time, and like I said earlier, alluded to earlier, I'm a serious actor now. 'Grease' is--first of all, even when I wasn't a serious actor I didn't like 'Grease,' that was not my favorite show right. So the auditions come around, everybody's excited for 'Grease' because Rosie O'Donnell's gonna be in it, that was announced blah, blah, blah. I don't care, I don't really care, I don't like 'Grease.' Tommy Tune sort of comes after me. Like they sort of, they, they, well they kind of keep asking me to audition and I say, "No, no, no, no, no." And one of the reasons was because they just wanted me to come in randomly, and now at this point we're talking about diversity, that has entered the conversation. Nobody really knows what to do with it. Nobody really knows where to place me and so I'm just getting a random audition from 'Grease.' And I would say, "What am I auditioning for? What role am I auditioning for?" "Oh, we don't know yet." It's like, "I'm not doing that. You're not saying that to my white friends. You're calling them in for specific characters. Tell me what you want me to come in for. I don't like this show, so no." I passed. I passed. I passed. For months I passed. Finally said, "Oh please come in, and if you come in--would you please? You, you can audition for the Teen Angel or Roger, the character of Roger." So I look at the script and I'm like well the Teen Angel sings one--I don't wanna sing one song. I wanna be in the show. I wanna be a human being. I wanna be a character who has an emotional arc, you know, that's always been my thing. So I go in and I don't want the show, I don't want it, so I'm, so I think I'm gonna throw it by rearranging Roger's song, which is called 'Mooning,' and I looked at it and I said, okay this is in the '50s [1950s], who was somebody black in the '50s [1950s]? Otis Redding. All right, so I rearranged 'Mooning' in the vein of Otis Redding, defiantly, like fuck you. It was a fuck you really. And I went in and I sang the hell out of that song and the entire room was on their feet at the end. It was at the Equity building [Actors' Equity Association] on 46th Street and Broadway or 7th Avenue, I was living on 44th [Street] and 10th [Avenue]. By the time I got home, by the time I had walked home, they had offered it to me on my answering machine. My agent had called me and said, "They want you to do this and they want you to do whatever you did, whatever, whatever you did," because they didn't know, my agent didn't know what I did. So they said, "Whatever you did with 'Mooning,' I mean--yeah, "Mo- 'Mooning,' they want you to do with the Teen Angel." And I said no, I passed. They're like, "What?" My--and it was like, "It's Rosie O'Donnell, it's high profile." I was like, "It's 'Grease' and it sucks. I don't wanna do it." So for like three weeks I'm like. "No, no, no." Finally Tommy Tune calls and Jeff Calhoun, "Can I take you to lunch?" And I'm sitting at Sardi's [New York, New York] and I'm looking around and I'm going, "You stupid--yes, yes I'm sorry, yes." (Laughter) I just said yes. I mean what--who the hell do I think I am at twenty-four years old, like turning down Tommy Tune because, you know, like--it was like, "I'll do it." Story_ID: 664281 Speaker 1: Fast forward to--and this is a, this is a really interesting relationship that I have with this show ['Grease,' Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey] because it did such great things for me, but it also--you know unfortunately it also put me in a box that I spent the next twenty years trying to get myself out of. It pigeonholed me into something that was not my own, you know because I had this voice, because I have this voice, at the time especially, that was like a show stopping voice. You know it was this thing that I could do that nobody else could do, that it was the height of it, it was the bravura of it. And the only thing, and the only way, I can describe it is go look at the video tape, like I was singing like Jennifer Holliday essentially in 'Dreamgirls,' but I was a boy and that had never been done before, so I was blowing roofs off of joints you know. The unfortunate part about that was that when you have a specialty skill like that, people have a hard time experiencing you as a human being. You become a clown. You become a coon. I called it the millennium coon show is what I called it. You know because when I showed up to the first day rehearsal, I saw the costume sketch, and granted the entire production was over the top designed, neon, just stuff that it didn't really need to be. Pink neon, like everything was neon and sort of, it was like somebody was on acid when they, when they designed it. My particular costume was essentially a white spacesuit, with no shirt, fourteen inches of orange rubber hair that look like Dairy Queen, you know, like Big Boy's [Big Boy], Big Bob's, Dairy Queen. Glitter, like it was my definition of a coon performing--like they put me in this place where I had to do this thing dressed like that. I was like that's, that's not what he looked like in the movie. He was just in a white shirt and a pompadour; he was just a regular person. Why can't I be a regular person? And I literally saw the design at the first day of rehearsal and ran to the payphone, and we were, we were rehearsing at the Nederlander Theatre [David T. Nederlander Theatre, New York, New York] pre-'Rent' [Jonathan Larson], so it was a dilapidated theatre. We were rehearsing in this space. I ran to the payphone sobbing, crying to my agent, "You have to get me out of this. You have to get me out of this. This is gonna be the death of my career." "You already signed the contract." Story_ID: 664282 Speaker 1: So this thing that was giving me all this exposure, you know I'm with Rosie O'Donnell, I'm with, you know like it was a big deal. It was a big deal for me. You know but like every time I went on stage, I sunk further and further, for the year I was there, in to this--and that was the time that I went around the corner. The theaters butted up against each other and I sat in this theatre [Walter Kerr Theatre, New York, New York] as a black gay man, (crying) and for the first time in my life saw a representation, a full representation of myself in the character of Belize [in 'Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes'] with Tony Kushner's brilliant words and George Wolf's [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] direction, who was the moral compass, he was the one that all those white folks were looking to for guidance, for spiritual leadership, to get them through this thing, this plague that we were in the middle of. He was the voice. And all I could think about was, I have orange rubber hair on my head and that's the person that I'm supposed to be (crying). That's the person I'm supposed to be. How am I gonna do that? When the only thing that people see me as is this clown with orange rubber hair on my head prancing around like a fucking queen [Teen Angel in 'Grease,' Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey], you know it was like (gesture). The back of my head blew off and I did not know what to do and here I am sitting, getting inside of all of my dreams and the most miserable I've ever been at that time. And I just knew I have to get out of this or I have to be done. If this is all it is, if the only thing I can do is show up and be in musical revues that entertain everybody with no depth, I can't do it. I don't wanna do it (laughter). Speaker 2: How'd you get out of it? Speaker 1: It's twenty years, it's twenty years of saying it and then trying to make the steps to get there. I mean it was twenty years of choices and decision and bankruptcies and no jobs and no work and moving to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and leaving--thinking about leaving the business and going to graduate school and, you know in the screen writing program [at University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and becoming a writer, denouncing (makes sounds). It was like I literally walked away. You know and this is pre- as I was getting into the music business too, which is a whole other--but it just kept (gesture), that gay thing just kept coming back and kept going. You know it was rough. It was really rough. It was really rough because once again we were in the middle of the, the AIDS crisis [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. So like, you know, a person like me was also not just pigeonholed, but also who I was as a human being was dismissed and reviled and hated and what do you do with that? Speaker 2: And had been forever. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 664283 Speaker 1: You walked away from Broadway and you did, you tried the musical career--we, as you just described-- Speaker 2: I was doing it simultaneously. Speaker 1: In '97 [1997] you made your first album ['Untitled'] with A&M Records [DV8 Records] right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: How was that received? Speaker 2: It was critically acclaimed and completely ignored. Speaker 1: Did they not promote it? Speaker 2: No, it was the gay thing. That once again was the gay thing. Speaker 1: Is, was this the album where you had to make the video-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --acting like you were straight? Speaker 2: Um-hm, with my best friend. And I'm an actor, and when you watch it, it works, but yes. And that's a, that's a hard--that, that was like, that--there were things that were disappointing; the 'Grease' [Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey] thing, you know the 'Angels of America' [sic. 'Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes,' Tony Kushner] thing. The discovery of understanding what I wanted my voice to be was actually empowering and moved me, got me to the position of understanding what I wanted and what I needed as an artist. It was the record--being in the record industry was the moment that I had to choose, and I had to choose my sanity over my fame. I had to look at myself and know and understand that everything that I had tried to be up until that point was rooted and based in flight and fleeing and getting out. And as a result of getting out then proving that I'm successful. If I'm successful, if I'm on the cover of magazines, if I'm splattered across BET [Black Entertainment Television] and MTV [Music Television; MTV], if I sell millions of records and I'm selling out stadiums, then you'll love me. Then the gay won't matter. And you know up until that point my voice saved me, everything about my voice. All I needed to do was open up my mouth and sing and then all the bad stuff went away. And for the first time my voice didn't matter. Story_ID: 664284 Speaker 1: Okay so I'd like for you to share--tell me the music industry arc-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --we can start there. Speaker 2: You know the music industry, like I said I got into it and I was so naive and I really thought my--like I said it was the first time that my voice failed me because at the time the music industry was really hard core gangsta rap. Like that had sort of entered the market-- Speaker 1: This is the late '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: This is the late '90s [1990s]. Also the transition into like Napster [Napster Inc.] and the digital and that fight, and I just, you know, there was a lot of homophobia, you know so much so to the point where my record company [DV8 Records] would say things to me like, "Literally don't speak because people will know." I went on 'The Rosie O'Donnell Show' the first time and they were like, "Just try not to talk too much." And Rosie [Rosie O'Donnell] being a friend of mine from 'Grease' [Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey] was--after the interview, "What are you doing? "Like what are--," so it was that kind of oppression, it was that kind of homophobia and it just was everywhere. Like to the point where I started second guessing myself, I started second guessing my talent and then nothing was happening. Nothing was happening with my music career. Nothing was happening and I was singing everybody under the table. I was showing up to places performing everybody under the--like all of the things that I had that nobody else in the market had at my age and at the--you know at the beginning of a career. It wasn't working for me and I just--it was destroying me. And I just decided I need to choose my sanity over my fame. Speaker 1: And choosing your sanity redirected your steps how? Speaker 2: It redirected my steps in several ways because I was receiving a very similar tone from the theatre community as well. It was like, there wasn't anywhere for me to go. I had reached the glass ceiling in both of these places that I had been able to work and manipulate for so long to my favor, they were closing down. And I just thought I gotta take a break, and I had a boyfriend at the time and he wanted to move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], so we moved to L.A. and I had, I had booked a couple of movies. It was 1999, I had gone back to 'Miss Saigon' to play John for the year, so I did, I made that progression. I was really happy about that. I had done 'Smokey Joe's Cafe' as well, which was during the album ['Untitled']. Speaker 1: And was that on Broadway? Speaker 2: That was on Broadway, Leiber and Stoller [Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller] musical on Broadway. And so I moved to L.A. I just left. I moved to L.A. I was like I'm in search of something. I am more than my voice and I'm in search of what that means. Story_ID: 664285 Speaker 1: What did you do in L.A.? Speaker 2: Well I got out there--I moved out there because I had booked a couple of movies here in New York [New York] and I thought, oh well maybe I'll transition into film and television. This is 1999, black, gay and out in film and television, I don't know what the fuck I was thinking, but (gesture). I thought I'd be doing something. And I got out there and in three years I had about four auditions. Now I'm not one to sit around, and in the interest of trying to find my own voice, you know, I started meeting with people and friends and producers and people who, you know just asking them like, "What's happening? Like what am I doing wrong? You know I've done everything right I think, but what am I doing wrong?" And the thing that kept coming up was, "You're unique, you're special," bullshit, bullshit, bullshit, "but you're special, people don't know what to do with you." If there is anyway--and my manager now of twenty-six years, Bill Butler was saying the same thing, my, all of my movie producer friends, my musical producer writers, you know, they were like, "Yeah, you got--it has to be specific to you, has to be specific to you. It's like you can't plug yourself in." I was trying to plug myself in to archetypes that already existed when I am actually a new archetype, so I have to be the leader of it, which is daunting, you know that's a daunting task and it's, you know, and so. So I got out there and like I said the one thing I kept hearing was, "Write it yourself. You have to create it yourself. Can you generate it yourself?" And I started doing that. I ended up going to the screenwriting program at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], the professional program in screenwriting. I started directing theater, you know because that was a passion of mine. I was like maybe I need to just pull back and be behind the scenes a bit and see how that feels. And what was interesting is that--and this was right around 9/11 [September 11, 2001], 'cause I moved to Los Angeles [California] January 1st, 2000 and 9/11 happened. And I woke up that morning, the next morning and my voice was gone. Acid reflux had ravaged my system so much to the point where I could not sing for three years at all. I couldn't utter a sound to speak for like two months. And the ironic thing about it was I knew exactly why that was happening. Because I asked God to put me in a position--universe, God, whatever we're calling it. You know I asked God to put me in a position where people would be able to receive me as more than my voice. That's what I kept saying. That was my longing. That was my desire. I am more than my voice. I am more than my voice. I am more than my voice. However, I didn't have the courage to take the steps that were necessary to create the space, by my behavior, for the universe to give me back what I, what I was asking for. So he had to take the voice away. 'Cause I was gonna keep doing the jobs. If I could sing, I would just keep doing the jobs. When in fact I needed to not do those jobs and I needed to do something completely different. It was the best thing that ever happened to me, you know, because it reenergized me in a way where it wasn't about being a star. It's like I had such a naive--like that was the only way I could get out, was that desire to be a star. That was what got me out. And then I was watching Oprah ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], as one is wont to do (laughter), and I, and I don't remember who, I think it was she and--I don't remember, but they were talking about--I think it was [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, and they were talking about how can you be of service, how can I use the gifts to be of service to something other than my ego and my own bank account. So I turned that mirror on myself and I asked myself that question, it's like but how do you do that in an industry that's inherently narcissistic. You know show business is inherently narcissistic, you have to put on your narcissist hat to promote yourself even if you're not. Like I'm so not a narcissist but like you have to have ver- you have to be able to access some version of that in order to just simply get a job. I left all of that and I just thought let me just, you know, not worry about that and work on service. Story_ID: 664286 Speaker 1: And as I started writing, I started writing about, you know, my friends that I had lost. You know, growing up gay and losing more people to AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] by the time I was twenty-one than my [maternal] grandmother [Martha Richardson Johnson] had. You know like these things and it was like, "Oh, you know, being gay and being proud of that, being out in show business and not hiding that. You know even something just as simple as that is service." I started doing that. The writing opened up such--cracked opened such a space in me that I just didn't even know I had. I didn't even know I was that person. You know like I didn't know that the stories could come from me. I'm a--I was taught to be a brilliant interpreter of others, other people's material. I'm the last of a generation that was taught like that. I'm the last before the Internet. You know that whole, that's all changed now. It's like, it's tipped so much to the other side that it's like (makes sound). But like it changed my life. It totally changed my life and I mean even inside of like getting to the depths of no jobs, nobody hiring me, breaking up with the boyfriend, moving back to New York City [New York, New York], you know sleeping on sofas and subletting, and you know my memoir is 'Three Suitcases, Twenty-Six Boxes and a Chaise' 'cause that's what I had for thirteen years moving around. You know bankruptcy, literally bankruptcy, you know. I didn't know what I was gonna do. I didn't know what was happening, but what I did know that--was that even with all--inside of all of this trauma everything that could have happened to me happened. You know from--every statistic that they said I would be, from bankruptcy, to diabetes, to being diagnosed HIV positive [human immunodeficiency virus], to like--everything happened in these thirteen years for a reason, you know, because I needed to be fortified for something and prepared for something larger than myself. And I was, I was sitting on my computer and reading playbill.com, broadway.com, which is something, a website I visited every day and they announced--(sighs) I haven't talked about this in so long. They announced the revival of 'Angels in America' ['Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes,' Tony Kushner], and I looked at this, and this was a year before, and I looked at it and I said, "Oh my god, that's what I'm gonna be doing. That's what's gonna get me back into the business." Speaker 2: And what year is this? Speaker 1: Two thousand nine [2009] was the announcement, 2010 was when we did it. And sure enough a year later through, you know, all of the roadblocks, nobody wanting to see me, you know not on the list, you know the guy with the orange rubber hair [Teen Angel in 'Grease,' Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey], you know all of that. I went in and it was like, I went into that audition, that courtesy audition that they gave me, thank god, because I had been in the business long enough to garner that to get in the room. And an hour later, after I'd been in that room for an hour, Tony Kushner got up from the table with tears in his eyes and hugged me and said, "You're the voice that I heard" (crying). "You're the voice that I heard in my head when I wrote this play all those years ago. You're the voice." Story_ID: 664287 Speaker 1: And as I was doing that ['Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes,' Tony Kushner], I went on playbill.com (laughter) and they announced 'Kinky Boots' [Cyndi Lauper and Harvey Fierstein]. And I had seen 'Kinky Boots' in the movie theater and I said to myself, and I may have said it out loud to the person I was with, "If I lived in London [England], Chiwetel Ejiofor would have been out of a job." No disrespect to him. He's brilliant. Brilliant in the movie too, but I had understood at that point the power of who I am. When I show up and I do the thing that I do, nobody else does it, and that is the thing, one of the things that I do. And once again, 'Kinky Boots,' you know they like to act like it was like, "Oh it was always you, it was always you." (Laughter) It was like, "No I remember the audition. I remember the concerns that you had about me"-- Speaker 2: What were those (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with 'Kinky Boots.' You know there was just, you know, I hadn't been in the business for a long--you know I, I had taken myself out of the business. You know I had lost my voice for a while, everybody knew that, you know what I mean? But when you don't talk about--and I don't talk--and I wasn't talking about why. It was a thirteen year break from the time that I was John in 'Miss Saigon' in '99 [1999] to 'Kinky Boots.' I didn't work on Broadway for thirteen years. So when that happens, and you're not talking about it and people don't know, they make shit up. "Oh, he's hard to work with." "Oh, he can't really sing anymore." "Oh, is he a team player?" "Oh, you know, will he be able to sustain--," you know all of that shit. (Pause) There was something about all of it. And it's so funny, the last audition, the final audition, because the acid reflux stuff I was still working through it, and the final audition, you know, I had come in and I had the audition and I did the songs and sang everything and then I went home and I got a telephone call and they said, "Oh, the musical director, they want you to work with the musical director and come back tomorrow." And the musical director is a friend of mine and a person who I had worked with in a creative capacity like, you know. And I walked in and I'm like, "What the fuck? What's happening?" "Oh, they're concerned about, you know, your voice," and da, da, da. And, you know, and I was like, "But it's--but I was singing it like a pop singer. I wasn't belting everything, you know, like it wasn't all balls to the wall." He said, "Just sing it balls to the wall, just sing it balls to the wall, and just sing it balls to the wall and then you get the part, you can do whatever you want." I'm like okay fine. I go home, stress activates reflux, so by the time I got home at six o'clock, I went to open up my mouth to speak and I couldn't utter a word. I couldn't make the sound. I couldn't make the sound. Ooh, I called my mother [Cloerinda Ford], I was like, "Get on, pray, come on" (laughter), "come on. I need all the Jesus you got because I gotta be able to sing tomorrow morning at 10:30--or 12:30. I gotta be able to sing tomorrow at 12:30, my life depends on it. I gotta be able to sing. Call on Jesus, the Jesus you're connected to 'cause you're more connected than I am, please call on him right now." And baby I stayed in that house, I (makes sounds), I did all my, you know, creams and unguents and potions and, you know, I went to sleep, I woke up at 7:30 in the morning, thank god for my training. This goes back to that. I was able to get in that shower. I was able to warm up my voice slowly-- Speaker 2: Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) exercise my voice slowly. Not just Carnegie Mellon, Joan Lader, since I got here, you know voice lessons all the time, you never stop learning, warming up my voice. I got it to the point where I can eek out an audition. At 12:30, I went in there, I sang those children under the table. Half hour later I couldn't speak. Jerry Mitchell called--I get a call from my agent the next day, "Jerry Mitchell, the director, wants to speak, wants you to come to his house. He wants, he wants to have coffee at his house, come to his house." And I called Jerry, who's been a friend of mine for twenty-five years, and I was like, "Listen, I don't need to come to your--is this good coffee or bad coffee? 'Cause I don't need to come to your house for bad coffee. You can just tell me over the phone." He was like, "Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Porter], just come over." (Crying) And I went to his house and he opened the door, he had a champagne glass in his hand and he said, "It's you, it's always been you. It's never been anybody else. It's never been anybody else and I'm sorry that the business is such that we had, that I had to put you through that." (Sighs) And the rest is history. Story_ID: 664288 Speaker 1: Tell me what the role is in 'Kinky Boots' [Cyndi Lauper and Harvey Fierstein] for the record. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So th- so 'Kinky Boots' is about a, is about a factory, a shoe factory in Northampton, England, that is going under and the way they make shoes, you know, the great way that--and care, that they make shoes has sort of become passe, people want things cheaper, blah, blah, blah. They're trying to--the young, the young owner [Charlie Price], sort of--his father dies and he has to take it over and he's trying to find a way to breathe some new life into the factory and he happens to meet this drag queen on the street. And through a series of events realizes that the shoes that are made for drag queens can't sustain the weight of a man. And so he gets the brilliant idea to make these shoes for drag queens. And Lola becomes the designer. And it's, it's a story of these two unlikely people coming together. It's a story of acceptance and the message is about acceptance (crying). The message is about acceptance and love is love is love and that's it, you know. And after (laughter) all these years to get to that, if I listened to what they had told me, (air quotes) they, if I had listened to the people who said, "You can't do it like that, you can't be that sissy, you can't be that thing, take the heels off. You can't be so flamboyant." Everything that I am is what they needed to make 'Kinky Boots' work. And had I not nurtured and cultivated all of those things over all of those years, it would not have been me. And that's about truth, you know, that's about--it's easy to be who you are when what you are is popular. It's going inside and knowing even when it's not popular. This is what it should be. Speaker 1: This is 2012, 2013 right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And how was 'Kinky Boots' received? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, we won Best Musical [Tony Award for Best Musical]. I won a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre]. I won a Grammy Award. It changed my life in such a way, and in such a way that I had, I had moved beyond. You know it was the original dream and I had not given up on the original dream, but I had moved beyond the need for the original dream and to have it come back like that (crying). Speaker 1: I mean even your, your city of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] made Billy Porter Day. Speaker 2: It was, you know and I think even beyond the Tony, even beyond the accolades, even beyond the three years of doing it that I did, you know in my contract when I made the contract I said I gotta go back to Pittsburgh, when the tour happens I have to step in and do that because they said I wouldn't be blessed. They said that God wasn't gonna bless a person like me (crying). Two days, I sold out the Benedum theater [Benedum Center for the Performing Arts, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in two days for a week, plastered all over the city was me, proud as Miss Lola. You know this is what the truth looks like. You know this is what real love looks like. This is what Jesus looks like. You know and I can stand here as this statistic that you said I would be and I am proud, successful and forward moving. That's the greatest gift. That's the greatest gift and now I'm just trying to figure out how to keep that moving forward, you know just trying to stay courageous. Speaker 1: Were you able to forgive them? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I mean what else is there? What else is there? You know I'm so, I'm so happy that my mother [Cloerinda Ford] was able to live to see it. You know to live to experience it with me. She went through so much. You know she had such a hard time with the gay thing because of her, her background. And she chose the road less traveled. She chose to support me and she was an outcast as a result of it (laughter). Speaker 1: In her church? Speaker 2: Yes, she left her church. You know she went to a different denomination, you know, who had a gay and lesbian ministry, who talked about it. You know she left everything that she knew in favor and of service of her love for me. So I'm so glad that she was able to ex- to experience the other side. Story_ID: 664289 Speaker 1: And you have continued to work in theater. You--I mean your career has been reignited-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you've made your own projects. You, you directed 'The Colored Museum' [George C. Wolfe]-- Speaker 2: I did (laughter) up at the Huntington [Huntington Theatre Company, Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and just, in 2015. You were--in '16 [2016] on Broadway in 'Shuffle Along' ['Shuffle Along, or, the Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All That Followed']? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What's next? Speaker 2: I don't know. You know I'm so multifaceted and I'm embracing that, you know I had an album 'Billy's Back on Broadway' that came out, which has been lovely. I'm working on a new piece called 'The Soul of Rodgers' ['The Soul of Richard Rodgers'] and what I realize is that as a leader and owning that, you know I think there's a part of me that still has a hard time embracing that I am a creative leader like that, like I really am. And I'm trying to step into that. I wrote a play called 'The Untitled Sex Project,' and I wrote it ten years ago, prior to there being the black, gay, out leading man, didn't exist before. I turned the corner one day, the day after we got our notice at 'Shuffle Along,' our premature notice, and for the first time I looked up, and you know I work like this (gesture), I don't think about nothing. I just keep it moving. And there my name was above the title (crying) with all these black, straight men, and Audra McDonald. They said it would never happen. It has never happened until me; black, gay, out, bona fide leading man on Broadway. I gotta do something with that. So this play that I wrote (laughter) ten years ago, that's about the generation of gay men who I call lost, we came out in the middle of the plague [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and went straight to the front lines to fight for our lives. And thirty years later those of us who have survived have PTSD [posttraumatic stress disorder], and the men who were supposed to teach us how to live, we know how to fight but we do not know how to live and we do not know how to love each other, died of the plague. And we gotta fix that. I thought I wrote this character for somebody else (crying), I thought I wrote this character for somebody sexier than me, somebody more desirable than me, somebody who was a leading man. And I have discovered that I am actually that person. So I'm trying to do that, I'm trying to stand in that truth and walk boldly into whatever the next phase is supposed to be with courage, which you said I was earlier, so I'm trying to hold on to that. I don't feel so courageous all the time, and continue to make a difference. Story_ID: 664290 Speaker 1: The fact that you are being as revealing as you are, as you say speaking your truth, why do you think that's so important? Speaker 2: Because the truth will set you free (laughter), and I need to be free. I need to be free. Speaker 1: What does freedom look like? Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm beginning to know. You know freedom, freedom is this awesome relationship I'm in right now [with Adam Smith]. You know I'm, I'm finally able to, to let go and be in it, and it is so powerful and so overwhelming. You know freedom is thus far the, the release; releasing worry, releasing doubt. You know I'm right in the like (laughter), you know I'm right there and I know it's all (gesture) working for the good. Speaker 1: And you talked about the men who would have taught your generation how to live-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --who died of the plague [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], they're gone. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, you know, well looking back at that time, you did not--did you know what was gonna happen, everybody just died? Speaker 2: Everybody died (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody died. Speaker 2: Everybody. Speaker 1: And now HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] is not a death sentence. Speaker 2: We're living once again (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're living with HIV which is a--I mean I remember the ads on the bus stop, "Come get the meds," and, "you really can live," and people weren't coming, especially black people. Speaker 2: Well that's a whole other thing, which is why I have to do it. (Gesture) We don't talk about it and we're still not talking about it enough. It's better, but not enough. Speaker 1: So how to live, thinking of all of the experiences that you have had, what do you tell young, black, gay males today about how to live his truth? Speaker 2: (Pause) It's interesting because they come to me, they stop me on the street, they say, "Thank you, thank you for all you did," (crying) and all I'm doing is trying to put one foot in front of the other. And so I think it's not about words, it's about living through example. That's what I'm doing. That's what I gotta do, I have to live by example. Story_ID: 664291 Speaker 1: What do you hope your legacy will be? Speaker 2: I don't, I, you know, I don't think about that a lot. I guess I should start thinking about that because you're not the first person to ask me. (Pause) I guess for now, I just want people to say he made a difference. He just made a difference. It's not about fame, it's not about fortune, it's not about--I mean I just wanna make a difference in somebody's life because there were so many people who were there for me, you know, so many angels that were there for me who don't even know they were, and I wouldn't be living right now if it wasn't for that kind of energy. I wanna be somebody like that, you know. Story_ID: 664292 Speaker 1: As you, you're approaching fifty [years old]-- Speaker 2: Stop it (laughter), but yes (laughter). Which is so weird because I feel like I'm, you know, I feel like that little boy still. So weird, but yes I'm approaching fifty. Speaker 1: But you know as we turn the corner on different decades, I think more awareness can come. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What are you looking forward to learning? Speaker 2: I'm looking forward to how deep the truth can go. That's happening right now. That's happening, the awareness of--I actually have to tell the world I'm HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] positive. (Pause) The courage. I'm interested in the Teflon, you know, that comes with the--you know the super hero-ness that comes with age (laughter). Because I see people, they don't give a fuck. I am almost there. I'm, I'm so almost there. I'm so almost there. I'm looking forward to that. I'm so looking forward to that. I'm like, you know, I got about 5 percent to go. Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: No. No because everything has, everything, the good and the perceived bad, has led to exactly who I am. Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to share that I haven't asked you? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know, I don't know if there's anything else on the planet that you could possibly ask. No, I've said everything. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Thank you so much [HistoryMaker] Billy Porter (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you too (laughter). Speaker 1: Thank you...