 Story_ID: 646591 Speaker 1: Today our subject is [HistoryMaker] Marvin Perry. I am the interviewer, I'm Jacques Lesure; and the videographer is Scott Stearns. Mr. Perry, could you please repeat your name and the middle name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Marvin Early Perry is my official name, M-A-R-V-I-N, middle initial, middle name, E-A-R-L-Y, last name is P as in Pennsylvania, E-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: And your date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Eleven, ten, forty-four [November 10, 1944]. I was born in the rural area of Oklahoma. The town we use is Elmore City, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: And most importantly what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 14th of July, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we currently? Speaker 2: We are right now in the townhouse of my wife [Roberta Dawson Perry] and myself, here in Phoenix, Arizona, the--at 1414 East Grovers Street [sic. Grovers Avenue], suite number 14. Speaker 1: So wha- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sui- suite number 4. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your current occupation? Speaker 2: My current occupation is, I own a public relation firm, P.E. International [Phoenix, Arizona]. Story_ID: 646592 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you a few questions that we consider our People magazine type questions that we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --ask all our HistoryMakers. The first one being, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food here, it's, I have so many of them that it's kind of hard to say, but I love Italian food, very much so. Speaker 1: And your favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh, that's easy, blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, I go for rejuvenation many times on short vacations to either San Diego [California] or Santa Barbara, California, both of those are in-- Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you live and adopt by in your life? Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite is when the going get tough, the tough get going. Story_ID: 646593 Speaker 1: So we're gonna move forward into your early life and your background. We're gonna start with your mother, what was her name? Speaker 2: Adeller Perry [Adeller Miles Perry], of course, that's her married name. Name before she was married was Adeller Miles, M-I-L-E-S. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in the area there where we grew up, around Elmore City, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about her background as a child growing up? Speaker 2: She was quite talkative about her childhood and also about her mother [Bernice Miles] and father [Willie Miles] and like that. She was born to, her father was like fifty years old or something like that when she was born. Her mother, I think, was like about thirty-two when they were, were, were married and everything. It was, she had a half sister by her mother and also a half brother on her father's side and one brother that they are fill, full blood brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: Did she, did she discuss her life growing up, how it was growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, quite frequently, all the time. Speaker 1: Is there any story that you can remember that she told you in particular? Speaker 2: Well, that it was very, very tough, you know, when they was growing up economically and like that. And one of the things that always bothered her is that she had to leave school at a early age, at five years old to work and take care of the family and like that. And a lot of that work was working like in people's homes, you know, as maid work and like that, so she talked about that very frequently and doing other things that keep the family going and like that, uh-huh. Speaker 1: How would you best describe your mother as a person? Speaker 2: Very much a perfectionist, very, very driven and that's really interesting 'cause--driven perfectionist. Very much a compassionate person. It would be a person--if she was starving and she had met somebody else who was starving and she had a loaf of bread, she'd probably give you three fourths of the loaf and she'd take one fourth, that's the kind of person--very, very giving individual, very caring individual, with very high principles. Story_ID: 646594 Speaker 1: And your father, what was his name? Speaker 2: Raymond Perry, Sr. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born to the best of my knowledge somewhere close to that community where my mother [Adeller Miles Perry] was; and I think he was born in a place called Salt Creek, I believe it was, which was in the same vicinity there in the county [Garvin County, Oklahoma] that my mother and father both were born in. Speaker 1: And do you know things about his childhood or his background growing up? Speaker 2: He was not as effusive as my mother was. He came from a large family I know. And they were, for a black family there at that time in the rural area, I understand they were quite well off and like that, considering you know, comparatively speaking. His father [Tim Perry] was very much an entrepreneur like, and he did very well, you know, in the agricultural economy and like that. He had, it was eleven of them that lived to be adults in the family. And he was probably somewhere pretty close to the middle of the family. And he left school at the eighth grade, which was in those days not too unusual for a man to get a eighth grade education, which was pretty adequate back in those days, or looked upon as. Speaker 1: How would you describe your father? Speaker 2: A guy with a tremendous amount of humor, sense of humor, loved a, a good joke and a good story. A guy, again of very high moral and ethical standing, extremely hardworking. And a guy who--unfortunately--he's very brilliant, I felt, felt he was, very much a thinker, very much a reader. And (laughter) very much a person, you know, with a tremendous sense of humor there. And one of the things that we always tease him about, he was probably the second worst craftsman I've ever seen in terms of working with his hands, (laughter) only second to me (laughter). So we always had a good fun talking about his craftsmanship, you know. Story_ID: 646595 Speaker 1: Now, how far back, sir, can you go in your ancestry; can you go back beyond, beyond your grandparents? Speaker 2: Some, yeah. My, on my father's side of the family. My youngest brother [Raymond Perry, Jr.] is the historian of the family and I've been to some family reunions where we've had a chance to talk some about that. My great-grandfather on my father's side, Joe Perry [Joseph Perry], he was born as a slave and, and so was my grandfather, born a slave too. Speaker 1: So Joe Perry was your great-grandfather on your paternal side? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you know of his wife, your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: I have that in the documents, but I don't recall the name right offhand. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, let's stay on your father's side and let's go forward to your grandparents. Do, do you recall your grandmother and grandfather on your father's side? Speaker 2: I did not meet them, but I've heard a tremendous amount about them from, not only from like my father [Raymond Perry, Sr.] and his sisters, but also from people in the community (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are some of the things he told you about them? Speaker 2: He talked probably more about his father. He was a, a, you know, a man who was highly respected in the community [Garvin County, Oklahoma] and I'd say very much a visionary and a good entrepreneur and businessman and like that, and he loved to trade and everything. And when I was growing up as a kid, a lot of times people would ask what my name was and I'd mention, you know, who I was and, "Oh, are you related to Tim Perry?" "Yeah." Right off the bat it seemed it gave me some entree in some respect there and everything. He was a guy who was way ahead of his time I felt, in many ways. And there's a big story in the family about him going to Africa, I guess around somewhere in the nineteen teens [1910s] and stuff, so he was always looking at things in a, and he went and met with the president of Liberia. He went to, I think, Senegal and some other places there in Africa in terms of doing some trade and some other things like that. So it was interesting even in my times when I came up, a lot of the people when he came back, blacks, did not really believe he went to Africa, they could not fathom that, that little community, that this man really went there, you know, and stuff. And that was the only thing I saw that--my father was very mild mannered, and that was the only thing I could see that started getting under his skin a little bit, when people doubted his father actually went to Africa. And my father always would say, "I really wish he hadn't because it's been a tremendous amount of money it cost us to--when he went there and was--kept his eye off the ball." And when he actually came back from one of the trips he was not the same, so obviously he came down with some type of a, a disease while he was there too, you know, physically he was not the same. Speaker 1: Now, your grandfather had been born a slave? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you recall when or know anything about when he received his freedom? Speaker 2: Well, it would have been, looking at the records probably about two or three years old. And that is, he was born in Texas, so one of the things we are looking at is really substantiating was he, he was obviously a slave but had Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] actually emancipated slaves at the time he was born, but as you know in Texas they, they celebrate something called Juneteenth, so a lot of the people did not know they was free, you know, by the Emancipation Proclamation until someone informed them, they continued to work as a slave, so he was a slave when he was born, yeah. Speaker 1: And he went on to big things after that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he did, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And how about your grandmother on, on that side? Speaker 2: I, everybody, now, actually my mother [Adeller Miles Perry] talked about her more than my father. And my mother thought she was like the salt of the earth, you know, she, she thought she was really a great woman. Her name was Nora Perry [Nora Douglas Perry]. And she just always thought so much of her. And my sisters and--older sisters knew her too and, and they was, thought she was just such a kindhearted, very nice person that they knew her as. She, her maiden name was Douglas and she was born in Texas too. And her father was a descendant of a slave woman and the master, you know. And, and but for some reason or the other her father was able to amass a, a considerable amount of wealth there in Texas there too. And unfortunately, he, a lot of his wealth was in cattle and something happened when he was driving the cattle from the Red River, across the Red River, there was some mix up or something river up and he ended up, did not, wasn't able to sell his cattle that year, and cattle was one of the things you sold to put in crops and stuff in the spring so that caused him some financial stress on that. So he ended up moving to Oklahoma, but still yet did very well after that loss there and setback. And his name was Bill Douglas, William Douglas, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And that's on your father's side? Now, let's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's on my father's side-- Story_ID: 646596 Speaker 1: --Go to your mother's side. Do you know her parents, her mother [Bernice Miles] and father [Willie Miles]? Speaker 2: Her mother--I never met her, her mother. Her mother died when she was at the age of forty, so none of my siblings knew my maternal grandmother. She, as I gather was a very hardworking person and obviously a very strict person with my mother [Adeller Miles Perry] and like that. And taught them the work ethics very much so and stuff like that. Speaker 1: And did you know the grandfather, your grandfather? Speaker 2: Yes, one of them I knew was Kingly Chapman [ph.]. And Kingly Chapman was a soldier during the Spanish American War, I guess he was there in Cuba with Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] and like that. And I would assume, somebody told me that there are, there's information on him, you know, at, at Fort Huachuca [Arizona] and I have not bothered to unfortunately, as of yet to look it up. But he picked up the, occupation up of being a surveyor, so a lot of the land in that little rural area that I grew up in [Garvin County, Oklahoma], which became predominantly white, he surveyed a lot of that land I understand. And he was a very respected person in the community also. He, it, it, it's interesting how things come about. At the time when my father [Raymond Perry, Sr.] came, was coming up, there was something like a state raised Negro they would say or a native Negro, which was, was quite significant at that time because if you went to date somebody's daughter, that's one of the things people wanna know about you, if you came calling their daughter, "Now, are you a state or are you native?" You know (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Explain that a little bit further, state raised, native raised, explain that. Speaker 2: Well, back in, when President Jackson [President Andrew Jackson] you know, they was fighting the Seminole Indians [Native American], particularly in Florida and like that, and these people decided that they was gonna sue the federal government, and the [U.S.] Supreme Court ruled on the side of the Seminole tribe. And I understand Andrew Johnson--Jackson, make the statement now, "Okay, the Supreme Court has made their decision, now back it up." So he sent the federal troops in there and some way or another reached, tricked them into some agreement, but it end up driving the, well, you know, but they don't use that term anymore, but when I was coming up, they used to say the Five Civilized Tribes, they drove them to Oklahoma, which they told 'em would be their land as long as the water ran--run, the sun shine and like that. Well, what many people know, one fourth of the people, I understand, on the Trail of Tears, on that drive were black. And so consequently after the Civil War some tribe, well, the Civil War, during the Civil War, some of the tribes fought on the side of the South and some fought on the side of the North. The blacks who were in Oklahoma, they were there native when it became a state, they ended up inheriting a certain land, you know, grant there from the federal government and everything. Now, the native, the state raised were the people who like came here from Texas and like that, from outside of the state before Oklahoma became a state, you know. And that was an interesting distinction when, like when my father and like that was coming up, a young man and stuff. Speaker 1: State raised, native raised (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) State raised versus native, you know. And if you say it today I don't think anybody under the age of forty would know what you were talking about (laughter). Story_ID: 646597 Speaker 1: Well let's move forward now. We--you're born in 1944? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was your earliest memory that you can recall as a child? Speaker 2: I can remember on a bright day and I must have been about two years old, somewhere two, two and a half, of taking a lot of pictures out there. My father's sisters had come to visit and we had a white house, a nice white house we were living at the time. And I remember being out there in the yard taking these pictures and stuff. And obviously from looking at the pictures I was very much determined to get in every shot possible (laughter). Speaker 1: So what street was this on? What street did you live on? Speaker 2: No street, it's in the rural area. Now-- Speaker 1: So, so-- Speaker 2: --let me explain something here when I start, I say sort of a joke when I talk to people, where you from, I'll say I'm from Elmore City, Oklahoma, but now I wanna explain to you, I didn't really grow up in Elmore City, 'cause you might think I was trying to pass or something for the folks here because Elmore City was then, and I think still is today, is a, is a, no blacks live there, you know, blacks were not allowed to live there. So I would say I lived in the suburb about five miles from the heart of the city, you know (laughter)-- Speaker 1: That, that was the closest (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which was actually the rural area (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So there was no street name? Speaker 2: No, no, it's just a rural area. Speaker 1: When that-- Speaker 2: Route 2, I think was the route that I lived on, Route 2, I wanna say (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But now there was a community-- Speaker 2: It was a farm community so, you know, your next neighbor may be a mile away or something like that, or three quarters of a mile away or something, you know. So there was the little village that I lived in, closest to was called Katie, Oklahoma. And that was like one of those towns, I think, probably didn't have a stop sign when I was growing up, I'm, I'm, I'm sure it didn't, but it had two little grocery store and one service station really. So that's where you could stop and get the latest gossip and like that; but most of us who were in that area lived in the farms around that little hamlet there. Story_ID: 646598 Speaker 1: Now, you had siblings, could you please name your siblings in their birth order, and include yourself? Speaker 2: Their names? And without telling you the exact year, Roggie [Roggie Perry Fisher] is the oldest, and then Floye [Floye Perry Cooper] is next, then Freddie [Freddie Perry], which is female, then Nova [Nova Perry], those are all girls, four girls. Next was Cleaven [Cleaven Perry], and next was John [John Perry], and then me, and then Raymond, Jr. [Raymond Perry, Jr.]. Speaker 1: So quite a large family? Speaker 2: There were eight, eight of us, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, could you tell me how life was in your home at that point, with that many children and your parents [Adeller Miles Perry and Raymond Perry, Sr.], how was life in the Perry home? Speaker 2: It was lively, (laughter) very lively. Speaker 1: How, how was it lively (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, of course, now, the girls being the oldest when I came along, you know, they were very much interested in the boys and like that, so they had a lively discussion and gossip and stuff like that going on. And the boys we were, when I was coming up we were very much into what things boys are interested in, you know, guns and hunting and, and all kinds of things like that, the pocket knives or whatever a rural boy would be interested in, you know, that's what we were, you know, going out hunting animals and, you know, game and stuff like that. And, and we had a lot of fun. Speaker 1: We notice that in families a lot of times there's a theme that runs through, the family has--what the family stands for. What, what was the theme of your family? Speaker 2: Well, I think that one of, well, I know one of the things, you can brand all us with several things, one is being very hardworking and being very honest, you know, those would be the two things, virtues, I think, you would see in the family, in each one of the eight of us, you know. Speaker 1: A work ethic and honesty (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, work ethic and, you know, honesty, right, yeah, very much so. Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, sounds and smells around your community [Garvin County, Oklahoma], in that rural area that you can recall? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I can recall like after a rain and like that, smelling, you know, the, the rain, you know, and after that in the springtime particularly, if you go down to a creek or something you could smell the creek and you could smell the runoff, you know, and stuff like that. I can recall a lot of birds. I remember hearing the birds chipping, chirping, and also you'd hear the coyotes howling at night, a lot of those. And you'd hear the owls hooting in, at night and those things would--are very common. Crows, you'd hear a lot of those things there too. And when I was growing up there were stories of some panthers down there too; and I think maybe once or twice I may have heard something, a panther scream, you know, or something, uh-huh. So it was a lot of, a lot of wildlife in the area there. Story_ID: 646599 Speaker 1: What age did you ent- enter elementary school? Speaker 2: I was five years old. Speaker 1: So that would have been somewhere around-- Speaker 2: Around-- Speaker 1: --forty-nine [1949]? Speaker 2: I was born in November, so I think it was probably more like '50 [1950]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the school that you, your first school? Speaker 2: Averitt View, Averitt View [Averitt View School, Elmore City, Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: Averitt View. Speaker 2: Averitt, A-V-E-R-I-T-T, V-I-E-W. Speaker 1: And you went there in kindergarten or first grade? Speaker 2: Well, back in those days, in, in that part of the country, they didn't have anything like kindergarten. You didn't, everybody went to the first grade, you know, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And now, how long did you stay there at Averitt View? Speaker 2: I stayed there until 1957 when they integrated the schools in that little community that I was in. Speaker 1: Now, now, was there any particular teacher that you can recall during that time period? Speaker 2: Very much so. Only--we only had one teacher and her name was Maulsie, M-A-U-L-S-I-E, Butler [Maulsie Butler]. And everybody in the, in the school called her Cousin Maulsie. As a matter of fact, I think it was not only because of the fact that somebody called her that, I think she was related to everybody who went to school there too, uh-huh. Yeah, I remember her (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so you were under her tutelage for eight years? Speaker 2: For seven years. Speaker 1: For seven years. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And now, do you recall any particular lessons that you had from her, that that stood out or any interactions that you might-- Speaker 2: Well, for some reason I fall, fell under her watchful eye and I have to admit I probably was the teacher's pet there, one of the teacher's pets, I'll say that (laughter). Speaker 1: So what kind of student would you say you were? Speaker 2: Well, she said I was a good student. And it was, you know, and here again, she was the person we had, taught very high principles and like that, and also the very high work ethics and stuff along that line. Very excellent at math and history I remember particularly her being, uh-huh. And so just an outstanding individual from a highly respected black family in the area. Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends that you can recall during that time? Speaker 2: Keep in mind this was a very small school and I think I was probably the only student in that class in which I was the top student. That's how small it was at first, but then I think I ended up skipping a grade so then I ended up with two other students in my class, one was a older brother, John [John Perry], and another one was a lady named Elsie [Elsie Rae Stevenson], so actually it was three of us in the class there from about the second or third grade. Speaker 1: So this was obviously an all-black school? Speaker 2: All-black, yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Because at that time you couldn't go to the other school in Elmore City [Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: No, it was not, no, it wasn't. The school, little school that we would have gone to would have been Katie elementary school [Katie School, Katie, Oklahoma], which would have been in this little village I was talking about there. That's where they'd gone to. And one of the things too I might mention, that we very much looked forward to every year was something called the 4-H clubs. And that's something that rural people were involved, agricultural people, you know, the four, I can't recall exactly the name of it, but, but the four, some principles that we lived by. And one of the things we would do is we would practice speeches and that was if--you knew spring was coming on, well, we'd start practicing speeches. And we was competing with other black elementary schools in the area and we'd go to the high school, at a place called Wynnewood [Oklahoma] and we'd spend a day there, you know, giving speeches and the girls were showing their fabrics and their sewing and like that, and, and they'd give you prizes for that and everything; so that was a high point of the year, you know, from a social point of view and very exciting and everything else to go there. Story_ID: 646600 Speaker 1: There was a town called Elmore City [Oklahoma] that you-- Speaker 2: Elmore City, yes. Speaker 1: Elmore City, that's not too far from you. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What's going on in Elmore City? Do you all go, get a chance to go and visit and hang out in Elmore City and, and shop and those kinds of things or do you-- Speaker 2: You, you mean back then or now? Speaker 1: Right, then. Speaker 2: Very seldom we would go to Elmore City for--we would go to the county seat there mainly to shop, Pauls Valley [Oklahoma]. And another place we'd go to, a place called Wynnewood [Oklahoma], those would be the two places that we would go to shop for something major like a, seed and feed or do banking and stuff like that, that's where we would do most of our thing. With Pauls Valley being the county seat [of Garvin County, Oklahoma], you went there 'cause, for, you know, legal things that we needed to see about that's where we'd go, there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How were blacks treated at that time? Speaker 2: It was a segregated society, separate and unequal. I remember we'd get schoolbooks handed down from other, you know, white schools and like that. But it was a, in the immediate community I lived in, everybody knew everybody and they had known each other for several generations, so it was a rather cordial type of relationships in that community there. The blacks, you know, pretty well knew their place and stayed there in their place, nobody raised any ruckus or anything like that. And, but as far as the relationships with the whites, I remember, it was very good, you know, particularly with my mother [Adeller Miles Perry] and father [Raymond Perry, Sr.]. There may be some things that they didn't tell us, you know, but they could vote and, you know, and like that. I remember--never remember any organized killing or lynchings by any whites or blacks in that county, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: So just the way, it was just the way that it was (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was just the way it was and people pretty well, I won't say people, but a large percentage of people accepted it as it was and there were some other people who thought things should change, particularly some whites, you know, who felt that way. I remember a lot of, there was a white family I remember particularly arguing with my mother telling--for integration of schools, you know, they were very much for the integration of schools, you know, and stuff (laughter). I think my mother kind of wanted to say, "Well, this is the way it had been when I was growing up, so kind of keep it that way." I believe that's kind of my father's position too. I remember some whites saying, "Well, yeah, we want integration of schools," you know, 'cause actually, you know, you grew up playing with white kids all the time. My father, he had almost like white brothers you might say. I remember he would talk about the Bill Brittain [ph.] family, and they would grow up and play together and they'd run around and get into devilment together and like that when they were preteens and everything. And, and, you know, when you are, when I grew up, you know, a lot of white guys we played with and all that stuff and had a lot of fun with them and all that stuff so. But, you know, you knew that it was there because one of the things you'd always say like, "Mother, can I have this or that," and if you said it too, "Well, So and So have it," if the person was white, she'd come back and say, "Well, yeah, but he's white," so actually that puts you (gesture), some place or another that you are not supposed to go, you know (laughter). Story_ID: 646601 Speaker 1: So you've been in this one school [Averitt View School, Elmore City, Oklahoma] now for seven years? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And now you get a little bit older so, I guess, you were, how old would you be now. You'd be seven years (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twelve going on thirteen when we-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was twelve years old when we went to Katie [Katie School, Katie, Oklahoma], which we doubled the size of the school, it became a two room, room school now. Speaker 1: So you finally, so you finally did end up going to Katie? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: You finally made it to Katie? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Tell me about that. So this would have been in the eighth grade? Speaker 2: Yes, the eighth grade. It was, one of the things I always say that when you look at, take corporations or whatever place of employment, and it's a big difference when you look at the leader who is committed to equal opportunity than somebody who says, "We just gonna do what we have to do to maybe get by." Like that, the principal of that school [Roy Romine] was very much into integration and stuff, he was very forward thinking, you know, in terms of, of blacks being integrated into total society and things. And he came over there and talked with us before we went to integrate there, which was a sad day for me because I had been with this teacher [Maulsie Butler] for seven years and everything. But the one year I was there, there was never a single incident of racial prejudice shown to anybody that I saw at all. And, and he and his wife [Vera Romine], it was a husband and a wife teacher, that they made sure that it was not, you know. So, they were, the day we got on the bus and went to this stop sign, a little store there, got off, well, one of the, kind of like the leaders of the students there at that little elementary school met us coming across the street and he came out to meet us and welcomed us and stuff. And it was just a, a really a beautiful experience in terms of how we participate, whether it was in basketball, softball, he made sure that there was no discrimination like that. Speaker 1: So this would have been around 1956? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957] that was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-seven [1957]. Story_ID: 646602 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now we've had some incidents across the country. Now, we've had-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. We had-- Speaker 2: Little Rock [Little Rock Nine]. Speaker 1: --we had Little Rock, but now Oklahoma do you think these incidents may have made, made them say in Oklahoma, "Well, we're gonna be different"? Speaker 2: Well, now I'm talking, right now I'm talking about my little school [Katie School, Katie, Oklahoma]. But one of the things the governor of Oklahoma [Raymond D. Gary] said when the [U.S.] Supreme Court ruling came back, back, he said, "We are going to follow the law," and I think he went a step further and said he was for integration, you know. And you gotta keep in mind Arkansas borders Oklahoma, they border, but it's a tremendous amount of difference in terms of the racial philosophy of most of the state. And in southeastern Oklahoma they have something called Little Dixie down there, you know, (laughter) which is more like, very much like the South, you know, like that. The other part of the state is less, is less subtle, but that doesn't mean you was free of, of racial type of, of discrimination. But I do not remember any like organized type of racial hostility of any size in Oklahoma, but there was, you know, some schools you did have some friction at, but at this little school that I was at, this elementary school for that one year there was never a single incident at all I can think of. Speaker 1: So you were going to school, in your neighborhood there was playing with all the children, everybody had kind of a mixed, integrated society going on for-- Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: --with, with the children and things of that-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and nature. So what were you thinking when you turned on the TV or the radio and saw what was going on in Little Rock one state over from you? Speaker 2: Well, I thought it was very bad, it was horrible, you know. Unfortunately we didn't have a television, but they told me about it, on television, I saw it on the radio and in the paper and like that so I thought it was really bad, you know, and I was repulsed by it. I think Life or Time magazine, one of the two, I never will forget this, this guy who was attacking this, this troop, you know, this U.S. soldier, and he had almost taken him down, you know, and this other soldier steps in and hit this guy with the butt of his gun and just cut him up when, you know, in, in the head and I remember Time magazine, I look at one of those--or Life, I think, it was either Life, or Look, saw the blood coming down from his face from that, you know, so that was very graphic. And the other thing that was very graphic was I saw they showed this black reporter being beat up on by a mob there in Little Rock. And, of course, many years later I asked about, someone who covered that, I asked about what happened, they said, "Did you see this picture there of that casket?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "That was his body being moved back through Memphis [Tennessee] there." "Oh, really?" So the guy actually, he died from those wounds, I understand. So it, it was really horrible, you know, Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was president at the time. And it was a interesting type of situation. You know, Eisenhower sent the troops to Little Rock to enforce the Supreme Court order. Now, I was told that he was wagering on whether to send the troops there, the paratroopers in, and the person who told him that he had no choice to do it I've been told is Richard Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon], you know, told him he had to do it, you know. Speaker 1: So you're, you're-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --in Oklahoma now and things are a little bit different for you. You're still aware of the segregation and the problems-- Speaker 2: Oh, very much so. Speaker 1: --but you're not feeling it the same way they are in Little Rock, Arkansas (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Around this time when the Little Rock incident was happening I was, had just integrated this previously all-white elementary school. Speaker 1: So now-- Speaker 2: And we talked about those things in classes too. Speaker 1: Oh. Did you? What were some of the conversations like? Speaker 2: All the kids was very much against what was the violence and stuff that was happening there in Little Rock. Speaker 1: These were all the children? Speaker 2: All the children in the classroom. Let's say, and it probably may have had something to do with the fact that the teacher was too. But you had to keep in mind all those people pretty well had grown up with each other and known each other for several generations but, you know, in the classroom, you know, they all was, felt it was very bad about what's happened in Little Rock and they'd ask some questions to--of the teacher about different things of-- Speaker 1: Questions? Speaker 2: --the racial makeup and stuff like that. Speaker 1: For instance, give me some questions. Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) one of the questions that they asked was quite interesting. Somebody said, "Why is it that the black people we have in class here are a different color?" Speaker 1: Now, what did they mean by that? Speaker 2: You know, some of us was very, were black, on, on up to, you know, almost white like. And they asked the question one day, "Why is that--," you know. And the teacher answered the question rather politically and he said, "Well, you gotta keep in mind, you know, a lot of the blacks are mixed with, you know, Indian," Native American, Indian at the time, he said. They said--that was one of the things I remember, somebody asking a question about it so he didn't wanna venture into it (laughter), I know he knew, but he was not--politically correct and venture beyond that. But it was, just had a lot of time, we just had discussions on, on race relations in the country and stuff like that. As a matter of fact even before where I was in this all-black school [Averitt View School, Elmore City, Oklahoma], we would have discussions to--about what was going on in Alabama or what was going on in, in, in where ever, you know, in the Deep South particularly. And along with the success of different people we'd see in Ebony and like that, which made us feel good. Story_ID: 646603 Speaker 1: So you stayed at Katie [Katie School, Katie, Oklahoma] for like one year? Speaker 2: One year. Speaker 1: And then it's time for you to go into high school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what high school did you go to? Speaker 2: Elmore City High School [Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: Elmore City High School. Now, you're older, the children are older-- Speaker 2: I'm thir- I'm--now I'm thirteen, yeah. Speaker 1: Before we go to high school was there a teacher in particular at Katie that that was very instrumental in your life? Speaker 2: Well, here again this was a one room schoolhouse so I only had one teacher and his name was Roy Romine, a, a guy who was, well, I won't go into what religion his was, but the religion he was a part of was very much pro integration at the time, and so were that person I was telling you about was talking to my mother [Adeller Miles Perry], yeah, that family was very much, you know, very much supportive of blacks and stuff. Story_ID: 646604 Speaker 1: Speaking of religion, was your family very religious? Speaker 2: I wouldn't, I, I'd say they are people who had very high principles which would be, you know, religious type ethics and like that. My mother [Adeller Miles Perry], you know, she liked to go to church and we were probably not what you'd call the shouting type religion at all in the family there, so I wouldn't describe us as that. My father was sort of a skeptic like and you get, you have to understand I think it was mainly because he was, loved the--playing the role of a contrarian more than anything else, you know (laughter). So he never really joined the church, he preferred to stay out and argue with people, you know, about why he shouldn't be, I think, that was probably the main reason why. So one day, it was funny, this, he was standing out there and one of his old buddies from childhood came up to him and said, "Raymond [Raymond Perry, Sr.], you ought to join the church." And he said, "No, I can't do that. They don't preach the right religion here for me." And this little guy said, "Well, why don't you go where they do preach the right religion?" And his buddy just cracked up laughing, (laughter) he couldn't come back at that; but it was--no, he, he loved being a, a skeptic and a critic, you know, (laughter) so he never joined the church. Story_ID: 646605 Speaker 1: So, now you, you get to Elmore high [Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and there's more kids now I would imagine (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there was. Speaker 1: And were there, was it still the same integrated feeling there at that school? Speaker 2: I found it to be--to be honest, the way I could put it was a living hell. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's talk about that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A living nightmare. Speaker 1: Let's talk about it. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: And, and before you do that, do you think the kids are getting older and, and their opinions are becoming more, more (unclear) just tell us why. Speaker 2: No, I think it had more to do with the school, with the city itself because it had been I understand--a black family some years ago had tried to move in there and they chased 'em out, you know. And this was a, you know, blacks were not allowed to live in this town, yeah, at all. And at one time they said if you're black they wanted you gone before, you know, before the sun went down, you know, that was the kind of the philosophy there. So it was, I had, it was integrated in 1958, I think, nineteen fifty--yeah, no, it would have been integrated in 19--my brother graduated in '50 [1950], in '60 [1960], so and he, it was totally integrated in 1956, it was by three blacks, my brother, you know, Cleaven [Cleaven Perry], a sister, Nova [Nova Perry], and another guy we called Teny Kendrick, we called him, referred to him as Teny, Jr., Teny Kendrick. Those were the three that integrated the school. My brother immediately began to face, you know, the hostilities and stuff. Speaker 1: What were some of those hostilities? Speaker 2: Well, like when you walk to the store, you know whatever, they'd call you, nigger, coon, jigaboos, and names I could never think of, you know, (laughter) very creative names, black bastard, the way you think of. And like he was talking about he was walking to the store one day and this Coke [Coca-Cola] bottle came right by his face like that you know--no, it was a brick that came right by his face, you know. And he was a very respected and mild mannered person. Now, my sister, she didn't have many problems except for one guy that would really, you know, harass her. And the guy, Teny, Jr., he, you know, the, he was a rather big guy there too, you know, so they didn't take too much there. And he was older, so was my brother too, older than the people he was with, so it was difficult on them, but not as difficult, but it was very much a hostile environment they would call you--and then even if you had the white kids who wanted to associate with you, you know, the other ones would discourage them and like that. Speaker 1: So you got there and it was still hostile? Speaker 2: I came there two years later. Speaker 1: And it was the same way? Speaker 2: Very much so, very, and I had the added burden because of the fact that, whereas my brother was probably, Cleaven, he was like, when he came there he probably was fifteen, so he would have been older and bigger than a lot of people in the freshmen class. When I came there I was, I think the second youngest in the class and also very small. I was in, thirteen years old, I was weighing eighty-two pounds soaking wet (laughter) with my clothes on (laughter). So I was a real good target with so- one exception though, I did have a older brother, John [John Perry] was there, and John was two years older than I was and he, you know, he had grown up there too so, again this situation he was almost as big, if not as--larger than most of the people in the class there; and, you know, he got into some scuffles there with some folks and stuff I guess. So, as long as I was with those two, I, I felt pretty well protected, you know, there. Story_ID: 646606 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How was the faculty and the administration towards you? Speaker 2: Their official policy at the time was cordial, you know, when I was there at--you know, my first year there and everything. And like and I think, you know, because I was small and like that they thought I was rather cute, you know, I think, (laughter) you know, a kid, more a kid than a, than a teenager, I guess. So I didn't have any problem with the faculty there per se. But one of the things I thought that would happen that was very interesting, when I--let me kind of give you a background here. Where I grew up in rural Oklahoma, school started for black kids like in July, I think, it went July to September. Then in September sometime you left school to go pull cotton 'cause there was a lot of cotton in that area and stuff and they needed these hands to pull cotton. You came back like maybe around first of November, you see. The white schools they started like late August, excuse me, or September and they went all year around. So like my first year that I was at Katie [Katie School, Katie, Oklahoma], you know, we were faced with the problem of being out of school for two months there and trying to catch up. And when I got to Elmore City [Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma] we were still faced with that problem of being out of school for two months, a, a little longer and then coming back and trying to catch up, so I had a lot of work to do in the freshmen year to catch up. And one of the classes I had was an English class and in this class I, you know, I had, I had to catch up, you know, like in algebra and English and other things too, so a lot of work I had to do, turn in themes and like this. And this old woman who was running the class, she was a very tough minded type person and gave us all the work to do and then she, she came and told the student, came and told the student hall--you had two hours that you spent in students hall, they say, and she told this guy, "I don't want these guys in student hall," me and my brother, "I want them in my class," you know, catching up. So went over there and worked with her and I started catching up pretty fast there at the end of everything, so she began to take a very keen interest in me. And back in those days, in the '50s [1950s], I was still reading the books about Zane Grey and the Westerns and stuff like that and that's what I was really liking and stuff, to read about these gun fighters and stuff. And, of course, in some of the books like Zane Grey, they have--the black guy is always a guy who is just a little bit beyond a lower form of animal, the way he speaks and what he does and stuff like that. And then she told me one day, "I wanna get you a book to read," you know. And I didn't realize it at the time, but the lady, she was half Cherokee Indian [Native American], this woman was, Miss Potts [ph.], I remember. But she, "I'm gonna get you a book to read," and I'm just sitting there, saying to myself, "Oh, just leave me alone, let me read these good Western novels that I wanna read," you know, fiction and stuff. So one day she said, "I got a book for you." I said, "Oh, my god, please," you know, (laughter) I wasn't gonna tell an adult like that, 'cause I was raised to respect adults, and particularly a teacher, you know. So the book she got for me to read was called 'Slave, Fighter, Freeman' by Frederick Douglass [sic. 'Frederick Douglass: Slave, Fighter, Freeman,' Arna Bontemps]. And that was really an eye opener for me, you know, as a thirteen year old freshmen in high school. Speaker 1: What did you discover in that book, Mr. Perry [HistoryMaker Marvin Perry]? Speaker 2: I discovered the, the condition of slavery but, I guess, one of the things that stuck out to me more than anything else, and it's something which, I guess, I had probably already suspected, you know, that the miscegenation that went on during slavery time because Frederick Douglass was like probably three quarters white, at least, I'd say, and those things had stuck out, you know, to me very much so. And a lot of people just didn't discuss that at all, whether you were white or black families, you know, you just didn't discuss it. I know my family did not tell me anything like that. As a matter of fact, going back to a time earlier in my life, I had four brothers and three of us was very close in years, you know, there's two years between Cleaven [Cleaven Perry] and John Essens [John Perry], two years between me and, and Cleaven, I mean, and John, so we were pretty competitive in different things, so we'd put up games and we'd see who could do this and that, and I was the smallest so I was gonna be the more aggressive and stuff (laughter) in order to win. So we saw this young lady who was a white girl, and we say--which we didn't pay attention to race, "Which one, girlfriend is gonna be ours," you know. And we started playing around with, you know, that and Cleaven was known as a person who would spill anything, you know, he went and told one of my sisters and we were informed in an unambiguous way that she could not be our girlfriend (laughter) by our mother [Adeller Miles Perry] and with a rod as a matter of fact (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What'd she say--what did she tell you? Speaker 2: She told us, told us that we could not be, that could not be and she used corporal punishment with the strap (laughter). That that could get us killed (laughter). And, I guess I, so, you know, that was quite inspiring and very eye opening to read the story there of Frederick Douglass, I would say. Story_ID: 646607 Speaker 1: So now you stayed there [Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma] and you graduate in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And had you decided what you were gonna do next? Was it a automatic thing to-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't, well, one of the things, first thing I had in mind, I was gonna, I was gonna graduate and the only way they was gonna take and get me out of there was gonna be, they had to kill me, you know, which they almost did, you know, on some occasion (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, tell us about that, tell us about that. Speaker 2: --on some occasion. Well, you know, that's just like you had, you know, a Coke [Coca-Cola] bottle was thrown at me and stuff and, and I was probably, I think, I was a little different than like my brother, you know, Cleaven [Cleaven Perry], which they, the faculty they loved. I, I, I was much more, so, began to say, "Hey, you know, some things are wrong in this society and very much wrong in this town and in this school system" (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were outspoken? Speaker 2: So I became much more I'd say outspoken in that regard and what I stood for and everything like that too, so that certainly didn't endear me with too many people either. And some of the people said they felt I was rather arrogant because of the fact that I made, you know, real good grades and strutted around, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: You were uppity? Speaker 2: Yeah, right, (laughter) 'cause some of the kids felt that I was uppity. So by the time I got into the, well, like in my junior year, I was the only black. From the sophomore year on, I was the only black in my class, you know. And my junior year, sophomore year, Cleaven was there. And what had happened when I started my freshmen year, I think, there were five or six blacks there. By my junior year, by sophomore year, there were three blacks, me, Cleaven and another one, and that was a lady, and they started harassing her and she dropped out and this lady had come in from the school at the county seat [Pauls Valley, Oklahoma] with straight A's, you know, her freshmen year and stuff like that. Well, her grades went from straight A's to like Ds and F because of this environment and stuff that she was in. And then she started harassment and she dropped out and quit and never went back, which was a real tragedy there. Speaker 1: So do you think that star students across the board in a lot of places had good grades, but with the harassment and the, and the, and the, just the overall hostility caused a downward spiral? Speaker 2: You mean at that school? Speaker 1: That school and, and, and maybe across the country do you think that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know because I looked at other schools in that county [Garvin County, Oklahoma] where they had integration, and integration went very well from what I could see in terms of the blacks participating on the basketball team and, and doing this and that. So it was just very unique to that city, which was an all-white city. I think that was the only all-white city in that county where they had, you know, some black kids busted in, bussed in--not bussed in, but just probably went there. And keep in mind there was a very small percentage of blacks who was in that area anyway there to, who could go to that school whereas some of the other schools had the greater percentage of blacks there too, you know. So that was a factor that played into it too, but oh, it was some harsh stories I tell you that happened to me. (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, just tell us, tell us, tell us one more. Speaker 2: Well, let's just take for example, you know, I was, about my senior year in particular, I had become I guess, persona non grata but I was, you know, one of the courses that was real dangerous was agriculture and--'cause you had to go out on field trips and like that. Well, we was out there doing some welding and stuff in that one day, and one of the guys picked up this pipe, you know, like a, a pipe that you'd have to, water pipe or oil pipe like that, you know, all iron and like that so. Anyway we was out there doing some things the teacher was explaining so, I was sitting back so I said--well, a ways, so I said, "Well, I'm a move up closer, you know, to where I can hear and see what's going on better." Well, one of the kids had this pipe he picked up, you know, this pipe was probably about eighteen inches long or something like that, and he said, and he didn't say anything, but he took the pipe and evened it up and measured it with my head, and I said, "I know, you're not gonna drop this on me," you know, but he did exactly what I thought he would not do. Well, he dropped it right on me, you know. And I think this happened, I did not move, came right across here and I had a concussion from it, 'cause it probably would have, it may, could have killed me or been a serious injury, so I immediately jumped up and said you know, I knew better than that. Well, the teacher went to the superintendent of the school and told him that I was the cause of it 'cause I got in the way and stuff like that, so, you know, all kind of things like that. You would be in like a pickup and they would try to shove you out in, in, in to go in traffic and stuff like that, so a whole lot of things. And, but I was determined I was going to see it out and that was like '62 [1962] and everything and that was about the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you made it through? Speaker 2: Yeah, about the time of the, you know, civil rights was really beginning to flare. And it always seemed like it was something with a Anniston [Alabama] burning or whatever, this place that get more hostile in terms of calling you the N word and niggers and everything else, you know, as you walked by this Dairy Queen where a lot of them hung out and stuff, a lot of, and but, I guess, the last incident that happened was I was about a week away from graduation, and a downhill slide now, you know, and this kid went by, came up to me, I was sitting down, and he hit me and tried to pick a fight with me, but I was smart enough not to fight him because we both would have probably been expelled and I wanted to graduate, you know, so. I, you know, of course, the, the teacher and stuff they reported it and stuff so, you know, bloodied my nose and stuff. But anyway the guy, head of the school, I was (unclear), persona non grata with him, Kenneth Mobbs, and, and he rather chastised me and things. But so I had--my last act was I was not going to march, you know, with the class, so I said, "Hey, just give me my diploma, I'm not gonna march," and some of the ones who, well was rather chagrined that I decided not to march; so that was my last act, official act with the school there. Story_ID: 646608 Speaker 1: So you were about eighteen, and you leave-- Speaker 2: I was seventeen. Speaker 1: Seventeen. So now the future is right there at you, there are several, are there, are there several choices for you now? Speaker 2: Well, I knew I was gonna be leaving this little community for sure and I did not, and one of the things I should mention too, I had gotten very active in the church there during my last (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What church was that? Speaker 2: I was at a Baptist church there called Sweet Home Baptist church [Home Sweet Home Church, Elmore City, Oklahoma]. And also some of the churches around there in the county [Garvin County, Oklahoma], I'd be, I was church superintendent of the schools and like that. And, and other, that's probably one of the things that led me to adhering to the principle of King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] nonviolence, you know, too. And everything I had written up to, my last paper I did was on, where I'd say global issues whether it was the merging of the European union [European Economic Community] or whatever, you know, so I wanted to deal with just the regular thing. Well, the last paper I did write on, I did write on the Civil Rights Movement and I turned it into the teacher and I, and that was like the last day of school [at Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma], so I never really heard any of her comments on it, but it was enough to get me to graduate. But she was very close to my brother and sister [Nova Perry] and as a matter of fact, Cleaven passed away about four, or three months ago, and she called him a year ago and was talking to him 'cause she thought the world of him and my sister, and she was asking about me and stuff and she was saying, "Be sure to tell him I said hello. I, I thought he was just so bright," (laughter) so, I guess, she probably still remembered that paper (laughter) it was funny, you know. Speaker 1: So now you're there and it's time to go forward? Speaker 2: Right. I, at that time I knew I was gonna be leaving the community, and I knew I could not likely be accepted by the [U.S.] military even though it had conscription at that time because-- Speaker 1: And why was that? Speaker 2: I had limitation, bad feet more so. But my whole thought would have been I would have loved to have gone into the [U.S.] Navy at the time, you know, but I was scared, I was sure I could not make it. And the reason why I wanted to go into the Navy was two things; one is I figured it assured me that I could see the world. And number two, I loved the uniforms. And I figured I went into the [U.S.] Army I'd probably end up--my luck would be stationed in Oklahoma at Fort Sill, in the [U.S.] Air Force I'd probably be stationed at Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] at Tinker Air Force Base (laughter), so. But what I didn't know is out here in Arizona they have a naval depot, so I probably would have been stationed there (laughter) in northern Arizona. So I ended up moving to Oklahoma City and living with two older brothers [Cleaven Perry and John Perry] there. And-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --my younger brother [Raymond Perry, Jr.] finally joined us there that same year. Speaker 1: And was it just the intention of moving or are you, are you gonna aspire for more education? Speaker 2: Well, there was--not exactly at that time. There were, I didn't, I was interested in first of all, you know--four difficult years, I was rather burnout, number one. And number two, I wanted to get a little money in my jeans and get some decent clothes and be able to socialize with the girls and stuff like that, you know, that was what I was thinking about. Plus, you know, I looked at it too from a pure economic point of view. I could not really completely visualize the return on education because I figured if I went to school and became a teacher, a lot of people I knew I was making more money than teachers, you know, so that was not something. The only thing I saw was I could probably go work for the federal government, but again there were people I knew who were working for the federal government who did not have a college degree. So a four year college degree could not figure into my, did not immediately figure into my plans there. It was mainly to get a job, hopefully a good job, and make some money and then I was thinking that I wanted to do some things on a more entrepreneurial basis because I had an uncle who was, you might say was a businessman, excuse me, and he did very well at that, became, you know, very wealthy and very respected, you know, businessman, so I looked at it more from an entrepreneurial point of view versus going, getting a college degree. Speaker 1: So did you work for a couple of years? Speaker 2: I worked for about three years, I did before going back to college. Speaker 1: And what were you doing? Speaker 2: Well, this was a problem, probably if I could have gotten a real good, a decent job, I probably, maybe wouldn't have gone to college. But I was working like in restaurants and like that, which was very low, you know, menial type pay like that. And I was looking at other ways to supplement my income and stuff like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're gonna hold it right-- Story_ID: 646609 Speaker 1: Now, you've been working odd jobs after graduation-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you're there with your brothers [Cleaven Perry, John Perry and Raymond Perry, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and what happens to make you decide that something else is gonna happen? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things was I was working at this drive in that was very close to a university called Oklahoma City University [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma], which I kind of became intrigued. And while I was there I also read a little ad in the paper where, that you could make, oh goo gobs of money they were saying, working part time you know, at this, this company. So I went and checked it out and, you know, it was a sales type job. And they were telling you about all the money you could make and stuff and I said, "Oh, man, I could get rich at this seem like." Well, what it turned out to be was selling pots and pans, and I tried it and, I guess, I was pretty good, but I could never get my contracts approved, you know (laughter). I get people and they say, "Oh, the credit is no good," and stuff like that, except I sold a few. But one of the things that happened was when I was working that, a lot of the kids, it was mainly young people under twenty-five working it, real college students like that, well, a lot of them were going to college and stuff. And I, I became intrigued, you know, with the fact that they were going to University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] or wherever, where a lot of them went to and stuff. And so I thought one day, I said, out of curiosity, you know, I'm gonna try this, because it seemed like to me that the fact of being, going to college it kind of mean something, because as I was moving around town, you know, selling footwear and stuff like that, I met quite a few young people who were in college and, you know, young ladies too. And they would say, "Well, you know, are you in college?" I said, "No, I'm not," so it seemed to me my social status went down a bit, you know, (laughter) 'cause I was not going to college and they were and stuff, you know. So I became rather intrigued about it, so what was college all about and stuff. And, and I guess I thought you had to be really, really brilliant, and I said people don't seem to be that brilliant, so I decided to enroll in a--Oklahoma City University, take a course at night and just, just out of curiosity see what it was about. And at the time I was working a job and a half or two jobs or something like that and doing some, selling cookware too to make myself some money. Well, I happened to--well, I wanted to enroll in a journalism class, history probably would have been different if I had--because I was not a, a great writer but--and the other one that was closed and they said, "Well, they got a history class open," and I said, "Okay, I'll enroll in history." In high school [Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma] I always did, you know, well in history. So I enrolled in it and it was totally different than what I had been used to in high school where they said, "Remember this date here, [President] George Washington crossed the Delaware [Delaware River]," this date, this data. "Who was George Washington's vice president," or something. This old guy, it was history, U.S. history from 1865 on, you know, after the Civil War like period, you know, towards that. And he talked a lot about these presidents and other people. And he particularly loved Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.], and when he talked about Teddy Roosevelt you could just see Teddy Roosevelt right in the classroom, you know, with the Rough Riders and like that, he was that good at it. So I became very fascinated with his speech, and I guess he noticed I was listening attentively to what he had to say and it probably warmed his heart too, so I got, you know, good grades in the class and stuff like that and I just found it to be very intriguing. And my mother [Adeller Miles Perry] was very happy to see me interested in college because she had tried to get--my mother and father [Raymond Perry, Sr.] both had tried to get me to go to college a year before. And I had a scholarship, as a matter of fact I could have taken, you know, to college, and I could have gone full time but back in those days I was very much and unfortunately, very (unclear)--still today very much individualistic, you know, so (laughter), I wanted to, you know, sort of like do things on my own, I didn't want anybody--if I wanted to enroll in basket weaving, if I wanted to enroll in basket weaving get my degree in basket weaving, so I want it to be an experience, you know, of mine. So I, and I didn't want anybody looking over my shoulder asking what my grades were or what time I come in or whatever, so I did not take the scholarship there. And I was planning on going back to Oklahoma City University that next semester, but during that time my mother became very ill and, and passed away, you know, and that would have been my next semester so I didn't go. So I found out that I could go to another university, which was a ways away, public university called Central State College [University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, Oklahoma] at that time, for less money even though I would have to drive much further. Story_ID: 646610 Speaker 1: So you're in school, you're doing well now. In that one class that you took at Oklahoma City University (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, at Oklahoma City University proper. Speaker 1: And, and what's the, what is the, now you're in another city too, Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], how are you adjusting to being there? Speaker 2: Being in Oklahoma City? No, I was still in Oklahoma City. I was living in Oklahoma City, but I was just driving, commuting. Speaker 1: No, no, I'm saying at this time because you had left high school [Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to come to Oklahoma City now. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, you've been there about-- Speaker 2: Three years-- Speaker 1: --three years. Speaker 2: --three or four-- Speaker 1: How, how are you in that town now? How are you adjusting to that life because-- Speaker 2: I'm adjusting quite well to it, you know, in the big city because I had room all around, you know, got to know people and stuff like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is it as segregated still? Speaker 2: Oklahoma City was, yes, part of it was segregated. But they had a boycott of the downtown stores in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], so there were some places that was not segregated, but there were places that you could not go to eat that were segregated, yes. Speaker 1: Well, legally-- Speaker 2: And public accommodations-- Speaker 1: Legally-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was it more of a, of a, of a, a covert thing because now we're in the mid-'60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: This was in the, now, now we're talking about before '65 [1965] but yes, there was a lot of places that, you know, that it was not wise to go to it and some people might make you feel very uncomfortable if you did not--if you did go there. And there were some restaurants that did accept blacks to come in there and like that--very proudly and everything. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Out of the--uh-huh. So I know the restaurants I worked at, there were blacks who'd come in there. As a matter of fact it was interesting. I worked at this cafeteria, that was in 1963, and the whites would go out front, the employees went out front and eat and the blacks would go into the kitchen there and clean off a table and we'd eat back there and stuff. So one day they made a mistake and hired this white guy, and I say mistake because the old owner did not want to hire whites because, I guess, he felt they might 'cause a problem, you know, this was a, you know, he was white, this was a white cafeteria. Well, this guy who had been in the [U.S.] Air Force or [U.S.] Army or whatever it was, and he was probably late twenties, and he said, "Look I don't like this, I don't like the fact that these blacks are eating back here, I'm gonna go talk to the owner." So he went up there and talked with him or something or other because right after that, they started telling us we could come out front and eat and that was in '63 [1963]. So we was able to go out front and eat. It was interesting though. So finally, (unclear), I think I was the first one to say, "Hey, I'm going out there to eat," some others followed. And then, but it took like a year to get some of the old timers out there; they almost had to drag them out front to eat (laughter). Speaker 1: They were conditioned, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 646611 Speaker 1: So, now you're, so your first year, let's fast forward a little bit to your, your, your history class [at Oklahoma City University, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma], you're enjoying that. Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your mom [Adeller Miles Perry] was behind you and she gets ill and she passes away, how did that affect you? Speaker 2: Her ill- she passed away. Interesting enough, you know, of course, it was a very sad time for me, but I will say this much, it strengthened my resolve to go push ahead because it, I know that's what she'd want me to do and so it just redoubled my strength it, you know, to it made me much stronger actually. Speaker 1: So what did you do at that point after she's passed away? Speaker 2: Well, I, I said, hey, you know, I'm gonna, you know, do whatever I can to succeed in life and like that in terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where did you go? Speaker 2: --hardworking. I continued to, you know, work and doing things like that. But also I was enrolled in school that August, that next semester, that fall semester full time. Speaker 1: Oklahoma Central or Central-- Speaker 2: Central State, the university in Edmond, Central State College [University of Central Oklahoma] at the time in Edmond, Oklahoma, I enrolled full time. Speaker 1: So that was a commute for you, you said? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there? Speaker 2: Until I graduated-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, four years later. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was the, what was your, did you go in there with a major, did you have a course of study? Speaker 2: No, I did not have a course of study. I had an interest in government, you know, keen interest in that. I grew up on, you know, politics sort of like from the time I could walk, you know, so that was two things interested me, politics and boxing so (laughter) they both were kind of-- Speaker 1: Did you know anybody on campus there already? Speaker 2: I did know one or two people on campus already. One of them was kind of like a homeboy I had gone to grade school with as a matter of fact [at Averitt View School, Elmore City, Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: Durant Lamey. But unfortunately like the first three weeks I was there, Uncle Sam asked for his service (laughter). Speaker 1: So he had to go? Speaker 2: Yeah, he had to go. And a few other people I knew sort of in passing, you know, from Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] and like that. Speaker 1: So approximately what year did you enroll in that school? Speaker 2: That was 1965. Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965]. Story_ID: 646612 Speaker 1: The voters act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] has passed, now, you're in school [at Central State College; University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, Oklahoma]-- Speaker 2: No, the, let's see, yes, it had, yes, it had. Speaker 1: Also Malcolm had been assassinated (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It became a law around that time. Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], Malcolm-- Speaker 2: No, yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: --Malcom X also is assassinated. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts or, or, or can you recall how that was for you when you saw these events going down? Speaker 2: Well, I was very much attuned to what was going on like, you know, with the Civil Rights Movement, you know, James Meredith enrolling in Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] and the falling of segregation in Alabama, you know, the governor standing in the doorway and stuff like that. I was very, very keenly aware of that and followed that very closely from the time I was in high school [Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma], you know, so, yes, I was very much aware of that. And I remember when I came to work one morning, when I was working, and I think it was probably '63 [1963], and Medgar Evers has been killed and this white woman was crying, who worked with us, talking about, "That's just so bad they killed, killed this poor woman's husband," you know, so she was holding a picture up of Myrlie Evers [Myrlie Evers-Williams], you know, Myrlie Evans [sic.]. Speaker 1: Medgar Evers. Speaker 2: Evers, you know, and stuff (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the same year-- Speaker 2: That was '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: --the same year JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, also. Speaker 2: Yes, I remember that very, very vividly, when JFK was assassinated. Speaker 1: Go ahead and share that. Speaker 2: Well, I had, John Kennedy, I was having hope in terms of what this country could be when I was in high school there and everything and I felt there had been some progress made. And when Kennedy first debate with Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] he had talked about the fact that a black person had like one half the chance as a white person to make ten thousand dollars. In his opening remarks he made statements about civil rights, (cough) excuse me, which I was very impressed with. And I was very disappointed Richard Nixon didn't because I lived in Oklahoma, which was part of the Solid South, and I certainly did not care for the Democrats' philosophy like George Wallace and, and, you know, Strom Thurmond and stuff, people like that. So I was more or less, you know, for the Republican Party because they quote unquote, freed the slaves and stuff like that. But I was very keenly interested in what John F. Kennedy had to say during his debates there. And then the thing that I was, in his State of the Union address in '60 [sic.], in 1960, I was sure hoping he would say something about civil rights and I was very disappointed that he did not say that, but I continued to be buoyant later when I hear, you know, Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] talking about civil rights and stuff like that. And I was very much gratify- happy to see when Kennedy, you know, submitted the civil rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] to [U.S.] Congress and stuff, which did not have, I felt, much chance of being, of passing. I was driving back from work, I was working two jobs at the time, and I was driving back from work and had my car radio on and they was talking about the great crowds that were turning out to see the president in Fort Worth [Texas] and stuff and he was on his way, you know, to Dallas [Texas] and like that. So when I got home it was about like twelve o'clock or something like that. So I turned the radio on, and at 12:30 I remember is, they had a religious program came on that I would listen to a lot. And I listened to, I was listening to this program, which I had been listening to, years, and all of a sudden it stopped and it said, "Bulletin, bulletin, bulletin," and thing, immediate thing came to my mind was there had been a missile attack launched on the United States from the Soviet Union, you know, (laughter) 'cause never before had I heard that program interrupted by a bulletin, you know, and that's when they said, "President Kennedy has been injured in Dallas and possibly fatally." And wow that was a devastating one. And then I immediately turned to another radio station where they have news on frequently and the report came on, the guy came on rather casually and kind of more or less, you know, lightheartedly saying that President Kennedy had been shot, but the way he was talking like it probably was not, you know, anything that bad, or anything yet, so. I had been up a long time, so I turned the radio off and went to sleep. And then that evening my youngest brother [Raymond Perry, Jr.] came in, you know, I woke up, he came in from school and I said, "How is President Kennedy?" He said, "Oh, he's dead." That was a devastating one because next in line was gonna be Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] who was a southerner, so we didn't have much hope (laughter) for a southerner in the White House. Story_ID: 646613 Speaker 1: So those years pass-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is assassinated-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was, was the death of Malcolm X anything that had an impact on your life? Speaker 2: Malcolm X, I had read about him and the Muslim and like that because the black Muslim--and it was certainly sad to see anybody assassinated, and I was following some of the things that was happening with Malcolm X and the church and like that, but I never had a feeling that the Muslims'--program they had was really an answer for segregation and discrimination in this country. What, they were sort of like more or less preaching the withdrawal from the confrontation, don't try to go to the food and to the stores or whatever, but let's build up our own thing. But when you look at it, even back in those day, I figured out that there was a nexus there, you know, so I had trouble with that ideology. And plus I had trouble looking at the solution to something that was political in nature I felt with a religious answer. And Malcolm X even if he broke with the-- Speaker 1: Muslims (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Nation of Islam, he seemed to continue to look for some moral or religious answer to the problem. I, my thoughts were I didn't care whether you were a Democrat, Republican, Socialist, Communist, Christian, Muslim, whatever, the issue was raised so just being a particular religion did not address that. I felt that racism corrupted anything. It corrupted whether you was a conservative or possibly even a liberal or certainly, you know, all the isms, a union or whatever it was corrupted by this cancer called racism so I didn't have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you think racism can also corrupt religion? Speaker 2: Oh, very much so, very much so. And religion was one of the things that was very much used to oppress blacks and to give whites a feeling that they were doing the, quote, unquote, the right thing. Like body- once said that in every lynching in the South, you know, that you could almost guarantee it was a minister involved in it, which was true in the, in the three kids [James Chaney, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner] that were killed in '65 [sic. 1964], you know. So, yes, religion gave the cover in many cases to discrimination, so, very much so. Story_ID: 646614 Speaker 1: So you're on the campus now of Central, it's called Central State? Speaker 2: Yes, Central State College [University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, Oklahoma], um-hm. Speaker 1: And what exactly-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how are you, how are you manipulated on campus now? How is campus life for you? Speaker 2: Well, you know, that was a community school, so a lot of people came and worked and they would disappear after three o'clock or so, after they had, last class. There were some who stayed on campus and like that, so, and the people who, a lot of the people were like myself, older students, you know. When I started there as a freshman I was twenty-three, twenty-one--twenty, almost twenty-one years old, so I was not your typical eighteen year old student, you know, like casually looking for the next party and stuff like that. So many of us were married and had kids at that time, so it was not like a quote unquote, party school that--maybe except for the ones who stayed on campus, they may have had some of that. Speaker 1: Now, was that your case? Were you married at that time or-- Speaker 2: I was not married at that time. Speaker 1: But, but, but many were though? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, many were married, you know, and had children too, but I was working, taking care of myself and stuff so. It was very interesting. The classes I took was very intellectually stimulating, at least most of them were and stuff like that. (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you involved in any, in any groups or anything on campus? Speaker 2: Well, my sophomore year I did pledge a fraternity. Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]. I pledged my freshmen, my sophomore year. And I, it was, it was a very interesting experience and I was scheduled to like go over my junior year and the first, the day I went to register and stuff for my sophomore year, I ran into a young lady there and we decided to go to a movie that evening and see 'In the Heat of the Night.' And as we were going to the movie, we came to this stoplight, and I had bought a new car and we came to the stoplight, and a car from the opposite direction, when the light turned green, he just gunned it and it came, pulled it right over into my lane and came dead at us, you know. So I just had to sit there and take it, you know, so, and she was injured in the car accident there too, but it destroyed my car. So I was involved with getting transportation and stuff, so I did not--my, that was my junior year, I'm sorry when I was--I pledged my sophomore year, but my junior year because of the incident I had to deal with that, and finally was able to get one of my brothers' car to drive and stuff, so it caused me a lot of, you know, unnecessary problems. And the guy they could not locate, and I think something went a little funny there with the police report too, you know, I'll just say. Uh-huh, so I did not go my junior year. Speaker 1: Okay. So you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --go through now, is there a declared major at this point as you're going into your junior year? Speaker 2: I was, my thoughts in my sophomore year was I was gonna major in political science. That was my main interest, in political science. Our, and I, interesting enough, I had an interest that I mentioned in business and stuff. A lot of people are not aware that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was very much aware of economics too, and he made a speech, about 1964 [sic. 1966], where he was talking about economics, what, you know, a black can make compared to a white and stuff like this. And so he talked about discrimination like that. Well, I was very much then, was interested in economics so. And plus I heard it was a challenging, you know, discipline so I was looking for some challenge so that's how I ended up taking a major in economics versus political science. Story_ID: 646615 Speaker 1: You mentioned Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] while you were in school in 1968 (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About '65 [1965] I'd say or '66 [1966] or something like that. Speaker 1: But he, he, he gave that speech. In '68 [1968] he was assassinated. Speaker 2: Yeah, about '65 [1965]-- Speaker 1: Were you still in school [Central State College; University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: Do you recall that day? Speaker 2: Very much so. Speaker 1: Tell us about it, please. Speaker 2: I was at work, now, I had been elevated to, at this restaurant I was a chef at night at this, at this steak place, you know, a nightclub, it was not a nightclub but it was a private type, you know, thing they had there too, very upscale place. So I was a chef there and I didn't encourage people to call me unless it was something really--an, an emergency. So I get this call and they tell me I had a telephone call, so when I got on the phone, it was Cleaven [Cleaven Perry], my brother was on the phone and telling me that King had been assassinated. And I says, "Wow, that--," I have to say it was not as devastating to me as, as Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] because I had really expected it to happen to King. I just was, you know, if it had had happened before I just thought by the grace of God he had lived that long with the threats on his life and everything; so that was not a shock to me that he had been assassinated. Sad and a great loss I felt, but I was not surprised at it I have to say. Story_ID: 646616 Speaker 1: So you go through 1969 and you finally graduate with a B.A.-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in economics. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Tell us about that feeling. Speaker 2: Well, I, I guess it's kind of like the, you had reached the climax and the conclusion. My first semester of my senior year, you know, I very much was, figured by that time I was going to either go to graduate school or go into the workforce, and I was leaning very strongly towards graduate school, so I applied to a number of graduate schools and was accepted at some of those, so I decided to pursue a master's degree and I was very much interested in economics with the idea possibly of getting a Ph.D. in economics, you know, I was thinking, at that time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had several offers for grad school? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Which one did you pick? Speaker 2: Well, I had several criteria I was gonna look at. One, I didn't wanna work. I had done that in, in college so I definitely didn't wanna work in graduate school I said. And the other one was where I could get the most money from (laughter). So I ended up by accident applying to Oklahoma State University [Stillwater, Oklahoma]. I had applied mainly, I, I had planned to go out of, out of state to graduate school. And they made me a very good offer fellowship wise and the money I was gonna get and stuff like that. Plus, they had a very fine economics department too, so that's how I happened to go into Oklahoma State University-- Speaker 1: So you grad-- Speaker 2: --versus someplace else. Speaker 1: --so you graduate in '69 [1969] from-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, from college [Central State College; University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: --from college and now you're on your way to grad school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And where is Oklahoma State located? Speaker 2: Oklahoma State would be as a crow flies we say probably about fifty miles north of Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. Driving wise at that time it was probably more like about seventy miles from Oklahoma City. And I was in a two year program there too, you know, in a disciplinary program, you know, I had to take all the courses, thirty courses or whatever it was for to get a master's degree in economics. But I also had to take like another almost thirty years--thirty courses--thirty hours, so I ended up almost, it went--was similar to like a double major and master's degree. Speaker 1: Did you work at that time-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --on campus or did they-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or did you commute? Speaker 2: No, I lived on, I lived on campus my first semester and then I lived off campus the rest of the time in an apartment. Speaker 1: How was campus life because you had never really done that-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --to live on campus? Speaker 2: --the, the life of an undergraduate and a graduate student are considerably different, you know. I was dealing with, you know, my peers mainly and we were not too much in a party mood like, so we would get together sometimes and have a few refreshments and stuff like that, you know, and do a few things to relax, but it was pretty well, you know, in your area of discipline and like who you associate with. There were some other people too, but the graduate students were and the, and the undergraduates was pretty well, you know, a different focus there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was serious business. Speaker 2: So I was not trying to be--yeah, I was not trying to be a big man on campus, you know, that was, if I ever aspired to that that would have been way in the past in my undergraduate days so now we were serious students, yeah. Story_ID: 646617 Speaker 1: So between, between your, your, your undergraduate studies [at Central State College; University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, Oklahoma] and your graduate studies [at Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma], were there any teachers that stood out that really made you look at life differently? Speaker 2: Well, let me say this much, there was a person who, in my undergraduate years, who really had, took a very keen interest in me and she was a sociology professor, Ruth Garvin--Garwin. She, I had a class in second--it was interesting though, my first semester my second year, sophomore year, I enrolled in her class and a lot of people told me, "Man, you know, this woman is this and that and very capricious and this and that, you better drop that class right now," you know, (laughter) they told me. She, her first test I took, you know, I did very well on it I'd say. And she saw I was wearing a Oklahoma City University jacket, you know, and she asked me did I go to Oklahoma City University [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] for college, I said, "Yes, I did." So, so she said, "(Unclear) and you did very well on the test," and, and went on. And then like somewhere or the other they had (unclear) you know, she went through the roll there and she said, "I wanna see you in the office, in my office after school, after class." I said, uh-huh, what's the deal now? Was I sleeping in class or something (laughter) or she thought I was, which I was not. Well, then she told me about, they had this practicum that I could work on during the summer, where I could be working in children court. So she took a very, very keen interest in my career and everything and told me some things that I valued about--and some of the things she told I could have valued but, you know, that if I had taken her advice on things too. But she was very much a person who stood out in my academic life. I had applied my last year in undergraduate school, I applied to a fellowship from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], a doctoral student, doctoral scholarship for black students. And I was a semifinalist for that. And so I got a free trip to New York City [New York, New York], and put us up for a couple of days there and everything free. They even gave us, gave us spending money too, you know, so. When I went to the interview panel that day and they shot, three young guys sitting around, they shot the questions at me and stuff, two of 'em was black faculty members, you know, at universities. The other one I think was on the staff of the Ford Foundation. Well, at the end of the interview and this guy said to me, Dr. Cook [HistoryMaker Samuel Dubois Cook] who went on to become the president of Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], he said, "Who is this lady, Ruth Garwin?" I said, "Well, that's one of my professors." He said, "Man, that woman sure thinks a lot of you" (laughter). So she was a person I say had a lot of impact on me personally and career and just, yeah, as a, you know, a philosophy and like that too. And the person who probably had the greatest impact on me politically was a young professor my first semester in college named John Farrell [ph.]. Speaker 1: Was it in grad school or undergrad? Speaker 2: Undergraduate school. A young professor, Ph.D. candidate at Oklahoma State University--at University of Oklahoma. A staunch Catholic, very much so he'd tell you, but an excellent lecturer and stuff and he was liberal too, you know, his philosophy was. And so that was very much interesting to, you know, hear a liberal type philosophy on a lot of things. And he also was rather critical of John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and civil rights at the beginning and stuff like that so. And it was, it was engrossing what he had to say in his, just in his lecture and his professionalism and, and all that and, and, you know, just his demeanor and stuff was very impressive there, you know to me. That would have been somebody who, I said had a lot of impact on me philosophically my first year. And I had taken very much, looked at, had, interesting, the year I was at, semester I was at Oklahoma City University, we had to do a book report and the one I got was, did a report on one, 'Conscience of a Conservative' ['The Conscience of a Conservative'] by Barry Goldwater (laughter). So his philosophy was considerably different from Barry Goldwater's, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: So it was interesting for you to hear that? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very interesting. Story_ID: 646618 Speaker 1: I was gonna say one thing about grad school, you asked me about, you know, professors, and there was two professors particularly I remember. One was the chairman of the department, Richard Leftwich, and he was from what you called the Chicago school of economics, you know, very much I'd say, you know, laissez-faire or 18th century liberalism as Milton Friedman would say, he had studied under Milton Friedman and like that, so this was right different than what I had had in undergraduate school [Central State College; University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, Oklahoma] and that was very interesting there too. And another professor I had was my advisor, John Sharon [ph.] and he was more or less a guy who did not lecture much, but it would, you know, get a class discussion going and like that. And that was a, a very fascinating--and so those two individuals stimulated my thinking a lot in graduate school. Speaker 2: So which area of, of economics would you consider that you were leaning towards-- Speaker 1: Oh, I was in what they call manpower economics, you know, because I had a fellowship from the U.S. Department of Labor in manpower, which was a interdisciplinary study, but you had to do your course studies in the field in which my field was economics and also in some related fields like, you know, sociology or in psychology, industrial psychology and like that. They were trying to train more people who--to be aware of manpower needs and like that into the future in terms of forecasting the needs and like that. So it came under the U.S. Department of Labor. Speaker 2: So here it is 1972 as you move into-- Speaker 1: Okay, '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: --and you'll be graduating soon? Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], yeah. Speaker 2: --from, from, from Oklahoma State [Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --with your master's [degree]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in economics. Now, there's, there's been a ten year period since high school [Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --what is [HistoryMaker] Marvin Perry thinking now that--in ten years he's gone from high school student to a master's in economics? What is Marvin Perry thinking around this time? Speaker 1: Well, (laughter) I, I, I felt older, of course. The world had turned many times. I had seen a lot of changes, you know, in, in that time period there too. The Vietnam War, I had lived through and was, was living it. You know, the Civil Rights Movement would come into its thrust and then went into the violent period. I had seen a lot of social, you know, turmoil and like that. And then the people who had the, had the moral changes of the free love and like that, so that was very interesting, but I say probably my core beliefs had not been changed since the time I was in, certainly in junior high [Katie School, Katie, Oklahoma] and like that, you know. I'd say if a person does not change at all, they would--personally was either dead or, or, or calcified of the mind but, of course, I had changed, you know, some philosophy, had grown older and stuff like that too, you know, and physically and everything, put on a lot of weight (laughter) compared to being that real skinny person when I was young (laughter). Story_ID: 646619 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You graduated now [from Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] and what's the next step after that? Speaker 2: Well, of course then it was career, I had figured that I was gonna do what I wanted to do. My, my thing I really wanted to do was to work in the area of international relations, so one of the places I applied to was the Agency for International Development [United States Agency for International Development] and they were very, very keen on me and everything and they were gonna hire me. Right about that time the president, Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], and, and they were not that keen on the Agency of International Development, so they reduced their budget like by, something like half or something so I wasn't able to go into the international world as I had wanted to do, you know. So I always had the interest in global type of work, you know, that's the reason why I wanted to go into the [U.S.] Navy because of the fact I wanted to see what other cultures and societies and people were like and their beliefs and religion and, and economics or whatever, you know. Speaker 1: That was very forward thinking from 1972 for an African American man. Did you find yourself to be-- Speaker 2: That was, that was in 1962 when I was thinking that (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, in '62 [1962] you were thinking it? Speaker 2: Yeah, in '62 [1962] I was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and, and, and it, and it came into fruition in the--and you started feeling it again in '72 [1972] around this time. Speaker 2: Well, I had, yeah, well, I still, yeah, that's what I wanted to do still, you know, but I was interested in doing that when I was in, in, in high school [Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma], you know. Speaker 1: So, so-- Speaker 2: Then I, unfortunately, I did not take a position that's--what others offered to me and I ended up taking a position at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] as a researcher there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in one of the divisions. Speaker 1: And how long, how long did you do that job? Speaker 2: I was there for about two and a half years I think, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And, and were there any other career aspirations or trainings during that, during that time period? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things which I found very interesting is that I wanted to, you know, much as I loved being there in Oklahoma with the people who I grew up with and the relatives and like that, but I also wanted to expand my horizons so I wanted to, if I was gonna stay in the United States I wanted to see something different than Oklahoma. So like one of the job offers I had was in Kansas City, Missouri, which I really loved Kansas City, but I said Boston [Massachusetts] was probably a little bit more different in the United States than Oklahoma and--than Kansas City would be. So that's why one of the, of the reasons why I ended up accepting the position at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston there. Speaker 1: And what year was that? Speaker 2: That, that was in '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971]. I, I think that was '71 [1971], yeah. So I said that was a, you know, it was interesting there. Boston as, you know, has quite a history there. And so it was very interesting to associate with people with a, a conservative, different background than yours and also who attended some of the top schools, not only in the United States but in the world, you know. So that was very good to experience there too. And then some of the cultural life on the East Coast, you know, you were a shuttle away from New York [New York] or Washington, D.C. if you wanna go there and stuff; so that was a quite interesting and challenging time. Story_ID: 646620 Speaker 1: So you stayed there [Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] for three years? Speaker 2: It was two and a half years. Speaker 1: Two and a half years in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Then what did you do? Speaker 2: I went to, you know, and Boston is very competitive for a young professional, particularly, I didn't have a Ivy League degree either, you know (laughter), but so I ended up taking it for less money than I could have made some other places, but I wanted the experience, so a natural move for me, unless I was gonna go back to school and get a Ph.D. in economics, you know. And, but my thoughts was anyway that the more I studied economics the more, uneconomical it would be to have a (laughter) Ph.D., so my thoughts were to go into commercial banking, which I did do, into commercial banking from there. Speaker 1: Was it, was there anymore training that, that you needed for that? Did you go to any more schools? Speaker 2: No, no more schools and just the fact that the training that they would give you, you know, inside of a bank and also in seminars and things like that, you know, that you would go to and everything. But and I did like I, in banking, I did go to a course that was like a week long course, that would talk about the American Bankers Association on commercial lending and things like that, so different seminars and different type of schooling that was done, you know, in banking that I went too. Speaker 1: So now this is about '75 [1975], '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: That would have been about, yeah, about '76 [1976] by that time, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So now you're in commercial banking-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what was your first job in commercial banking? Speaker 2: Well, my first job in commercial banking, I was a credit manager for a, a leasing department of this bank I worked for in Omaha, Nebraska [Omaha National Bank; First National Bank of Omaha]. And-- Speaker 1: So you had moved from Boston to Nebraska? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, uh-huh. Well, I had a little stop in between there, between there and Boston, but I had happened to get an even better offer from Omaha so I ended up taking that. But in, I was a credit manager there in Omaha for the leasing department, which was a subsidiary of the bank holding company. My job ended up being not only looking at the loans in terms of approving them or if they were within my limit, or going to get the necessary approval for the leases that we were making and stuff. So I traveled a considerable amount throughout the Northwest and also somewhat in the Midwest but particularly in the Northwest. We did a lot of leasing of center pivot irrigation systems, so if you fly over a part of the country you'll see those round circles in the West, we lease those systems to a lot of different farmers and like that. Which was a very interesting experience because where I grew up if somebody owned a section of land, they had a lot of land. And when I get to talking to the little boys up there in Montana and Idaho, they can start telling you about how many square miles they had in land, you know, and stuff. And many of them had airplanes they could, they had to fly over that land because they couldn't cover it with a pickup or a tractor like that in one day or something. Story_ID: 646621 Speaker 1: So now you're flying around the country, now you're-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Corporate America? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: What's the tone of Corporate America around this time in '75 [1975] for, for an African American man? Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're, you're armed with all the degrees you need. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Well, my--I was there at Omaha National [Omaha National Bank; First National Bank of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] and I had a really, I had a great experience. I had a, first boss, when I first came in there, was a very enlightened, very forward thinking, very well educated person, very pro equal opportunity and stuff. He was, you know, he was very excellent, I spent a little time in his department before going-- Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: I think his name was Bob Oakes [ph.]. Really a, a terrific guy. And then I went to work for another terrific guy who headed up the leasing department there, John Brusque [ph.] who was also a person who was very, I felt forward thinking in, in terms of race relation and equal opportunity and like that. They were proactive in that regard. So, I had a lot of support from, in those areas there. And also, you know, Omaha [Nebraska] being a kind of in a way like a larger city than what I grew up with [in Garvin County, Oklahoma], you know, a little village like because so many people had roots there in the town and like that, there were newcomers, but not as many as you would see like, you know, percentage wise in Phoenix [Arizona] and like that. And I say the management of the bank itself was very top management, very proactive in terms of equal opportunity and, and integrating the workforce and, and things like that. Speaker 1: In speaking with people that were in that corporate structure-- Speaker 2: In that corporate environment at the time, I, it was very challenging for blacks, you know, in terms of moving up. As a matter of fact one of the things I did when I was there is I put on a conference, what we call it the, I think it was the Midwest Executive Development Leadership--Midwest Executive Develop Leadership Conference [Midwest Executive Development Leadership Conference (ph.)]. And I had gotten heavily involved in the community there when I was in Omaha too. I had become president of a, what essentially was a black chamber of commerce called Mid-City Business Professional Association [sic. Mid-City Business and Professional Association]. So I was still, you know, like in my late twenties, something like that and early thirties, so I (unclear) and full of ideas and stuff. So they made me president because I didn't have any better sense to say no to it (laughter) I guess, 'cause the organization was broke and like that, but I accepted it as a challenge and stuff. And one of the things that I did is I worked with the University of Nebraska at Omaha business school [University of Nebraska-Omaha College of Business Administration, Omaha, Nebraska] and some others and I was just amazed at the kind of support we got from the corporations in terms of sending people to that event and also, you know, underwriting certain things. And we got people from outside of the state to come, a lot of people from the midwestern area, West Coast like that came to that. When we first talked about doing it, everybody said you'd be lucky if you got fifteen people to this event in totals there. And the, we ended up with over three hundred, you know. Speaker 1: What, what was the theme of the conference? Speaker 2: The theme was about some of the challenges and how you could overcome, you know, barriers in the corporate world as a black. We brought in one of the guys who was at that time was a vice president with Eastern Air Lines, James O. Plinton, Jr. to speak, and he came in from Florida. We had written another guy who is in Phoenix at the time about speaking, and he worked for a major Fortune 500 company here, black guy, who was in a vice president position, and he wanted us to pay him an honorarium, so we wrote James O. Plinton and, and he wrote us back and said, "Look, transportation is our business and speaking is my privilege, so there is no fee," you know (laughter). So we was happy to get that so he came in free to speak with us and spend the, the day with us at that event. And then we went out and we brought in a guy who had been a professor at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] named Stuart Taylor [Stuart A. Taylor] who had, you know, knew her [sic.] from my relationship with the, you, you know, with the Harvard business students when I was there and stuff. And he conducted a workshop there about, you know, some of the things that you could do in terms of being successful in the corporate world. In essence whereas I'm gonna focus in essence on you, what can you do to be successful, you know, regardless of whatever the environment around you would be. And then we had some other people to that come in from different places who spoke on the panel. So it was a very--and thrilling three days there and we had a lot of support from the, from the business community, so. And nobody thought that we could pull that off, you know, and I was the one who was, you know, organizing it, behind it, and got some other people involved and got the whole community involved as a matter of fact; so, it was a, it was, it was really, really, you know, great. Story_ID: 646622 Speaker 1: So I'm noticing a theme here, [HistoryMaker] Marvin Perry is now, you're, you're finally, you're starting to be an activist but in another kind of way, not necessarily an activist that's on the corner with a bullho- horn (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --saying equal rights. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You're going into the economic side of things-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and the corporate, and the business side of things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Right. And one of the things to, I guess, (laughter) I was, you know, in the '60s [1960s], the whole idea was that you looked a certain way and talked a certain language and you tried to scare white folks and whatever. I don't think I ever had that type of demeanor that I was gonna scare anybody (laughter) anyway and that was not my goal in that regard, but bringing about change and mobility was very much so a interest of mine and certainly the economic and political spirit or interest at that time. And that's one of the reasons why I accepted the president, the chairman of the board of this organization, you know, the black business association [Mid-City Business and Professional Association], which was, was very interesting, you know, what we were able to do in terms of turning that organization around from taking it as, as a disrespected organization in the black community and laughed at and was able to bring funds in, in a little bit of--no time. And one of the things which I did when I was there community wise is we, when I became president in '76 [1976], in January of '76 [1976], you know, we had some dire financial problems but we was blessed to have a staff to work, we weren't doing it volunteer, but we needed funding for the places. So, the, it came very, serious manner that the directors of the organization had to sign on a loan to get a, a loan from this bank to continue operating for a month. And me being chairman of the board my name (laughter) had to be the first one to go on there, you know. So in some way if the company defaulted we was gonna have to pay for it, you know (laughter). Story_ID: 646623 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had the conference [Midwest Executive Development Leadership Conference (ph.)]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well the conference was put on, we, you know, it was my, you know, I was the one who was the driving force behind that. We got a number of organizations involved but mainly the, Mid-City Business Professional Association [sic. Mid-City Business and Professional Association] and also the University of Nebraska-Omaha business school [University of Nebraska-Omaha College of Business Administration, Omaha, Nebraska], and then the bank [Omaha National Bank; First National Bank of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] I worked for and other places in there, they chipped in with some money to, to underwrite that conference. But keep in mind now, the conference was one of the things which I had done, you know, which I had focused on doing. And, but that was not just the sole purpose of the black chamber. The black chamber was more or less to get, you know, sustain and grow black businesses in the, in the greater Omaha area (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get them to solve it? Speaker 2: Well, this was, well, yes, I did, it was interestingly enough, we were looking for a hundred thousand dollars and at the time the executive director, I was on vacation and the executive director said--well, he wanted to go in and talk to, we had to set up a meeting with the chairman of the board of Northern Natural Gas Company [Omaha, Nebraska], which later became part of Enron [Enron Corporation], you know, and then, you know, spun off from Enron. Well, the guy who headed that was a, one of the very heavy hitters there in Omaha, Nebraska, and also was on the board of directors of the bank that I worked for. And I told him, "Well, look, before we go see him we need to hit strategy wise, we need to get together." So reluctantly he met me for coffee and we were, he was pretty grumpy there. And I was like thirty at the time, I think, thirty-one I probably was and he was like fifty-five or fifty-six (laughter) so he had years on me. So I told him I said, he said, we wanna, I said, "How much are we gonna ask them for?" He said, "We gonna ask them for a hundred thousand dollars." "No, no, don't, don't do that, that's not gonna fly." I said, "What we're gonna do is, we're gonna go in and ask him for--that, we gonna tell him that we have a real crunch, you know, right now and we just need some money to get us over this hump, you know, and we'll make things happen, but our back's against the wall and we have signed this loan and stuff like that so we need some money." I said, "What we're gonna do is go in and ask him for a thousand dollars, you know, and ask him to send letters to, or a lot of other, you know, major, you know, COs and ask for a thousand dollars." I said, "We gonna do that and if we do that, I'll tell you what I think he gonna do, he will probably give us the check for at least ten thousand dollars," you know. And so went in there, you know, him being the CO he said a few pleasantries and, and then he turned it over to me, you know, the CO of the chamber, I knew him personally. And I told him what our problem was and everything and then I told him that I wanted to have a, a, we wanted twelve thousand right away for immediate infusion of cash to keep going and we wanted him to give a thousand and then a, ask his CO buddies for a thousand to help us. And he said, "So you want me to do that," he said, "I'm going to tell you something. I'm not gonna do that." He said, "First of all, big people don't like to have their name on a small amount of money" (laughter), "which a thousand dollars would be, so I'll tell you what I'll do, I'll give you $10,700," you know, the executive director almost fell out of the chair (laughter). So we got the check from him so that eased our cash burden and that was in June of 2006 [sic.]. At that time I had left, I was on vacation so I caught a flight that same morning to Dallas [Texas] and when I called the office of the, of the chamber there, the Mid-City Business Professional Association-- Speaker 1: That was June of '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 1: Oh, you said 2006. Speaker 2: No, sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was June, June of '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: I, I guess, the heat's getting to me (laughter). Rather it was June of '76 [1976] I called the office there and asked the staff had he been, you know, the executive been back, he said, "Oh, yeah. They was really happy to find out about we had some infusion of cash there." And on my way to Dallas to attend a national meeting of the National Business League, which was headed by a guy named Berkely Burrell [Berkeley G. Burrell] out of Washington, D.C., we had chapters around the country, well, when I got into Dallas, I checked into my room and then I got a call that somebody was calling me from Arizona when I was in Dallas for this conference. That was in June of '76 [1976]. Story_ID: 646624 Speaker 1: So you had the, you had the organization straightened out pretty much by now? Speaker 2: Well, I felt we had gained a lot of respect because of some of the things we had done, you know, that were highly visible. We knew we had not moved mountains and there was a lot of things to do but we had gained visibility and respect and the fact that we were, were trying to do some things and had done some things that showed what we could do. And at that time Omaha [Nebraska] had a statement, "Omaha can do," so we fell right into that statement theme that we can do, so here's what we are doing. And at that time too, one of the things that I instituted too, even when I was on the, on the, on the committee, on the committee before I became board, chairman of the board of the committee, I instituted and said, "Hey, we, as businesspeople, you know, you as business entrepreneurs, I know you're busy running your business day to day, but some of the things you need to do is get out and make connections with the larger society in terms of getting jobs for your business and, and like that and expanding your business and making relationship with banks and stuff." And one of the ways I told them you can do this is by serving on different boards and committees and like that, so I started that effort when I was chairman of the political affairs committee. And what had happened was when I came to Omaha, I wanted to get involved and that was my, that was my direction there too, and I just happened to have been there like in two days and I read this paper and I saw this name Mid-City Business Professional Association [sic. Mid-City Business and Professional Association], so I investigated them my first day at work [at Omaha National Bank; First National Bank of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] and a guy told me about it. And I called him up and went to the first meeting and, for a lunch meeting or as and they called me back and asked me would I serve on this political affairs committee, and I said, "Well, yeah, I'll do it." The next meeting I went to--they asked me would I serve as chairman of the committee and I hesitated and said, "Well, yeah, I'll do it" (laughter). So then about six months later, the chairman, the president said, "You know, what? I think that you should put your name in for, you know, chairman of the board." "No, I'm not ready for that, I'll run for, you know, the vice chairman or something," (unclear). "No, no, you gonna make it this year for chairman." So I agreed to--, "Okay, I'll do it," so the nominating committee put me up, so I had become chairman of the board like within six months there, within about eight months, you know, so. Story_ID: 646625 Speaker 1: Are there any other major events in the '70s [1970s] that, that, that you'd like to speak on, as, as we move into the '80s [1980s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --because now your networking skills-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you coined a net- the word isn't coined yet, networking but you're doing it. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I also had become members of the Omaha Jaycees [Omaha Junior Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, Nebraska] and had become active there too. In the '70s [1970s] there were a lot of discussions about, were we falling blacks, were blacks falling back in this country, going backwards under the Richard Nixon administration [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. But one of the things that the Richard Nixon administration black initiative was, you know, black capitalism and stuff, which became sort of controversial and I say I also found it very saddening too because I had an opportunity to look at some of the loans and stuff that was made to some businesspeople and like it--not just, not, not in Omaha but in another city, I won't say where it's at, but anyway I had seen where they were like giving these people loans, black businesspeople, quote, unquote, loans for a hundred percent of what they're looking at and instead of putting into the business they had planned to start or had, they were, a lot of them were going, buying Jaguars with it and stuff, you know, which was very saddening to me, so-- Speaker 1: Let's talk about that for a moment. So you, so you're, you're, you're seeing this going on with the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --with the monies and things, you're getting organizations together that are networking, a lot of, you're, you're, you're chairman of the board [of the Mid-City Business and Professional Association], you're having conferences on what to do about money-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how to, what to do in Corporate America-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and we're moving forward into the '80s [1980s], now, we're going into the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 1: The, the '80s [1980s] are ushering in, what's going on now for you? Speaker 2: For me in the, well, that's, that's a, that's a different story there, in the '80s [1980s]. I was, I came here like I was telling you about in '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: To Arizona? Speaker 2: No, yeah, I came to Arizona in '76 [1976], but in, in June of '76 [1976]-- Speaker 1: And you got here-- Speaker 2: --I was on vacation and I was in Dallas [Texas] at a, at a conference. And I had received a call from a recruiter and who wanted me to come out to Arizona to look at joining a bank out here [Arizona Bank, Phoenix, Arizona]. And I kind of said you must be kidding, in a sense because the only thing I looked at Arizona was rattlesnake, cactus, and dead cow bones, you know, 'cause I had gotten literature from one or both of the state universities here about coming here, applying to graduate school here and I said, "No, no, don't, don't even think about it, you know, coming to Arizona, that's what I heard." And it just didn't seem to fit right. So I said, "Well, I'll fly out," and they offered to spend out--me a couple of days with them and stuff. So I looked around and it was in July when I came here, but one of the things that really struck me was the sunset. And they made me an offer and I talked with them, there were people, and they were saying, "Well, you know, you gonna, you should definitely think seriously about this because Arizona is a growing part of the country even though they had some bumps here recently, the economy, but it's a place that's growing and, you know, another thing too you don't have to worry about snow," you know. So I never liked cold, you know, so even though I could take the heat, but I couldn't take the cold weather when I was growing up a kid, you know, so. I came out here and they made me an offer and at the time where I was in Omaha, Nebraska, we were, the bank [Omaha National Bank; First National Bank of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] was going through some, you know, downsizing and stuff too, you know, because of the economy and also because of the fact like in Omaha and Nebraska, you only could have one bank, you know. You could have some satellite offices where you could take in some money but actually we were located right downtown, so we was being hurt by deposits, you know, going down and some other things too so. After some cajoling from some people and I said, "Well, okay, after thinking it over and looking at it and stuff, I will give it a try." So I moved here August 23, 2076 [sic. 1976]. And I drove from Omaha to Phoenix [Arizona]. Story_ID: 646626 Speaker 1: Okay. So you get to Arizona, you have a new job available for you [at the Arizona Bank, Phoenix, Arizona]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and what do you realize when you get here? Speaker 2: Well, the first thing I did, by that time I say I had discovered how to learn a town real fast. But what my strategy would be, I, I got here at like about 4:00, and 3:30 in the afternoon and the air conditioning in my car had gone out, so it was really hot (laughter). On August the 23rd, I check into this hotel downtown, turn the air conditioning on high blast. One of the first places I went to find out, I stopped at the Urban League [Phoenix Urban League; Greater Phoenix Urban League, Phoenix, Arizona] before five o'clock. Speaker 1: The same day? Speaker 2: Yeah, before five o'clock. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And I kind of wanted to find out about the black population. Early the next morning I checked out to go to the chamber of commerce [Greater Phoenix Chamber of Commerce], you know, the main chamber of commerce and get information on Arizona. And then I know like in every community, you know, two things I wanna find out. I wanna find out about the power structure, find out what the largest bank is, and see who serves on that board, find out what is the most prestigious hospital, and the utility companies, so you can look at who's on those boards, you've pretty well got a feel for the power structure, particularly you see the same person, you know, appearing up on all three of those boards. Story_ID: 646627 Speaker 1: Mr. Perry [HistoryMaker Marvin Perry], so you're involved in Arizona, now you get here, you hit the ground running. Speaker 2: Yes, that's the way I definitely had planned it. And my thoughts was that I wanted to make, you know, contacts and build relationships very fast when I get here for several reasons. One, is when you're new to the place that's when you can get a feel for the lay of the land quicker than any other time because you haven't been cluttered with some other things. I was hired, you know, into move, you know, into the management there, top management or wherever, you know, certainly in the upper middle management (unclear) pretty fast. I wanted to make relationships in the bank [Arizona Bank, Phoenix, Arizona] and outside of the bank real fast so. The other thing in addition to what I was telling you about how you learn a community, there are two other things I know that you can do. One, if you wanna know about the black community some, is to go stop in at a barbershop to get your hair cut so, you know, whether you need one or not you're gonna hear a lot of gossip there. The other thing is if you take a cab ride somewhere, now then you get a gabby cabby, you gonna find out a lot, you know, (laughter) too. Those are informal ways that you can do. Well, I, my first or second day at work, you know, they didn't have much for me to do there because it's orientation and stuff like that. I called up the Urban League [Phoenix Urban League; Greater Phoenix Urban League, Phoenix, Arizona] and a guy had told me that the Urban League man here, headed up, was highly respected in the system, a friend of mine that I had met in Omaha [Nebraska]. And I called him up and we agreed to meet for lunch at one of the private clubs downtown. And he, we ended up missing each other, when I went up on the elevator to meet him, he was downstairs waiting for me and vice versa, so we just gave up that day (laughter) we, it was very frustration. So we did finally get together and we had lunch and talked and stuff and he said, "How you, how you think about serving on my board?" And I said, "Well, that sound very interesting, I'd love to." So I called the head of the human resources department and asked him about the organization and he spoke very, very highly of the CO, Junius Bowman, who was CO of the Urban League at the time, very, very highly of him, conscientious person like that. And, but only thing he had warned me before I came here, not to talk to Junius Bowman about what it was like for a black person to live here, he said 'cause Junius Bowman's wife [Miriam Young Bowman] has a, is very wealthy and he doesn't live the lifestyle (laughter) that most blacks would here, you know, he was telling me. So and I found that out and talked with him. Well, at the bank there, I, I, the match, you know, I was liking Arizona when it was beginning to cool off, other places are cold, I could play tennis and stuff and I'm rubbing that in on people. Story_ID: 646628 Speaker 1: But I began to run into some difficulties there, I guess, part of it was the envy of, of my salary and also of, you know, being black, that obviously played into I'm sure, double trouble there, you know, and stuff, so. Speaker 2: Now, and, and now was this trouble with blacks and whites? Speaker 1: Well, I was mainly dealing with whites, you know, at the, yeah, with whites, but I'm saying so blacks, you know, they knew I was here too, but it was, you know, with some whites there, you know, so that was some challenges there. So as it went on I talked to, you know, top management there and stuff said, "Oh, don't worry about anything, you know, things, we understand that, you know, forget about it." So, as a year later things were not quite progressing as I it wanted to, so things became to sort of a head, it turned kind of ugly like, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was it one particular incident that-- Speaker 1: Well, obviously, yeah, it was, you know, so, at before, you know, it was--everything was an understanding that this, "Everything is okay and we understand that some people gonna take shots at you and like that but don't worry about, you know, we got your back." Well, I don't know, I don't to this day know exactly what went down, but anyway I was called in and they was telling me that, in pretty strong language, that some people was very unhappy with me and I didn't know what I had done, you know, at all, you know. But it was nothing at work particularly, to--much more but something personally like, which wasn't explained to me. So I, then I did something, what no one probably thought I would do and probably not too many employees would do, and I wrote a letter to the chairman of the board, you know, and mentioned the fact I had various concerns about the organization, you know, not to put myself--but also what I was beginning to discover about blacks in general, because I had begun to pick up stories of what was going on with some people, you know. And, you know, just from being out in the community and stuff, so, which was rather unsettling. So they finally get back in touch with me and stuff and, and we had a, a dialogue and reached a, a meaningful decision and stuff to go, you know, ahead and stuff, but things were, were very, very rocky and bumpy there. And the organization, you know, they had a reputation of being very conservative, but conservative doesn't necessarily equate to racism, you know, sometimes people use the word conservatives as a euphemism for racism but the two are not necessarily the same. So I, their philosophy if they're gonna be conservative in lending like that, that was set by the, you know, the, the top officers and the board so, you know, if I could not like working for a conservative institution, go someplace else, the way that my thoughts were. But that didn't bother me at all but it was just that the culture I saw was very anti-black and anti-minority in general so it was a, it was a, a real challenge there, so I began to get very concerned. And interestingly enough I was at a Urban League [National Urban League] convention over in Los Angeles [California], I had been talking to a white couple about moving here and stuff and this lady who was from Phoenix [Arizona] and who had strong relations with the Urban League through a major company she worked with, very respected white woman, and boy she jumps on me something terrible. She said, "You mean--I didn't know you worked for that So and So bank, that's the worst thing in the world." So she was really--lambasted me something terrible, you know, so I wanted to run and crawl under the table-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --like I was guilty of it. "Well, what they did to my friend," you know, her friend was black, "and this and that," you know. So things began to get bad to worse so we came to a parting of ways. So I felt that here I could walk away from this place and go someplace else and make probably, you know, even in Arizona here make some more money and certainly I could, I wanted to go outside of the state where I was--make more money, but I had grown to like it here because the weather and some of the things, you know, too and, and the more relaxed lifestyle and stuff, so I decided that this is a--type of institution, practices need to be redressed, you know, addressed and stuff so, and I decided to challenge them on their employment policies, you know, through a class action suit with the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], you know, complaint. And my thoughts was at the time that hopefully this will go on for maybe two months, I don't think I can move the--I'm, I'm more or less not necessarily a minimalist but thinking that if I can move this needle five degrees not necessarily a hundred eighty degrees, I will have done some good (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mr. Perry [HistoryMaker Marvin Perry], I don't think we've actually mentioned the name, is it okay to mention the, the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Arizona Bank [Phoenix, Arizona]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, Arizona Bank. I said we're, if I can move it a few degrees that would be good, you know, for somebody else I said. You know, come on because this type of institution exists, you got to keep in mind bankers and other executive professionals they meet at the American Bankers Association meeting or with (unclear) whatever, and they can say, "Here's how we handle our race problem. We bring, we'll hire blacks, but we'll make it so difficult for them that they'll leave, you know. So then we go out and we'll say, tell the government agencies," which are not that effective anyway, "'Well, we hire 'em but for some reason they just won't stay,'" you know (simultaneous). Story_ID: 646629 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you filed a lawsuit? Speaker 2: Well, it was a complaint with the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], you know, that, alleging that there was class action, you know, type stuff, so a race, you know, discrimination going on about race. And EEOC, I talked to, you know, that's where my community contacts came into being. I talked to a friend of mine and asked for, who were some lawyers, so he gave me a name of a couple of lawyers that was real good. One of 'em was a guy who was having vision problems, he could not take suits, take, you know, any advice. The other one was a, an attorney who worked for a major law firm, a corporate law firm, but happened to, he had never served as corporate counsel to that organization, and this guy had worked for EEOC. So normally he'd be on the other side of the table, but we talked about some things there and he knew the players at EEOC very well. So there was a guy who I had served on the board of the Urban League [Phoenix Urban League; Greater Phoenix Urban League, Phoenix, Arizona] with and I went to him at EEOC, a black guy, everybody else in the agency was very much saying, "Hey, you know, go for it," you know. And this black guy became, he was the one that, I was shocked that was throwing up a lot of road blocks and stuff. I couldn't understand it. So then finally, you know, I thought we was gonna settle it like within two months, and I had gotten a letter from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and like that, and it didn't settle so they went into an extended investigation. So this guy called me up one day and the way his demeanor was and everything else, it just didn't sit well with me. And he told me that he had the IQ of von Braun [Wernher von Braun], you know, the great missile scientist and stuff like that. So, and he caught me at a time when, I, I, I was not quite at my best that morning, but we talked and stuff and I answered him as much as he could and responded and stuff like that and didn't let him intimidate me at all. So I told my attorney about who the investigator was, he said, "That is bad news," he said. He knew the guy. He said, "That is very bad, and get you another, ask for another investigator." One of the guys who I had worked with at the bank [Arizona Bank, Phoenix, Arizona] had gone to work for EEOC. I told him about it and he said, "That is bad news, you'd be, it's amazing how many, you know, non- cause of non-finding he has written, you know, against brothers and stuff. This guy had the mentality of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]," you know. So I said, "Oh, wow," but I had asked this guy who I knew, and he said, "Oh, the guy, you know, he's good." That just didn't sit right, you know. So what happened was, as it, time go on, well, I wasn't gonna back down, and they were saying they weren't gonna back down, so let's see who's the toughest, you know (laughter). So I did something which they didn't expect me to do, and that was I owned a few shares of stock, I used a shareholder resolution to attack them. So as a shareholder resolution, you know, your resolution go to all the shareholders and this and that, but they really don't like the fact that it goes to Wall Street, you know, and stuff and they gonna have to respond to the shareholder resolution about their practices and stuff and I went through and mentioned the fact that EEOC had found this on them in the past and they just settled a class action suit with Hispanics and this and that, you know, so. And at the same time I went to OFCCP, the office of the federal contract compliance [Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs], so and hit them there, and that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So all sides are being bombarded then? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. And that was like in January about four months later. And then-- Speaker 1: January of what, of what year now? Speaker 2: That was seven- '80 [1980]--that was sixty-- Speaker 1: You're being, you're being-- Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989] now. Speaker 1: --you, you mean, you mean-- Speaker 2: That's '79 [1979] now. Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979], okay. Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979] now, '79 [1979]. Story_ID: 646630 Speaker 1: Yeah, so I was hitting them from several fronts. Then, of course, the media hit it, the television--the newspaper took up the story (snaps fingers) just like that, so all TV stations was covering it too, that this complaint was filed against them. And the worst thing they wanted to do is bad publicity, so then I became very per grat- very hated, you know. But as we continued our advance, you know, and things drew it into a real protracted war there and, you know, I continued to use shareholder resolutions against them and stuff and they really didn't like that, you know (laughter). They hated those shareholder resolutions. Yeah, but the FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation] said, "Oh, no, he's got the legal right to do that and we're willing to back him up in court if you wanna sue to not do this," so. That and then some of them, we finally reached an agreement that we'd settle this shareholder resolution if they would publish certain type of information in their annual report about, you know, what their numbers were and stuff like that. Well, they didn't publish what I had asked them for, but the attorney was an ex-politician so I knew, I was judging him and he was judging me, you know, that he was not an ideologue as the people I was dealing with in management, they were very, you know, right wing conservatives. So we reached an agreement, you know, his attorney pushed them to do that, their attorney did, so we was gonna publish this information. So at the time he wrote this shareholders resolution, I told him he could write it, and he had some stuff in there, I said, "Look, if you leave this stuff in here, I'm not gonna sign it, this, we didn't say--agree to this and--when we spoke." So he had to rewrite it, so when I was, while they was rewriting the shareholders resolution, I took a little time to go to the library and just happened to pick up a magazine, I think it was called society and something, society, anyway, in there, you know, the South Africa began to raise up, an issue in South Africa was raised up about investment in South Africa. They listed the banks who had done business with South Africa and there was the Arizona Bank [Phoenix, Arizona]. I couldn't hardly believe that, you know, this relatively small state bank was doing business in South Africa at the time when the banks, the big banks in New York [New York] was feeling it was too hot, you know, and they was buying computer equipment and I understand it was for [U.S.] military purposes later so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So in the heat of the apartheid-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and, and-- Speaker 1: They were funding-- Speaker 2: --they, they were funding-- Speaker 1: --making loans in South Africa, so. Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Marvin Perry has been able now to add fuel to his, to his-- Speaker 1: Right. So I wrote the chairman of the board, you know, "I'm a shareholder," I said, which they really hated, I said, "Why is the bank, well, listed in here as making loans to South Africa?" He wrote back and said, "I don't know why," he's very, being very disingenuous, "I don't know why," he said. Then I wrote back again, I said, "I want clear, you know, unambiguous statements, you know, about this," you know. And he wrote back another note like that. So at the same time, I had sent off a letter to this magazine and asked them where they got the information from and they told me from this group in New York and--who was monitoring that, monitoring that, so I went directly to them and asked them. I said could they send me some documentation. And they wrote back and described the loans and everything else as made through the Axiom Bank [ph.] and stuff like that. And I went to the Axiom Bank and verified it and stuff. And I brought this to their attention. And then at the next, this was before the next shareholders meeting it was, and The Arizona Republic, the main paper here carried the story that they were going to, I was gonna ask for the chairman's resignation for lying, you know (laughter). So all the media was there, you know, and stuff so. What happened was they was there to ask for me, you know, see me ask his resignation and stuff, so he said at the shareholders meeting, he said, "Marvin have accused me of lying and I wanna ask him to withdraw that, you know, about, I did not lie about what I said," because I had written the guy who owned the major controlling interest in that bank, Burt Edstrom [ph.] of Chicago [Illinois] you know, who was married to the Wrigley family that own the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] and stuff, you know, that family who was involved and, you know, controlling interest in the bank. So I had told him, I said, "Look, I'm not protesting the fact this guy made loans, you know, that they made loans to South Africa, but the fact that he is gonna be disingenuous and actually lie to a shareholder, which in my opinion is illegal," you know. Well, at that next shareholders meeting and he, instead of me questioning him right about the South African resolution, I used that opportunity to ask him about the equal opportunity policy. So I told him I said, "Look," I said, "your vice president of human resources is in here and if you can't answer this question you can direct it to him. Tell me how many black professionals do you have in these departments, you know, like human resource, like trusts, where blacks (unclear), commercial lending, and international loans, those places (unclear)." Well, he finally cut me off like--and I, but he was very frustrated and his voice was breaking and everything else, so (laughter) so he finally told me to sit down so. They were very, very upset with, you know, with that, very upset (simultaneous). Story_ID: 646631 Speaker 1: Did you win the suit (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I won, you know, the complaint. Well, what happened was EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] did file a class action lawsuit against them in court but what would, I know you, let's wrap this up, but one of the things that, you know, as we continued to do our fight, you know, I, attacking them on the CRA, which is the Community Reinvestment Act [Community Reinvestment Act of 1977]. This organization [Arizona Bank, Phoenix, Arizona] had made millions of dollars in loans to South Africa, which it said was for military purposes. At the same time in South Phoenix, which is the minority area of Phoenix [Arizona], they had made only sixteen thousand dollars of loans within like a five year period. Speaker 1: Sixteen thousand dollars? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Out of a portfolio of like about five hundred million or something, sixteen thousand. So I get them and ask them about that. A reporter from the Business Journal [Phoenix Business Journal] came up to me and, you know, the Business Journal, at that time was very conservative, it was owned by The Arizona Republic, very conservative paper. And this guy told me he wanted to interview me about this. And he came up to me and he said, I said, "I wanna see your identification to make sure," and he showed the identification from the public safety, and I didn't realize reporters had to get security, so I was like, "Oh, wait a minute, is he a spy or something?" But he told me, he said, "Look I wanna write an article that shows these people as being very racist," a white guy. And, and he, he did, he wrote this big front page article, I was gonna bring it and show you, about that and that was devastating to them, you know, because now they've had, not just black but whites, you know, big people was calling that paper went to the people. So at the end they get ridiculed and everything got so the pressure was really coming down and they fought back, they brought lawsuits against me and stuff like that and this and that too but I won 'em, you know, and everything so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now [HistoryMaker] Marvin Perry is, is-- Speaker 2: A person, very persona non grata (laughter). Speaker 1: --and, and, and he is a known, I mean, people, he's known in the community, now he's come into Arizona in a few-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --years and he's stirred the pot so to speak. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Story_ID: 646632 Speaker 1: And I can tell you one other thing, which I think is interesting to know. Well, at the same time these things were coming out, I was talking to the (air quotes) quote, unquote, black leaders, and strangely enough I wasn't able to get any of them interested in it, so what was going on with South Africa and the fact they was making loans, not making loans for businesses and like that in the community. So I talked to a Hispanic senator, state senator for about thirty seconds, he says, "(Unclear) what you're talking about, so let's talk." So I talked with him and he was very interested. Then I finally said, "Look, this is something, you know, in terms of the lending practices and South Africa, you know, this is a not a bucket I should be carrying, other people should be carrying it because they gonna say I have an axe to grind." I went to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and every place else, none of them wanted to hear to it, so. Speaker 2: And, and no one really helped you (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, they did not, no, not really. But one guy who was their executive director did try to help and they got rid of him. Speaker 2: You think it was fear for, for the status quo? Speaker 1: It was fear and ignorance, you know, and then you get the superstition too that I might get a lot of money out of it too, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you had those things to all working in. Well, one day I said I'm going to the civil liberties union and I went by the, the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union of Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona] and knocked on their door and nobody was in, so I went right across the hall and sat, to a group, group called ACORN [Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now] and, and I was asking them about when would somebody be in at the Arizona civil liberties union. And they said, "Well, they don't keep regular hours." So now, I'm looking at the wall and I saw that they had been protesting different things, utility rates and, and I sat down and started talking to the guy and what I was concerned with, he said, "That's very interesting, very interesting, I didn't, you know, realize that but let me talk to our home office and I, I'll get back in touch with you in a couple of days." A couple of days I got back in touch with him, they had already studied up on the CRA [Community Reinvestment Act of 1977] and other stuff and what they did they started putting together this coalition to sue the bank [Arizona Bank, Phoenix, Arizona] and they also put together a march, they kept it quiet, but they brought a major march down, and these were not blacks, and these were whites, mainly, you know, Hispanics, and a mixture of people. And they had these signs protesting the bank's loans and stuff and I think they had a board meeting going on (laughter) at the same time. The president could not answer any questions and he did a really poor job. So now they was getting pressure from white groups, you know, and stuff, so that was really devastating. Speaker 2: So their overall policies are now being exposed on both sides of the fence (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, they was double teaming but, you know, like I said the blacks were more or less you get things like well, you know, I might, can I get two hundred dollars for my dinner next year or something like that. (Laughter) You're more concerned with something like that. Story_ID: 646633 Speaker 1: You've got a knack of networking you-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you've, you've learned how to network and how to put, to find out what's going on. So you started, you start something called the Black Board of Directors Project? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, during the same time, I had talked to the bank [Arizona Bank, Phoenix, Arizona] about putting minority on their board, in which they did do, put a Hispanic on their board there named Ronnie Lopez. And, and I started talking about, "Hey, you know, more blacks--," this is something I had done in Omaha [Nebraska], and I started talking to black leaders about, you know, "this is something, we should do this, I was persona non grata so I'm not the person to do it," you know. Started talking about putting blacks on different boards and stuff. And finally a friend of mine who worked for a company called Greyhound [ph.] who was an attorney, he said, "Look, these people are not gonna do anything, if it's gonna happen you gonna have to do it yourself." So the first year we did it, and we brought, had a dinner where we brought in a guy named Charles Duncan [HistoryMaker Charles T. Duncan], which was an excellent choice 'cause Charles Duncan was on the board of Eastman Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company] and TRW [TRW, Inc.] and Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company] and like that. Gave a great presentation about corporate boards and stuff, so that was '84 [1984]. Then, you know, of course, the other thing which you saw to is there was a need for blacks not just on the corporate boards but also on other boards too where they're gonna make major impact. Plus, a person who normally serve on a corporate board is somebody who had done their tutelage on, on little boards, nonprofits, governmental boards, commissions, who is really known in the community and has risen to the top of their profession or business-- Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this. Now you've had, you had had experience on boards? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you think that a lot of, a lot of the black, black professionals were unaware of the, of the power of sitting on a board? Speaker 2: Very much so, very, very much so. Yeah, very much so. Now, the only thing they could understand now, that on corporate boards you got paid some money. When I, I wish I had never mentioned that early because that's about the only thing they, "Oh, I wanna be on this board because it, it, you know, I can get some money from it," you know. But no they, they were almost totally unaware of that. Speaker 1: Who were some of the first people that you placed, Arizonians on boards or you helped get on boards? Speaker 2: Well, you know, they, the first year what we did is went through and identified about thirty, it was kind of done more of a kind of a, a discussion piece about thirty people we profiled. And we sent that to different corporations and other people. One of the first people who served on a corporate government board was a lady called Janice Carson [ph.]. I remember that time, we got her on the board of Logan Developmental Corporation [sic. Logan Development Corporation, Surprise, Arizona], which make loans to a lot of small businesses, including minority businesses. So that was like in '84 [1984] we did that and then some others too. So we saw a need to continue that effort and stuff. And I always say I'm gonna do it for one more year, you know, (laughter) but one thing, you know, led to another. And then another thing too we saw that when we were dealing with a lot of the major nonprofits and government boards, and commission, and some of the people we were reaching out to really didn't have any idea of what a board was, excuse me, and what they're supposed to do so. We started doing a couple of things, one is bringing people in to teach them about what the roles and responsibilities were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Education. Speaker 2: Yeah, education. And also one of the characteristics of a good board member is somebody who knows the community and are known in the community, so we started giving them a lot more visibility and stuff like that in the community and stuff (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So far, so far what has been the placement rate since '84 [1984] when this-- Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984]-- Speaker 1: 'Til now. Speaker 2: Well, the people we had in '84 [1984] was, a lot of them were already on different boards. Starting in '85 [1985] let's say, everybody who have participated in that, has been given an invitation to serve on a number of boards and most of them have accepted it, you know, to serve on different boards so. Speaker 1: Would you have a number of approximately how many you may have-- Speaker 2: Placed? Yeah, our calculation would be now about sixteen to seventeen hundred placements. Now, keep in mind that's over this twenty-four year period. During that time, you know, there is gonna be rotation of the boards and stuff like that and there are gonna be some people who unfortunately are not with us anymore or some people left the state and like that so. Speaker 1: Now, you-- Speaker 2: --we did that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you were very, you were very busy in placing these boards, in placing people on these boards-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and identifying new Arizonians coming into the town you, you seem to have a knack, not just for placing but knowing who got to town? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Can you explain that briefly? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I, I, you know, one of the things is that we get referrals from different employers and from previous members and just from people in general. And then, you know, as I circulate around to, I meet some people on our own and stuff like that so that has fed into it to, you know. Speaker 1: So would, so would you just say it's, it's a matter of being out there? Speaker 2: Part of it is being out there and if we see somebody that we think that is going to be beneficial, you know, can, can benefit from the organization, we're gonna go after them too, you know, we might see somebody in the Business Journal [Phoenix Business Journal] that they just been promoted to sit in this place that we don't know about or something that we look for. And one of the things we look for people, you know, who first of all they gotta have, you know, good character we're looking for, and not somebody we can do a FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] check on those, but people who have those (unclear) check too, but we have people who are gonna be able to handle confidential information and conduct themselves in a professional manner in meetings and stuff like that to add to the organization. But we scan the waterfront for, for good people. Story_ID: 646634 Speaker 1: Now, since the '80s [1980s] you've been on several boards, you served on, on, served from '93 [1993] to '99 [1999] on, on the, on the United Way board [Valley of the Sun United Way, Phoenix, Arizona]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you were on that board. You-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you're a founding member of the ASU, Arizona State University college extended [Arizona State University College of Extended Education Dean's Council]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you founded that board. Speaker 2: One of the founding members, yeah. Speaker 1: And you served on various--Scottsdale Cultural Council [Scottsdale Arts, Scottsdale, Arizona], now, so at the same time that you've been placing people-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you've also been very active, doing-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) your own work. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So at this point in your life now, what's the next step for you logically? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I'm trying to figure that one out (laughter). I guess my thought is, I grew up on a farm [in Garvin County, Oklahoma] as I said. And one of the things that we did is we always believe in never stop working, you know. The only time you stop working is when they, when you got ready to go to heaven, you know (laughter). But I, I am not as--on as many boards as I used to be on, and part of it is so I can do some other things but I'm looking to transition out of what I'm doing and hand the reins to someone else here, you know, in the future and like that. I'm looking at it 'cause there are some other things that I'm going to be looking at doing too and some facets of the Black Board of Directors Project, I would like to take and build on, you know. And one of those is the annual retreat that we have, I'd like to build on that (simultaneous). Story_ID: 646635 Speaker 1: Mr. Perry [HistoryMaker Marvin Perry], what would be your aspirations for African Americans in business and in general in the future? Speaker 2: I think that's sort of like the last frontier for black--fulfilling the aspiration of quote unquote, dream, if I may say, is in the, still in the area of economics, you know. You know, I have seen blacks, you know, whites and other groups too, start businesses in the last fifteen years and have gone on to become billionaires. I asked some people a question, I say now, what if Google [Google Inc.], if, if Google--the people who started Google were black and the people who started Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] were black? And we'll just maybe throw in one of the, you know, major companies (unclear), how much impact would that give us in this society? But, yeah, so the thing that we've got to do is be more forward thinking and also more expansive thinking, you know, more creative in what we're gonna do in the economic sphere and, and looking at how different things relate, how politics relates to economics, how university--you, you know, transfer of technology relates to economics and political power and like that. Yeah, and I think we got to look at certainly, it's okay to look at it from a personal point of view but we're gonna have to look at it as from a group perspective too, you know, to change the playing field. Story_ID: 646636 Speaker 1: What would you say is your legacy? Speaker 2: I never think about that. I never, I do not, you know, that's up to others to judge, you know. All I wanna do is the best I can do, and do what I think is right, and that's the greatest satisfaction I can have. If some people say it was good, you know, that warms your heart. And as Bush [President George Walker Bush] said, (unclear) as Bush said, everybody wanna be loved, you know, I guess, (laughter) you know, but that's not really the most important thing, the most important thing is that I do what I think is right and in the, if brocades [sic. accolades] come with it, that's really nice. If the brickbats come, which you expect, that's the way it is, you know. But long as I have felt in my heart I've done what is, what I think is right that's the only thing I'm concerned about. Story_ID: 646637 Speaker 1: And how do you want [HistoryMaker] Marvin Perry to be remembered? Speaker 2: I don't ever think about that because I don't have control over that, you know, at all, I don't control it--that's up for others to, to judge and, and that's not, in my opinion that important. It's important what I do. And, and hopefully my work will be, stand for itself and I think everybody would like to see, you know, seeing positive about themselves but the main thing is I'm not gonna know it so I'm not worried about that. Story_ID: 646638 Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for young people in Corporate America, or people in, that might wanna sit on boards-- Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and just the community involvement in general? Speaker 2: I'm gonna talk about Corporate America. I think it's very important, you know, to build those relationships inside of the corporation and outside the corporations. And those relationships you build are not necessarily gonna be with blacks let's say, if you're a black person, but I think it's extremely important to build those relationships with people who have the power in the corporation and those are mainly whites, you know. And to build those friendships and relationships with those people if you're looking at moving up the corporate ladder. And the person many times that you build relationships with is not gonna necessarily be somebody who is that fond of black folks, but the fact is they might like you or something, and many times they're gonna help you. There's a statement that nobody ever makes it, you know, on their own and I think that's very true in the world and, and generally in the work world but particularly true in the corporate world as you move higher up the ladder. Speaker 1: Is there one-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --last parting shot that you'd like to tell, the one last comment that you'd like to say if you could? Speaker 2: I, I, I think that you wanna be involved in the community, be involved in the community 'cause there's an old adage that you do good to live well. And for the young person who, particularly like in their late twenties and early thirties, mid-thirties, this is a good opportunity when you are serving on different boards and you're not getting paid or anything like that at all, but it's invaluable in terms of the skills you learn, in terms of becoming a more broad gauged person, you know, your skills of leadership and stuff like that is very important. And that's an excellent way to market yourself to not only within that corporation but with change going on now, also in the broader corporate world. Studies after studies have shown that people who keep the grind- nose to the grindstone, generally are not gonna get as far number one. And number two, if their job is eliminated, it's gonna take them much longer to get another one. Speaker 1: So is [HistoryMaker] Marvin Perry saying to get involved? Speaker 2: Get involved, uh-huh, you (unclear) for yourself, and also for, you know, the, the community, the betterment of humankind hopefully a little bit of that too. Speaker 1: Mr. Perry, I wanna thank you for this interview (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you very much. Speaker 1: It's been wonderful and very enlightening. Speaker 2: Thoroughly enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Thank you very much (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you. Story_ID: 646639 Speaker 1: Oh, looking at that picture there and looking at the glasses that I'm wearing, I'm gonna assume that I probably was in my late twenties, probably around, somewhere around '72 [1972] or something like that I'm, I'm going to guess that was probably about the time it was taken. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Seventy--yeah, about '71 [1971] or '72 [1972]. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You want me--(unclear). That's a picture of my brother, John [John Perry], who is with his red Mustang [Ford Mustang] and that is gonna be about nineteen sixty--I wanna say it's probably about 1967, around that time there. And that's was taken down at my, my mother [Adeller Miles Perry] and father's home. At that time my mother would have been deceased, but we were down there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: That's me standing between my two sisters, on my left is Nova [Nova Perry] and on the right I think that's, that's Freddie [Freddie Perry]. So that was the time I received my master's degree in 1971 [from Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 2: That would have been taken at the same time and-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's the same one? Speaker 2: No, it's a different one (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 2: In 1971 when I got my master's degree, on my left is my sister, Roggie [Roggie Perry Fisher], and on my right is my brother, John. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Next. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That would have been taken somewhere around 1970, early--probably 1971 in Boston, Massachusetts, at my apartment I had. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: I think that was taken probably about '77 [1977] at a place I had in Omaha, Nebraska, I believe, looking at the bookshelf and the place there, it was a high rise apartment that I was living in, so I think that would have been taken around '75 [1975] or '76 [1976] probably. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Speaker 2: That was taken, I believe, at my parents' home there. And one of those pictures is my father [Raymond Perry, Sr.] and his grandkids. And I believe in the back there that maybe one of the kids, but these were mainly my father's and mother's grandkids there with him. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: That was taken in nineteen seventy--let's see, probably 1970, around Thanksgiving in 1970 at my sister, Freddie's home. And there I'm holding her son, Elton [Elton Milton]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's my sister, Roggie, there, and--probably in her home or at my parents' home, my father's home, I think. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Speaker 2: That was probably taken in the early '90s [1990s]. I am at an event and I'm talking with a guy who is with the City of Phoenix [Arizona], a employee there, a manager there in the City of Phoenix we were talking at a reception. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was taken in February of 2006 at a place called The Phoenician [Scottsdale, Arizona], and Phoenician resort, and we were attending a banquet there put on by a society of the, of lawyers there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: That's my wife [Roberta Dawson Perry], of course, on the side there, but not at that time. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): There you go. If you could just hold it in the margin, there you go (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. That was taken in 1976 I would say. A guy with the metropolitan Omaha chamber of commerce [Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce] is giving me a certificate at a breakfast meeting. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. One second, hold it. Okay. Good. I got a tricky one for you there. Speaker 2: Upside down. He, he-- Speaker 1: Here's how I'm gonna do it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) He's got it, he's got it, oh, there he goes, got it. Speaker 1: Oh, this is one of my militant, this is what I wanna say militant ones, surprising article here (laughter). It dropped down-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: --on the counter. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, no. I forgot, that's a good, that's a good position, okay. Hang on for one second. Sir, you need to tell us about this one. Speaker 1: This would have been taken my junior year in high school [Elmore City High School; Elmore City-Pernell High School, Elmore City, Oklahoma], so it would have been about 1960, '61 [1961], when I was a junior there...