 Story_ID: 171896 Speaker 1: So I [Julieanna Richardson] want to have you state and spell your name and give your date of birth and today's date? Speaker 2: My name is Randall Pinkston, R-A-N-D-A-L-L, P-I-N-K-S-T-O-N. Date of birth is March 3, 1950. Today's date is Monday, August 25, 2014. Speaker 1: Okay. And our location? Speaker 2: We are in New York City, 4 Time Square, Skadden [Arps]-- Speaker 1: Arps. Speaker 2: --law offices, 20, 38th Floor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Room 228. Speaker 1: That's good. Got a good memory there. Speaker 2: Well, it's short term (laughter). Speaker 1: And then, you know, I forgot to ask your place of birth-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --also. Speaker 2: There's a joke about that which I won't tell you, burn your tape. My place of birth is Yazoo County, Mississippi. On my birth certificate it says Holly Bluff [Mississippi], H-O-L-L-Y, separate word, B-L-U-F-F. But some people told me years later that I was not born in Holly Bluff, that I was born in the county. So outside Holly Bluff is the accurate place of birth in Yazoo County. Speaker 1: Well now what's the difference then between, you know, outside of the-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, Holly Bluff is a municipality, shall we say, and where I was born was not inside--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Inside. Speaker 2: --Holly Bluff proper, it was in the county but it was the nearest town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So in those days you were, your place of birth was the nearest town. Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a journalist. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 171897 Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Lemon meringue pie (laughter). Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Saint Martin [West Indies]. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Learn the lesson and find the blessing. Speaker 1: I don't think we have that-- Speaker 2: That's original, that's mine. Speaker 1: Oh, I was gonna say, oh, that's lovely. That's lovely. Story_ID: 171898 Speaker 1: So I wanna start out by asking you about your father and what his name and year of birth and what you know about his background? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, you don't have that sheet, where it says father there's a blank. That's because my father was not part of my life. I mean I know who he is, I know his name, I know his background but for my purposes, my father was my granduncle, Warren Wallace [ph.]. He was a carpenter. He grew up in Yazoo County [Mississippi], later moved to Jackson [Mississippi] with my, you know, I told you I had two moms, so the, my birth mom gave me to my grandaunt mom who raised me with her husband, Warren, from, I was six months old. Speaker 1: Can, can I-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --ask this question? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: So your great, you said your great-aunt mom or your great-- Speaker 2: Grand-aunt meaning-- Speaker 1: Grand. Speaker 2: --meaning my grandmother's sister. Speaker 1: Grandma. So your grandmother, so you were raised by your-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) my grandmother's sister and her husband. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) grandmother's sister and her husband. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And their names? Speaker 2: Warren Wallace and Lucy Wallace [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you, before I get to that, let me have the name of your birth mother too. Speaker 2: Clementine Lamb [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Clementine Pinkston Lamb [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, so you-- Speaker 2: But you meant her birth at the time, her name at the time or her name now? Speaker 1: Her name, both names. Speaker 2: Okay, now it's Clementine Davis, my stepfather is Edward Davis [ph.], yeah. Story_ID: 171899 Speaker 1: So, with the Wallaces-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you, they take, you are raised by them once you're six months, years, six months-- Speaker 2: From six months forward, yes. Speaker 1: --forward. Speaker 2: So can you tell me about them, their background? Speaker 1: Oh, well Lucy Pinkston Wallace [ph.], the daughter of the picture of the-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: --original matriarch that I showed you, the one who was born in 1878. Anyway she is Annie Brown Pinkston's [ph.] oldest daughter. Annie Brown Pinkston born in 1878 in Copiah County [Mississippi], Lucy born in 19, 1896 in Yazoo County [Mississippi]. She always aspired to go to school but circumstances only allowed her to finish, I think, seventh grade, sixth, or seventh grade. She was, for all practical purposes, a domestic. I mean she was a cook, she worked in hotels, she worked as a private, a maid. Mostly in Jackson [Mississippi], some work in Yazoo County, a little bit I think in Vicksburg [Mississippi]. But by the time I came along she was in her fifties and she had been ill. She had, so she had stopped work in the '40s [1940s], moved back to the country to rebuild her health. That's when she got to know, well, she already knew my mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)], but they became sort of close, aunt and niece, and then supported my mother's going to school, going to college. And my mother, my grandaunt mom moved to Jackson--back to Jackson in the mid '40s [1940s] with my dad, my uncle, my granduncle [Warren Wallace (ph.)]. She got a job, I think working for a family. I'm not quite sure what she was doing but some kind of domestic work. He was a construction worker, Hod Carriers Union [International Hod Carriers and Building Laborers' Union]. And lived in rental housing, first on Hamilton Street, two houses on Hamilton Street, and then later on Church Street in Jackson. Attended, well they were members of Central United Methodist Church [Jackson, Mississippi]. Well, at the time it wasn't United 'cause they had not combined with congregational, so they were the Central Methodist Episcopal Church on, on Farish Street, and that was my first church, Central Methodist Church. And they, when it came time for me to go to school, they had to become my legal guardians. My dad wanted to adopt me but my mom wanted me to keep her family's name. So they became my legal guardians, not my adopted parents. Speaker 2: Oh, I see. So, if they had adopted you then you would--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I would have been a Wallace. Speaker 2: Wallace. And so they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And in fact a lot of people thought, because they, you know, Lucy Wallace, Warren Wallace, Central, they thought my last name was Wallace but it never was. Story_ID: 171900 Speaker 1: [HM] Randall [Pinkston], what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest memory growing up was in Yazoo County [Mississippi] in the house where I was born, sitting on someone's lap, I think it was my grandaunt mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)], but in the room was my mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)], and my great-grandmother [Annie Brown Pinkston (ph.)], and I named everyone. I said, "You are Clemmy [ph.]," that's my mother. I said, they called her Clemmy, "And you're Mama," that's the person, my grandaunt mom, 'cause that's what I called her. And Lord forgive me, "And you are Mammy," and I called my great-grandmother Mammy for a long time until I understood that was not a nice name but she didn't make me stop calling her that. And, oh, "And you are a Mae [ph.]," I think my grandmother was there, Mae was my mother's mother but I think she was there, but I remember my mother and my great-grandmother and my grandaunt and I named them, in that room on that day, that's one memory. The other memory I have-- Speaker 1: So how old were you, you think? Speaker 2: Maybe, maybe three, maybe, three plus maybe. I was very young. I also remember sitting on a man's lap on the front porch of that house. And I asked my mother, I said, "I don't really remember papa." See, so papa was my great-grandmother's husband, Moses Pinkston [ph.]. I said, "I don't really remember much about him but I seem to remember sitting on his lap and we were on the porch and it seems like I was to the right of the door." She said "That's where he used to sit." So you, if he was outside on the porch, that's where he would sit. He didn't, there was a lot of room to the left but there was a little on the, if you're facing the house on the right, and he would sit there and he didn't talk, and I don't remember him talking to me, anyway. She said, "So if that's what you remember, you probably were sitting on his lap." So I, those are my two earliest memories in the house where I was born. Story_ID: 171901 Speaker 1: So what was life like in the Wallace household as you're growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know, financially we were poor. But I don't think I was really aware of it because I, my memories that I got everything that I needed and maybe, and I know that they stretched, I had, mobility issues. I had to have special shoes. My left leg was weaker than my right leg. Speaker 1: It was weaker? Speaker 2: Weaker, yeah. And so the doctor told my mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] to make sure that I was always in a, on a toy or something that would make me use my legs. So they bought, very expensive tricycle, very expensive, I had, my car, the pedal car that I had, had a chain. Now the, the, the cheaper cars had rods but I had a chain to make sure that I could maximize the use. So I would go up and down the street in my little hot rod. I have a picture of that, I can't, I couldn't find everything, me and my little hot rod with the number five on it. It was orange. I had a wagon, a Radio Flyer Wagon. So they took very, very good care of me. I knew my neighbors because mom was, I told you she'd been ill and so by the time I was like three-ish or four-ish, she be, she fell into poor health again. So she couldn't really, if she would send me to the store at a like four or five years old but she couldn't go herself, so she would have her neighbors watch out for me as I'm walking from our house to the store at the other end of the block. Mrs. Johnson [ph.], Mrs. Elizabeth [ph.], and she would call 'em, "Okay, yeah, Billy just passed, just passed the house." "All right, he should be back in a minute," and, Mr. Gates [ph.] was the grocer and anyway, so. It was a very supportive kind of environment, not just in our house but on the block, you know. Speaker 1: Now you use the term Billy? Was that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what mama called-- Speaker 1: She called you Billy. Speaker 2: Yeah. Nobody called me Willie in my family. That was my given name on my birth certificate. Speaker 1: Was Willie? Speaker 2: Willie, yeah. That's what the W stood for. Speaker 1: So it's W. Randall-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Pinkston. Speaker 2: But I stopped using that as soon as I left Mississippi. And my, my, my mother and my great-grandmother [Annie Brown Pinkston (ph.)] and my sisters and cousins and my uncle was "Ran" for Randall. Story_ID: 171902 Speaker 1: So are you raised essentially as an only child? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But in Lucy [Wallace (ph.)] and Warren's [Wallace (ph.)] house, yes. But I also lived for about a year and a half with my mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)] when Lucy became very ill, she couldn't take care of me, I was about like maybe five, not quite ready for school. So I lived in the country with my mother and great-grandmother [Annie Brown Pinkston (ph.)], and sister, and cousin, who was like a sister, is like a sister, from say maybe five and a half until six and, how old was I? Maybe seven, six, seven, seven years old in Yazoo County in Holly Bluff [Mississippi]. First, my very first school was in the middle of a cow pasture. Speaker 1: And that's with your, you're living with your mother-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at this point? Speaker 2: Hall Elementary School [ph.]. Speaker 1: And is your mother-- Speaker 2: She's a teacher. Speaker 1: She's a teacher. Okay. So how was it living your mother versus living with the Wallaces? Speaker 2: Well that was also, it took adjustments because remember I'm a city kid, I got sidewalks, I go down the street to the store to get a popsicle. I go a little bit further around the corner with my dad to get a bag of peanuts. Central Methodist Church [Jackson, Mississippi] is up the street right next to the ice cream parlor, so when we leave church we get an ice cream cone. Okay, that's the life in Jackson [Mississippi], within like a one block radius of my house that's, all of that's there. I go out to the country, oh my God, nothing, you know. I'm sitting there on the porch crying looking at the cars going by wishing I could go back home (laughter). That's, can you imagine a little five year old, it's, was, was a shock. But my great-grandmother and my mother and by now I have a younger sister and then my cousin, who was older, my, who was being raised by my great-grandmother, we all are in the same house and it's very loving there too, it's just a different kind of space. And then up the road we have my aunt, and her husband, they were, they owned the, the, the land. So that was the other thing that I was blessed about. I didn't live on, I didn't live in a, in a farm, on a farm that was owned by a plantation owner, it was my grand-uncle and his wife who owned the property. I used to beg them to let me pick cotton and they would say no, you don't know how. And so finally they let me do it one time and, and I didn't really enjoy the experience, and didn't have to do it again. Had I been living on someone else's property it would have been a whole different deal, you know. So, it was, it was a different kind of, of loving environment but it, it took a little getting used too. Speaker 1: So but you were there only, what a year and a half? Speaker 2: Year and a half-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --about maybe two. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) and then-- Speaker 2: Yeah, like first grade and a little bit before first grade. Speaker 1: And then you moved back--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I moved back to Jackson. Speaker 1: --with, with the Wallaces. And you're there for-- Speaker 2: The rest of-- Speaker 1: The rest of-- Speaker 2: --the rest of their lives. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Except, you know, for visits. I mean I would spend summers with my mother and my sister. And once I got a paper route I couldn't spend the whole summer, I would just spend a couple of weeks. So like maybe from twelve years on I never was in Yazoo [County, Mississippi] for more than two weeks at a time. Story_ID: 171903 Speaker 1: So, what sights, smells and--sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, if it's the country, if it's Yazoo [County, Mississippi], it's the smell of dirt when it rains or a fireplace when it's cold, the crackling. We didn't have, we didn't have butane tanks, we had a wood burning stove and a wood burning heater. And that leaves a very distinctive odor in, in, in the house. If it's Jackson [Mississippi], at times I, I have this memory of my mother, my grandaunt mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)], her perfume. She had a couple of, I don't wanna say Arpege, one of those, you know. And, and every now and then she would be able to go to church [Central Methodist Church, Jackson, Mississippi], and so that's when she would use her perfume, I remember that. The, the peanut place on Farish Street. You could smell it before you got there because he roasted them and the door was open and there was this big vat that they cooked them. Across the street was the Alamo Theatre [Jackson, Mississippi]. They sold these delicious hot dogs and hamburgers, which you could also smell even though you couldn't buy it at that, you know, necessarily. Yeah, those are some of the aural, A-U-R-A-L, memories that's I have. Speaker 1: And then what about sounds? Speaker 2: Ah, sounds. Well, the radio is one of the most prominent sounds that I remember. We didn't have a television initially but we had, always had a radio. And in the country with my great-grandmother [Annie Brown Pinkston (ph.)], the radio went on at six o'clock as a way of waking us up. But what I began to become aware of was that the person talking was talking about farm stuff, soybeans, pork bellies, the price of commodities, I now know. At the time I didn't know what the heck he was talking about but I listened, I had to. And then the news because my great-grandmother was very, very, very into like reading newspapers and listening to the news. Same thing with Lucy in Jackson. We listened to WJDX AM 620, which was an NBC affiliate, and they had news on the hour. So at eight o'clock every morning it was Russ Ward. At 6:00 or 6:30 in the evening it was Morgan Beatty, Morgan Beatty's 'News of the World,' I think. Later when we got a television we watched the NBC affiliate, WLBT, and so we saw Huntley-Brinkley ['The Huntley-Brinkley Report'] and John Chancellor. On Sundays it was always religious music, and sermons. And I didn't really get a chance to listen to, you know, rock-n-roll and stuff until I figured out how to get control of the radio at night after my folks were up in the front of the house and I would play with the dial and get skips with WLAC in Nashville [Tennessee], WDIA in Memphis [Tennessee]. The R & B station in Jackson went off at sundown, WOKJ, back in those days, so if you didn't hear it during the day, you didn't hear it. Story_ID: 171904 Speaker 1: Oh, there's this one sound, I kind of connect that to my curiosity about broadcasting. I was--we had this wooden radio with, that was battery operated, beautiful wooden cabinet and I don't know where that, I kept, kept up with it for a long time and I lost it somehow, but in any event, so dad [Warren Wallace (ph.)] and I are in the living room listening to the radio and I'm, I wanna say this is 1954 before I went to, to live with my mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)] or it may have been '56 [1956] when I, I came back at some point I, somewhere in the '50s [1950s], and I'm listening to the radio and I hear the sound like a boom, cannon or I didn't know it was a canon but it was this big loud sound, and then it happened again. And then I, I realized that I could hear it outside on the, like right the door 'cause it was a small house and so you walked out on the porch and you could hear it, and I went out to the sidewalk and now I can't hear the radio but I can still hear the cannon. So I come back in and I hear it on the radio and I go back out and it's on the sidewalk and I said, dad well what was, what is that? He tells me that they're firing a cannon up on the grounds of the state capitol. I lived the, the first house, the first two houses where we lived were on Hamilton Street which terminated at the state capitol in Jackson [Mississippi]. And so I later figured out that they were inaugurating the governor. It may have been [James Plemon] J.P. Coleman, I'm not sure. I think it was J.P. Coleman 'cause that was the governor when I was a small child. And so I always remembered oh, that was on the radio, so now I'm trying to figure out how a real sound gets into that box. You know, I eventually figured it out. But that was, that was my, the beginning of my curiosity about broadcasting. Story_ID: 171905 Speaker 1: You're essentially in many ways around a lot of older people. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --they're gonna, so what are you learning about the world? I mean they're--do you have chores? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: What role does church life play? Speaker 2: Very important. Speaker 1: Okay. So, can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Okay. I did have chores, and I had to do things a very specific way, and that was under the tutelage of mama Lucy [Wallace (ph.)], who as I said that was born in 1896, had been a maid, and worked in hotels, and she was a fabulous cook. She didn't make me learn how to cook but I did have to wash dishes. If we were doing the laundry, this was before the days of these auto, you, these automatic washing machines, we had the old wringer type where you put the clothes in it and then you had to run it through the, the squeeze thing-- Speaker 1: (Inaudible Response) Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: To squeeze out the water. Speaker 2: To squeeze the water out, right. And then you, you took the clothes to the bathtub to rinse them out. You always had to put bluing in the water. People don't know what bluing is now, but there was this blue stuff that either made the clothes smell fresh or whatever. And when you hung them out, the sheets had to go together, the pillow cases had to go together, you just couldn't just willy-nilly hang stuff any, any old way. And if, well, I figured that out once because I hung stuff willy-nilly and she, even though she wasn't feeling great, went down the steps and rehung everything (laughter). And said, "Billy this is how you hang clothes up," you know. You had to look a certain way. So, yeah they were very much into what was appropriate, what was proper. We, as I said, you know, we were financially poor but in terms of, what's that word, you use, we were, we, when you wanna do better-- Speaker 1: Aspirational. Speaker 2: Thank you, yes. Oh, aspirationally, definitely middle class or, or higher. Her template for what a little boy should look like or do was based on what she had seen her bosses do with their children in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s], and how they dressed them. And so, when she could save up the money, I wasn't getting clothes from the dollar store, I would be going to Parisian [Jackson, Mississippi] which was, you know, sort of a middle end shop but for us it was really high end. We never got to Kennington's [Jackson, Mississippi] or Emporium [Jackson, Mississippi] but that was her, so if you bought something, you bought something to last. So that was what mom taught. Story_ID: 171906 Speaker 1: Dad [Warren Wallace (ph.)] had his requirements as well. As I said, he was a construction worker, so he taught me the sizes of nails and different kinds of screwdrivers, Phillips-head, straight head, you know, I forget the names of the hammers, different saws. And I would be his assistant to bring him things. You know, don't bring him an eight nail when he wants a sixteen, or a finish nail when he wants a tack (laughter). And he was very slow but methodical, and when he did something, I mean there are things that he made that, that are still in Yazoo City [Mississippi] today and they're at least forty years old, and you could stand on 'em and beat the crap out of 'em and you really have to work to take 'em apart. So I would, he would, he also was very specific about the way he ironed his clothes. Now this is before the days of spray starch, so you had to dip your clothes in starch, after you rinsed them, you dipped them in starch and then you would hang them up, they would dry. And then to iron them, you'd have to sprinkle them to, to make them wet. And you had to have a very, very hot iron, you, you know, to put some power behind it and but when you put it on you, the, the shirt would stand up, so or the trousers. And so I saw him do that and so that's how I learned how to iron. I have this thing about my shirts have to be, and I got that from him. Same thing with his shoes, you know. Gotta be spit polished. Story_ID: 171907 Speaker 1: In terms of intellectual, you know, learning stuff, mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] went only to sixth grade but she remembered almost everything she learned. And one of her books was the McGuffey, McGuffey Reader, McGuffey, must, it's McGuffey or McGruder Reader [sic, McGuffey Readers]. And, and that's where she had all of these sayings, like, "Good, better, best, never let it rest till your good is better and your better is best." "If a task is first begun, never quit until it's done." Anyway, I had to memorize those. And it, and when, you asked me, my, my saying, that saying that I gave you was mine, but if I were, if you had asked me well what were some sayings that people gave you, those would be the ones that come to mind, you know. That you always had to do your best. I have, I lived on, so from Hamilton Street we moved to Church Street. Church Street happened to be the location of the one and only colored library in Jackson [Mississippi], the George Washington Carver Branch Library. And I spent hours in that place just going through, just reading first the children's section, then the juvenile section, then Mrs., Miss Ruth Romans [ph.] was the librarian, she had two assistants. Miss Romans would, you know, suggest things to me to read and when she saw that I liked adventure like I, I had read about the 99th Pursuit Squadron, and I was reading about the, the, the dog in the North, husky or not Rin Tin Tin, it was another, it was another-- Speaker 2: Husky, I mean, oh-- Speaker 1: It was husky, it was about an Alaska, you know-- Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): 'Call of the Wild' [Jack London]. Speaker 2: Well, no, not that one, but anyway there was like these, it was a series about these dogs and, and like what we, this it's, I know it's in the Iditarod now, but at the time I didn't know anything about Iditarod, I knew these, these dogs that would drag you across snow. So I would read, I read about them. And so she says to me, oh, so you like adventure. Why don't you try this? So she gave me this book by this British author, and to this day, I must have been like maybe twelve, I don't know if she had actually read the book because it was Ian Fleming's, James Bond novel and that's where I first learned about the Mound of Venus, and I'm not talking about outer space. And so because I was a curious young man and, you know, I'm now pre-- Speaker 1: Cause you're-- Speaker 2: --puberty and so I'm going and looking up like what is, (unclear) the big, the huge dictionary that was in, I said oh, oh, oh, oh, hmm. So, of course, then I became an Ian Fleming fan and read everything that he wrote (laughter). But it beat, you know, learning about it from dime store magazines, which I later read. But that was my first introduction to the birds and the bees as it were. Thank you, Ms. Romans. Speaker 1: So--(laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 171908 Speaker 1: So this, you have a--you paint a very structured household-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in a lot of respects. Speaker 2: Very structured, yeah. Speaker 1: And what about meal times, I mean, you know, what are they, 'cause your grandmother [sic, grand-aunt Lucy Wallace (ph.)] you said is working, right? Speaker 2: Well she was until I was maybe three-ish and then she didn't work anymore because she was ill. Speaker 1: Oh, so she-- Speaker 2: So now, so from like, like three and a half, four on, she's at home. She doesn't go back, she can't go back to work. And as a matter of fact, she was so ill at one point that's why I had to go live with my mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)] 'cause she couldn't take care of me. But, you know, Sundays were the special meal time. But like so on a day to day basis either she or my dad [Warren Wallace (ph.)] would fix breakfast. When I guess I was about nine I began to do it myself. The breakfast consisting of, of either, you know, cold cereal or maybe oatmeal or scrambled egg or fried egg and bacon and toast or biscuits if that was left over from the night before. Lunch, I'm not so aware of that. Dinner was usually some kind of vegetable, turnip greens, collard greens, mustard greens (laughter) one of those three. Peas, snap beans, cornbread, meats, would be called neck meat, neck bones-- Speaker 1: Neck bones. Speaker 2: --bones, yep. Speaker 1: Beans? Speaker 2: Beans, not a lot of beans, but some, peas. Saturday was usually fish. Some, for whatever reason, Saturdays was fish day. And Sunday, almost always, fried chicken, rice, vegetable, biscuits, maybe cornbread. And frequently some kind of fresh fruit desert like peach cobbler or berry cobbler, you know, the, whatever was seasonal. Christmas time was chocolate cakes and coconut cakes. And ah, and when she felt like it, pecan pies and lemon meringue, or when we could afford it, 'cause, you know, those were not exactly inexpensive deserts to make. My dad, by the way, was making, when he, when he was working and he didn't work all the time, 'cause he was a construction worker, his salary was about, I don't know fifty to sixty [dollars] a week. The rent was nine [dollars] a week. So we were not like living large but we were, you know, we were doing okay. And then when I started working I would always give my money to my mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] and she'd give me a little something back. I later found out she was, for the most part saving it, you know-- Story_ID: 171909 Speaker 1: That was a, so that was life in Jackson [Mississippi] with them. And then out in the country, my mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)] was the principal bread earner, wage earner at teaching. And on weekends she would go shopping and my sister and I would always, you know, wait with eager anticipation for her to come back because she would always bring us some kind of junk food, you know, potato chips or, or, or cookies, that was like the weekend treat. The rest of the week we prayed for her to come home because great-grandmother [Annie Brown (ph.) Pinkston] did not cook, could not cook, did not really care about cooking. And she would just throw anything in and say okay here come, this is what you gotta eat and we'd, not that we showed her but roll our eyes and, you know, pick around it and make do with what she prepared. Our mother wasn't a great cook but she was better than our great-grandmother. So the food was, but there were a lot of homegrown foods because my great-grandmother was a great farmer, gardener, so in the garden it was everything, potatoes, watermelons, we had peach trees, fig trees, apple trees, plum trees, all kind of vegetables, corn, squash, cucumbers, chickens. Story_ID: 171910 Speaker 1: So were you, were, did you help with the gardening? Speaker 2: Yeah, I helped with the, I did what they told me, you know. I don't remember how to do it but if she said, you know, dig a hole here and put some water and yeah. Yeah. And in the country, and I also did a little bit of gardening in Jackson [Mississippi] because my mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] grew herbs that she used for medicinal purposes, garlic, I specifically remember. And so she would have a little garlic patch, a little, I don't know if she actually grew sage or she bought the sage, but I know we, she used to make sage tea, garlic tea, something else, I can't remember all of the, remember all of them. And we had a fig tree at home. And she would grow or dad [Warren Wallace (ph.)] would grow tomatoes, some string beans but it wasn't a big garden, it was just a little, small garden. Speaker 1: So with the medicinal do you remember her giving those to you like, you know-- Speaker 2: Well not, well, okay, so mama Lucy didn't really, she, the, the stuff that she grew she, was mostly for her, if I was sick then I got like, you know, medicines from the drugstore but they too were traditional in the sense that in springtime you had to take 3 S Tonic [S.S.S. Tonic] or 666 or something or Black Draught, you know, to sort of clean your system out. Year round, especially in the fall, you had to take cod liver oil. If you know, you had a stomach problem, here comes the-- Speaker 1: Castor oil. Speaker 2: Oh, my God. You knew exactly, you saw my face scrounged, I, even now just the memory of that stuff, and she would put lemon in it, which she thought was making it like taste better and it was like ugh, had to take it. So did I say Black Draught? So that, those were things that I remember. You know, if you had cuts tincture of, tincture of iodine or Mercurochrome, Mercurochrome. If, well I didn't really have muscle aches so much but she, it was this green stuff, green ointment, I can't remember the name of it, Act On Rub [ph.], Act On Rub, (making a sound) smelled like crap. And for colds, Vick's Vapor Rub, lemon tea, which I still swear by to this day. Real lemons, you have to boil the water, cut the lemons, put the lemons in the water and let it, let the, whatever it is in the lemons come out into the water, put the top on it, let it steep, then you drink it with a little sugar or honey or whatever. But not this lemon juice stuff that people say, oh yeah, I have a little lemon tea bag. No, that is not lemon tea folks, I'm sorry. Lemon tea, you boil it, it's like one lemon to a cup and a half of water, and that--just try that if you ever get a cold. Story_ID: 171911 Speaker 1: Iodine, I hadn't heard of that in a long time and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, they don't make it anymore. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you said the-- Speaker 2: Mercurochrome. Speaker 1: Mercurochrome. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, that was it. Speaker 2: It was like iodine-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --but it was different. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: I don't think they make it anymore. It must be some kind of-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't-- Speaker 2: --poison or something. You know, all of this stuff that is, that we just kind of like used routinely-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it's now outlawed. Of course, they say if they tried to test aspirin it wouldn't pass muster these days. Speaker 1: Well the, things like, tell me when you're ready, Matthew [Hickey]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): We're ready. Speaker 1: Okay. You know, things like, you know, cod liver oil-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I mean people, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well now, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, that's a huge, big deal. Speaker 1: Huge, big deal. Speaker 2: And we were taking it, the, the liquid form, you know. Now I take the gel tablets, thank you very much. What is it, fish-- Speaker 1: Fish oil? Speaker 2: Yeah, fish oil, and gel tablets. Great-grandma [Annie Brown Pinkston (ph.)], so actually I'm told that her father was a medicine man. He was Choctaw. Oops, let me turn this thing off, sorry. He was Choctaw. And now I don't know if he was or not but I do know that she was a midwife, self-taught, and she used all kinds of natural remedies. So, my mother, my birth mom [Clementine Davis (ph.)] tells a story of, she was also raised, raised by my great-grandmother. So she's in my great-grandmother's house and she has an ear ache. So Sweetie, the one I called Mammy when I little boy but later I called her what everybody calls her which is Sweetie and mama, she goes out and she finds a bee and she take the bee and, and extracts some fluid from the bee and drops that into her ear, a bee or a wasp, I'm not sure, one some kind of insect like that, and drops that into my mother's ear, cures the ear ache. There was another remedy that she used for that time of the month, for cramps. I don't know what that was but, and I, I'm gonna ask my mother for specific details on that. I mean, when you think about it, there was no drugstore so if you didn't know these things and you became ill, you were up the creek. You know, headaches you, (unclear) the, the maladies of just living, if you wanted some kind of treatment you had to find somebody who knew something about natural. She knew, she said, my mother says that my great-grandmother could look at a, a tree or a bush and know what its properties were for, for health purposes. So, you know, this would be good for that, this you could make a tea out of it. This you would, you would smush it up, put some, some kind of softening solution and, and apply it to, to whatever it was was ailing you. What I remember is that when I had colds, I used to have a lot of colds when I was little, she had this really rough woolen pat cloth that she would put, it was like lard but it wasn't called lard, but it was like a lard like substance, smelled horrible, and she would heat the cloth, put that stuff on it, pin it to my, my long johns and, and dare me to take it off (laughter) and that cleared up my chest. I had to go to school wearing it though, you know, but, yeah. So, my great-grandmother was really the medicine woman in the family. And my older relatives remembered stuff, you know, different ones remember different things and, and they all now say we wish we had just sat down and written it, written down what was this, what was that or how she did it. Speaker 1: Because all those home remedies basically proved to be what, what we now know as natural medicine. Speaker 2: Yes. Isn't that something? Story_ID: 171912 Speaker 1: Now, so what schools are you going to? Speaker 2: Okay. Growing up with Warren [Wallace (ph.)] and Lucy [Wallace (ph.)] in Jackson [Mississippi], the first school was a kindergarten, private kindergarten, Mrs. Mitchell's [ph.] Kindergarten, which was down the street from our house on Hamilton [Street]. And then later she moved on to Bloom [Street] and so I was going there until one day Mrs. Mitchell sent me home in the pouring rain and that upset mama, and so she said, "You ain't going there anymore, I'm gonna teach you." And so from that point forward, and I guess that was maybe a year, I had to do my numbers, do my letters, do my reading for Lucy, for mama until she became ill and I went to the country to live with my mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)], went to Hall Elementary School [Yazoo County, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Hall? Speaker 2: Hall, H-A-L-L. My first grade teacher, oh, I, I have a picture of her, she's still alive. Mrs., Mrs. Brant, Catherine Brant [ph.]. I was in her room for maybe two weeks and she told the principal that I needed to be in second grade. And that was because I knew my numbers, I knew my letters, and I could read. So my sister-cousin, the, the one who was six years older who was, she tells the story, which I don't really remember, I kind of remember it a little bit, she says, you know, Mr., so it was a four room school house that covered eight grades. So there was like first-- Speaker 1: This is in Jackson or is this-- Speaker 2: This is Yazoo County [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: The country? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was first second, third, fourth, fifth, six, seven, eight. So the principal taught six, seven, eight. So she said, my, sister-cousin says that Mr. Rat, Ratliff [ph.], would call me from my second grade class, which is really a, you know, I'm in really first grade age but I'm second grade class, and have me, would come around and give me a book and tell me to read a passage, and then he would tell me to go back to my room. And so I was always puzzled about this like why is he having me. She said, well, what he was doing was embarrassing us because you could read things that we couldn't read (laughter). My, my sister-cousin later went on to earn her Ed.D. [Doctor of Education] and retired recently as assistant dean of education from Kennesaw State College [later, Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw, Georgia] in, university in, in Kennesaw, Georgia. But she remembers me being, you know, the, the example that he said, "Now if that little boy can read that, why can't you all--" Story_ID: 171913 Speaker 1: So where were you getting that, was it being around adults because they weren't literate themselves, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, mom wasn't, no. Well, well, mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)] was but I really wasn't, I wasn't really around (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You weren't around her. Speaker 2: --her. You know, I have often wondered that myself and all I can, I was just curious. And I, well, well, remember, I see my great-grandmother [Annie Brown Pinkston (ph.)] reading. I see my mother reading. I see Lucy [Wallace (ph.)], I mean we subscribed, we didn't have money, but we took the paper, I mean Monday through Friday paper, and the Mississippi Enterprise and Jackson Advocate with the, the, the Negro publications on weekends. So there's always something in the house. We, sometimes when we had the money, we subscribed to Jet, when we didn't, we would buy a copy. Later our next door neighbor when we moved to Church Street [Jackson, Mississippi], Mrs. Bailey [ph.], she was a maid. Mrs. Beulah Bailey would bring old magazines home from her employers. I remember National Geographic and The New Yorker. What I remember about them is that they, they weren't in color, there were no pictures especially in The New Yorker. And I couldn't, at first it was like I don't really wanna look at this. Yeah, I'll look at Look magazine and Time, you know, the ones with the pictures. But later I began to read The New Yorker and I began to read about stuff that had happened like ten or fifteen years earlier because these were old magazines like World War II [WWII] and all of that. Didn't understand a lot of it, but I just liked to read. And I think the, the love of reading was, how do you like, if you like music, I don't know, I don't know why but, but I read a lot. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I want, I want, now I wonder sometimes only kids tend to have to keep themselves occupied but that's, that's not necessarily the reason, you know. Speaker 2: You know, I was aware of, so I, you know, I keep referencing this poverty thing, but I was aware of stuff that we didn't have, 'cause remember now my kids, my friends are my age and they're parents are a lot younger. Their parents are my mother's age, not her aunt's age. And they've got cars and, you know, and they go places and they could go to the movies and I couldn't. I mean I would go every now and then but not like, they would go every week. You know, I'd save Hart's bread wrappers to get into a movie on Saturday 'cause you, save four Hart bread wrappers, which took two weeks, you could get into the Saturday movie free. So I was aware of this, this gap, this financial thing, I guess, economic thing. And while I didn't feel, I don't think I felt less for it but I aspired to those things and I wanted to read as much about them as I could. Mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] invested money in an atlas, you know, we, I guess it was twenty [dollars]. I mean, the big book with maps and it was just, she invested another like thirty [dollars] in a thesaurus and a dictionary. Couldn't afford the encyclopedia 'cause they were going around in those days, you know, selling sets of encyclopedias to people, that was two hundred and some odd dollars, no way. And the library [George Washington Carver Library, Jackson, Mississippi] was right down the street, so I, I had access to that. But I just liked to read. Story_ID: 171914 Speaker 1: And we talked, we haven't really talked about church but I had-- Speaker 2: Well you said Central [Methodist Episcopal Church, later, Central United Methodist Church, Jackson, Mississippi]-- Speaker 1: Central, yeah. And then later Mount Helm [Baptist Church, Jackson, Mississippi]. Mount Helm is a Baptist church. Speaker 2: Mount Helm, were your, were your, were your, were the Wallaces Baptists or (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, so, okay. So Daddy [Warren Wallace (ph.)] was Methodist, which is my mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] joined the Methodist Church but when I was like eight, so, so now I'm in the Methodist Church like all the way through, like, you know, from a little kindergarten age in vacation Bible school and the little programs, Mother's Day. Then around about eight a half or nine years old, it's time for me to make a decision, you know, for Christ. So mom says, it's, okay, Billy, it's time for you to like to start thinking about joining church. And I said okay. Well I guess I'll go down and join Central with daddy next Sunday. She says no, I want you to go down to Mount Helm and sit on the mourners' bench and at revival and I want you to sit down there, she said, because those Methodists sprinkle and you need to be baptized. So that's how and, and Mount Helm was closer also, but that's how I got to Mount Helm because mom decided that I was not gonna be sprinkled by the Methodist, I needed to go under the water and that was the Baptist and so I joined Mount Helm and then later she joined Mount Helm and we came back to the church that, you know, the, the denomination that she grew up in, which was Baptist. Story_ID: 171915 Speaker 1: And there were a lot of people at that church [Mount Helm Baptist Church, Jackson, Mississippi] who were pivotal in my development. Miss Juanita Lee [ph.] who had a story hour on Sunday evenings that was the first thing that I began to attend at Mount Helm [Baptist Church, Jackson, Mississippi]. Miss Lee had a degree in library science but she a speech impediment and she had a mobility issue. So when she went to apply for jobs, no one would hire her so she ended up working as a maid at the main library, the, the white library. But the church allowed her to conduct story hours for the kids and I was one of those children. So this, this is gonna be a little difficult for me to get through 'cause whenever I tell this story I, I, so now I'm a teenager and I'm in high school [William H. Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi] and I'm about, I don't know-- Speaker 2: What, what year is this (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], '66 [1966],'67 [1967], '68 [1968], somewhere in there. It's after the major part of the Civil Right Movement. So now black people can go to the white library. So she keeps asking me to come to her library, you know, right. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now who is this? Speaker 1: This is Miss Juanita Lee. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The one, the one with the speech impediment who ran the story hour when I was a little boy. And, you know, she, you know, would buy my tickets when I was selling something for the plays or candy, with, with fundraisers for the band, you know, through my years. And so now I'm like sixteen, seventeen, and I'm working at an office supply company downtown, downtown, the standard stationery site, delivered newspapers for four years, and then I got a job as a delivery boy for an office supply company, and later furniture assembly and whatnot. Anyway, so Miss Lee wants me to come to her library, and I'm thinking I don't, you know, by now I'm, I'm either going to [George Washington] Carver [Library, Jackson, Mississippi] which is still down on the corner or I'm going to Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] because Jackson State allowed high school students to use their, their book, you couldn't check the books out, but if you were doing a research project you could come in and, and use the books and maybe that was because my high school principal's wife was the librarian there, I don't know. But I could go there and get any book that I needed. But one day, I remember going to the main white library, and I really went in there just to see Miss Lee, just to tell her hello and, you know, okay I came by to see you at your library. And so she says oh, Billy, Billy, come, let me, let me introduce you to my, so she took me all over the place because she wanted them to see what we had accomplished without their help. Despite-- Speaker 2: All the issues-- Speaker 1: --all the stuff, all the segregation and the exclusion and all of that. That we had managed to become articulate, smart kids, even though we couldn't come to their library. It was for her that she wanted me to come because she had been part of developing me. Story_ID: 171916 Speaker 1: Because that was, I mean when you think about or to think about people with no education what they did, I mean, you're talking about an environment where, you know, you, you've said several times we didn't have money but there's nothing about your story that is wanting. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And that's the thing. Even when you're, here I'm gonna give you, I want you to do some wiping too here. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I may be out of wipe but I got-- Speaker 2: You know, there are, I had-- Speaker 1: There was nothing about your story that was wanting. Speaker 2: Yep, not at all, yeah. Thank you. Thank you. Speaker 1: It's almost like you're-- Speaker 2: You know, it was-- Speaker 1: Your, your forehead too. Speaker 2: Oh, right here. My-- Speaker 1: Are you afraid, that was my first time using them and I'm only convinced, it's like you, you said you should dab. I'm like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't bothering anybody 'cause I, rubbing it and not dabbing it. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But I, you know, I've applied makeup more than a little bit in my, in my career. Speaker 1: (Laughter) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but skipping around though, that was the same kind of, same kind of idea or, or mindset that my high school principal had, Mr. Luther Buckley who's still alive. He's ninety-one years old. And my elementary school principal, Mr. Laverne Randolph [ph.] who passed a few years ago, I have his picture here somewhere. So Mr. Randolph at Smith Robertson [School, Jackson, Mississippi], it's--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: So, so but what, let's, so you go to, I just wanna understand it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Hall Elementary School [Yazoo County, Mississippi]. Speaker 2: For first grade. Speaker 1: And then you went to, with your mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)]-- Speaker 2: That's where I was at Hall. Speaker 1: At Hall, okay. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) okay, yeah. Speaker 1: And then where do you-- Speaker 2: Back to Jackson [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: And, and what's the, and that school was? Speaker 2: Smith Robertson. Speaker 1: Smith Robertson. Speaker 2: This, this school. Speaker 1: I see. The black school that we were talking about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, this school. Speaker 1: Is that-- Speaker 2: The first one that was built for black people in, in Jackson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is an old class, the early 1900s. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: But it was still there when, when I came along and I lived like two blocks away. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And it was a first through sixth grade school. Story_ID: 171917 Speaker 1: And then, and then you go where? Do you go, do you have junior high? Speaker 2: Yeah. Rowan Junior High [later, Rowan Middle School, Jackson, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: R-O-- Speaker 2: W-A-N, junior high school. Which was seventh, eighth, and ninth grades. And then high school at Lanier, L-A-N-I-E-R, W.H. Lanier, William H. Lanier [High School, Jackson, Mississippi], tenth, eleventh, twelfth grades. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are all of these schools-- Speaker 2: Yes, black. Black principals, black counselors, black teachers, black cafeteria workers, black custodial staff, total African American institutions. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what I'm trying to sort of understand is, where is the sense of any danger? Speaker 2: Danger? Speaker 1: 'Cause I, yeah. I don't hear that. Like do you feel that you have to be careful or are you being told what parts of town you can-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --go to, what sides of the street or-- Speaker 2: Well, okay. So, the first time I remember being warned about being black was around '56 [1956], '55 [1955], somewhere in there. And I didn't know what mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] was talking about at the time, this is Mama Lucy. She says, "Lord have mercy, that poor Emmett Till. Boy, don't you be messing around with those white girls." She says this to me. Now I don't even know what she's talking about, right. I don't know who Emmett Till is, I don't know what she means. So this is like a, a theme or reframe, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, you know, just every now and then she'll be reading something or something would happen to some black person, God and it's still happening, you know, whatever the circumstances Michael Brown is dead, and that would, that would make her remember that, and there would be some kind of warning to me. So, you know, by the teenage, of course, I, I know what she's talking about. But I didn't really, I didn't feel a sense of danger because in the first place, I didn't know anybody white. You know, I wasn't like in a, in an environment where I was gonna be even encountering white girls or anybody else unless it was, you know, merchants in the neighborhood. I mean there were several grocery stores. There was a furniture store we went to, buying shoes, clothes, but I didn't really have any kind of interaction with them, that would potentially lead to me being interested in some girl that would get me killed. So, so yeah but that was the first foreboding, if you will, of what life could be like for you as an African American male in Mississippi at that time and it had to do with relations with the opposite sex of the opposite race. Story_ID: 171918 Speaker 1: There were a few other things but I didn't, you know, for me they were more, not so much dangerous, as just crazy and hurtful. My mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)] took me and my sister to the zoo in Jackson [Mississippi]. We were, four and two or five and three or six and four, you know, we were little. And we wanted water. And the zoo matron told my mother to take us behind the restrooms and get one of the discarded soda bottles, you know, Coca-Cola and Pepsi they came in glass bottles, and to rinse the bottle out and that's how we would get water, you know, from the faucet behind the restroom. So my mother, who I guess at that time was, she was in her twenties, yeah, she was, she hadn't, reached her thirtieth birthday at that point, said yes, ma'am, and the zoo matron walks away. And my mother waited until she had walked an appreciable distance away, and she lifted my sister up to the water fountain and then she lifted me up to the water fountain. At this point the zoo matron, for whatever reason, turns around and sees her doing this, and comes, "Gal didn't I tell you to take yourself and them," I don't know if she said, little Negroes or whatever, I don't know what she called us, I just remember that the, the zoo matron was really, really upset, and told my mother to wait right there until she came back because now the zoo matron's going to get the police officer, she didn't have a walkie-talkie, thank God. And so when the zoo matron went away the second time, my mother got me and my sister and we scurried out of the zoo. So obviously that could have been a dangerous situation but for whatever reason the zoo matron just let us go, let her go or, you know, them crazy coloreds. And, so that was something that I remember. The other danger, and it was my fault, but it could have been fatal, recall I was delivering newspapers from age eleven until fifteen. So on Sunday afternoons 'cause we didn't have a car but I had a bicycle, I would go exploring and I'm, one of the places I liked to go was the airport. Another place that I would go to when I was like maybe thirteen on, was Tougaloo [Mississippi], which was a long way from where I lived. Speaker 2: How far? Speaker 1: Oh, about ten miles, I mean, as for pedaling a bicycle, about ten miles. And I usually went with a friend but this day when he couldn't go, I would go alone. So I'm pedaling on, north on State Street turns into Highway 51 North. And my newspaper manager Mr. Hayes, Lawrence Hayes [ph.], was going south and I was going north, and he saw me and he blew his horn and waved at me and I waved at him as he's going by. Well when I waved at him, my bike veered to the left and I turned back around and I was almost on the center line, and there was a car coming in the opposite direction being driven by a young white male, very quiet car, and a girl was sitting next to him and he had this smile on his face, and he saw me heading almost across the line and did not blow his horn, and if I had not turned around at that instant, I have no doubt but that he, he wasn't gonna cross the line to hit me, but if I had crossed the line in front of his car, he would have hit me. Story_ID: 171919 Speaker 1: So these are really just little snatches of things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you're not, so as things heat up, 'cause I remember hearing a, a talk you gave and you were in the talk talking about, you know, people, you know, people coming down South and hearing about whether people are Communists and things like that. Were you, what, what period of time-- Speaker 2: That was in the '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: --the Freedom Riders [1961], yeah. Speaker 1: Right the Freedom-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: So you, but how old are you at that point? You're in your, six sixteen, seventeen (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no Freedom Riders was much earlier. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) earlier. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that you're thirteen, twelve, thirteen. Speaker 2: No, I'm eleven, twelve. Speaker 1: Eleven, twelve. Speaker 2: The Freedom Riders were '60 [1960], '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Not, okay. Speaker 2: And the [Civil Rights] Movement, the, the [James] Meredith March of Freedom [sic, March Against Fear, 1966]. Okay, so, Freedom Riders, I was eleven-ish or so. Medgar Evers' assassination [1963] I was about thirteen. Speaker 1: The Freedom Summer (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: The Freedom Summer I was-- Speaker 1: It's-- Speaker 2: --about-- Speaker 1: It's fourteen. Speaker 2: --14. Meredith March of Freedom I was sixteen. And, and really the only, the only demonstration or, or march I participated in was in the summer of '66 [1966], and that was the last leg of the Meredith March from Tougaloo [Mississippi] to the state capitol grounds [Jackson, Mississippi] for a whole bunch of speeches. So I wasn't part of the young people who actually were getting fire hosed and all of that because my mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] said we don't have any money to get you out of jail, so you stay away from all of that, and so I did. Speaker 1: Well, I mean I just get, a lot of the people who were doing that were from the North, you weren't necessarily doing that, not to say people weren't doing that. Speaker 2: Some, yeah, yeah, some of, but some-- Speaker 1: Some, but-- Speaker 2: --I had friends who, who did do it and who were arrested and who were taken down to the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: How, how many numbers do you think? Speaker 2: Friends of mine who were actually, five, six, you know, these are, these would have been young people. One passed on now, is the Gene Cornelius Young. He was featured in a book by Anne Moody. Getting his hair cut at a, the barber shop that had desegregated and when he got to Washington [D.C.] for the, but his mother was involved in the movement, and his mother was one of the, you know, supporters of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and she went to the rallies and took him with her, and he had this great speaking ability from a young age. He later got his speech (unclear) from the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] but as I said he died about four or five years ago. So not a lot of, of my, my immediate friends but he was one that, who, who did. And, and interestingly, I didn't know that about him until we were adults because I didn't meet him until we were in like tenth grade. And he had done this stuff when he was in seventh grade. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: And we were not in the same school. He was at Lanier Junior High [sic, William H. Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi] and I was at Rowan Junior High [later, Rowan Middle School, Jackson, Mississippi]. So I didn't even know anything about it. So no, I, I missed, in terms of like direct involvement, I didn't, I wasn't there. I saw some of it, delivering newspapers I saw [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] speaking on somebody's porch and the lady asked him to move off 'cause she didn't want her house bombed. This is like on, on Church Street [Jackson, Mississippi], down the street from where I lived. Story_ID: 171920 Speaker 1: So what, what else is forming you as a young person? Speaker 2: Academic achievement. I did well with most of my studies, you know, and I made fairly decent grades. I also did well with standardized tests. So, you know, I usually got, I scored in the upper percentiles, certainly upper percentiles for black kids in Mississippi but sometimes upper percentiles, depending on the test, nationally. So that's, that sense of accomplishment, and I wasn't good at sports. I was in the band. And I was also active in student government in junior high school and in high school. And I was active in drama. And, of course, the church [Mount Helm Baptist Church, Jackson, Mississippi], and in choir. So I was doing instrumental music at, at high school [William H. Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi]. I was doing vocal music at church. I was vice president and president of the student council in eighth and ninth in junior high. Vice president and president of student council in tenth and eleventh grades. In senior high, I was state student council president for colored. Went to Williamsburg Student Burgesses [Williamsburg, Virginia], which was an eye opening experience, when I was in eleventh grade. I was on the cover of Senior Scholastic wearing a tricorne with two other people, one from abroad and one from someone else in America and then me. I wish I could find that, I don't where it is. So, so that's what's, that's-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) and that was in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, all of this is like, that was in eleventh grade. So those were the things that, you know, there wasn't any sense of can't. And there wasn't, you know, I wasn't an angry, young black man because of things that were happening to us. I mean I didn't, yeah, I was upset about it, and if you had asked me points of view, I would have told you what I thought but there, you know, I wasn't, I wasn't debilitated. Story_ID: 171921 Speaker 1: I had a lot of hope. And happened to have been in a place at a time where there were people interested in helping us get to the next level. And so in eleventh grade [at William H. Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi] we had people coming to our high school from Ivy League Colleges, encouraging us to apply. And I'm, you know, I think these guys are from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] or Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or somewhere, I don't know where they were from, but they were from like the North. And we're sitting there listening to them, so there were about thirty of us who had done well on tests and done wells on grades. And I was not, like I think I was like number eleventh or twelfth in my high school class but there were a lot of smart kids there. And they were telling us all, you know, apply to Harvard, apply to Yale, apply to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], and I'm thinking I can't get in those schools, this is what I'm thinking right. NSS-FNS, National Scholarship Service and Fund for Negro Students, that was another organization that, that came to our schools, our counselors encouraged us. And so in senior year, or maybe it was the end of my junior year, I don't remember when I decided, I just decided, okay, let me see what's going to happen. Oh, I had also gone to enrichment programs at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] and at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] [HBCU]. So, Tougaloo was a school that provided summer science training program in physics and chemistry. And Jackson State had something called, oh gosh, I can't remember the name of the program, but it was a weekend program that kind of dealt with the humanities and social studies. They gave us free copies of the New York Times, free copies of Time magazine, we took a little bit of Spanish lessons. We had geography lessons. And mostly we had a lot of encouragement from college professors about, you know, you smart kids, you can do whatever you wanna do, don't let anyone deter you from thinking about wider possibilities. One of the professors, Ira Jefferson [ph.], his motto was modesty gets you nowhere, modesty gets you nowhere, be confident, toot your own horn. So, you know, somewhere in the background of my mind, I'm absorbing all of this. You know, I'm not going around with my chest puffed out but on the other hand, I'm doing everything that I know how to do, and I'm looking beyond Mississippi and looking beyond what I think is possible, to sort of what I think is impossible. So because of NSS-FNS, I got a recommendation to apply to Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut]. Story_ID: 171922 Speaker 1: As far as we knew, they were coming from campuses. Speaker 2: Around-- Speaker 1: The schools were sending them down. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But see but right, but there were a lot of, a lot of, what people don't realize and this is the only thing that is some, somewhat problematic in the telling of the stories 'cause, you know, we talk about Freedom Summer [1964] wasn't just, you know, one period of time (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, there were lots of different initiatives-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --that were happening-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, but we're, you know, and-- Speaker 1: And I didn't really know the, how the linkages-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --worked. Speaker 2: And, and the, I mean, because, well, I mean there are probably a lot of programs and there were people were helping in different ways. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: But, you know, what we know is on the political side more with the voter education but, you know, this was also the time when money is starting to come you know, and be released in the urban and poor communities too. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 171923 Speaker 1: Oh, because of these young people who came and the outreach by our counselors and this organization, National Scholarship Service and Fund for Negro Students [NSS-FNS], I, it was suggested that I apply to Earlham [College, Richmond, Indiana], Wesleyan University [Middletown, Connecticut], Earlham University, and one other, the third one, I can't remember. So now I go to the library and in those days, you know, your college catalogues were paper and you pulled them off and you looked at them and you see how many students and where the school was located and what the temp, you know, stuff. And then if there were some schools that you were interested in that, when you couldn't find the catalogue, you wrote to the school and asked them for a catalogue and application materials, and so I did that. And I applied to, for various reasons, Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts], Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts], Wesleyan in Connecticut, Columbia [University, New York, New York], Earlham, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Oklahoma Baptist University [Shawnee, Oklahoma], that was because my Sunday school teacher wanted me to apply to Oklahoma Baptist 'cause she thought I should major in religious music or something but there was no way in the world I was gonna do it but I applied 'cause, you know, I was compliant. And I was accepted, in addition to those schools that I applied to, that's nine, right. So Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] and Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] just sent me acceptance letters and a financial aid package, even though I didn't apply to those schools, I mean they sent me the application, said fill this out but you're in. So I must've--I was accepted by eleven colleges and universities. And then I had to figure out which one to go to, and how I did that was a whole other still. But I ended up going to Wesleyan, and that's where I got my first experience behind a microphone. Story_ID: 171924 Speaker 1: And because of that experience, well because I did that, I took, I took a picture and sent it to my dad [Warren Wallace (ph.)] and he showed his minister, Reverend Wendell P. Taylor at Central [Methodist Episcopal Church, Jackson, Mississippi]. And Reverend Taylor, unbeknownst to me, was on the advisory committee of WLBT [television station] in its efforts to try to keep its license. And when dad got sick and died, Reverend Taylor asked me what are you going to do now? And I said I'm going to transfer to Millsaps College in Jackson [Mississippi] from Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut]. I'm gonna come home, stay with mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)], finish my education, and try to go to law school, that's what. And he said, "Well, why don't you go down to the TV station? They're looking for reporter trainees." And I said, "Reverend Taylor I don't know anything about reporting." And what I didn't tell him, was I wasn't really interested in being a reporter. And he said, "Well Billy just go down there and tell 'em I sent you." So being compliant, I said, yes, sir, and I did that. Fortunately they, I told them that I was going to go back to Wesleyan, 'cause this was like in the second semester of my freshman year my dad died, but I wanted to go back to Wesleyan for one year and then come back home for junior and senior years and I told them that it was my intention the following September to go back to Connecticut for a year and they said, well we need somebody who's gonna be here full time because we wanna invest a lot in training. Said, "You'd be a great candidate but what about the radio station?" I said, oh, yeah bet. So they gave me a job, you know, spinning records and that's what I really wanted to do anyway. I didn't really like the format 'cause it was hard rock, Vanilla Fudge, Iron Butterfly, music I'd never heard of, I got used to it. Anyway, so I got a job at the station but and in, at WJDX FM playing music, not as a news trainee. But the news director heard me reading the news and I wasn't stumbling over Phnom Penh [Cambodia] and Cam Ranh Bay and Viet, Vientiane [Laos], and, you know, those Vietnam War references of the day. And he said, "Where did you learn how to do that?" And I said I've been listening to news all my life, you know. I didn't have to go through the thing about my great-grandmother [Annie Brown Pinkston (ph.)] turning on the radio and we listen Morgan Beatty and Russ Ward and, but, and through a atlas that mom gotten for me when I was little boy and I'm looking where places are, and skips on the radio station, and so I know stuff that I didn't even know I knew. So I said well, I don't know, I just, I like the news and when I was delivering newspapers for four years, I would always read it as I was folding it, every day. So I did quite nicely on current events, always. So he kept bothering me about coming into the news department and I wouldn't, until I came back too, so I went away to Wesleyan and then I came back the following summer and he, he tricked me. He told me that he wanted me to be a camera man, so he gave me a camera, and he gave me some film, he gave me a light meter, and told me if I shot stuff correctly he would put it on TV. So I'm out looking for wrecks and fires, so that I can, you know, take some pictures and, mama, I shot that. Went on for about a month and half and I, I wasn't getting paid for that. I just, that was just what I wanted to do. So then he says to me, well, I wanna pay you, I'm thinking oh he's gonna pay me to be a photographer, and this is what I'm thinking. I says, "What do you want me to do?" "Well, you know, it's not to, it's not to shoot, shoot film. I just want you to write a newscast for me." I said, okay. And, you know, format it. I said, okay, well what's that? And he explained. I said okay, well who's gonna do it? He said, "You are." So my very first job in broadcast journalism was writing, anchoring, and producing a fifteen minute Saturday night newscast. That was my very first paying job in broadcast journalism, broadcast journalism. Thank you, Dave Meer [ph.]. Story_ID: 171925 Speaker 1: Now, you're, you had been at Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut] how long, how many years? Speaker 2: Just two years. Speaker 1: Just two years. So after two years you come back [to Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what year, your father [Warren Wallace (ph.)], pop, whatever-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --his, his death was in-- Speaker 2: He died in, in second semester of freshman year. Speaker 1: Which is what year? Speaker 2: '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: So, his death, was it unexpected? Speaker 2: Well, it was to me. Although I learned he had lung cancer and so, you know. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: He probably knew when I left, 'cause he walked me, you know, as I told you, we didn't have a car, and so he called a taxi to make my trunk and my suitcase to Sun-n-Sand Motel on Lamar Street [Jackson, Mississippi], and that's where you got the airport van to the airport. And he walked to the hotel and gave me a hug and he said I'll see you Christmas, Billy, and just before Christmas mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] called and told me he was really sick and I had to come home. Speaker 1: Let, you know, what's so curious is that mom was the one who had always been sickly. Speaker 2: (Nodding). Speaker 1: You know, from the time that you were-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, you were-- Speaker 2: Yeah little, yeah. Speaker 1: --little. And so you would have thought that she would have been the one. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I remember distinctly having, she had a fish bone in her throat once and we thought that she was, she was gagging and gad, you know, was hitting her on the back and stuff and I thought she was gonna die. I was scared, you know, I was four, maybe. Things you remember. And then when she was ill before she sent me to live with my mother [Clementine Davis (ph.)], she couldn't, she couldn't get up, and so I had to bring the pots and pans and cooking materials to her bedside and she would tell me, you know, bring me a cup of water or bring me this, bring me that, turn the oven put the match in there and make sure you put it out. And, you know, little things that she had me to do to fix the food 'cause she couldn't do it herself. And then finally she just gave up and said, "Okay, you're gonna have to go stay out, stay with Clemmy, stay, go stay with your mother." Story_ID: 171926 Speaker 1: So you come back and you get this job like out of, really, almost nowhere. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, actually I came back and because I had worked at the radio station the, the radio people said, you know, whenever you wanna come back to be a DJ to play some music for us on WJDX FM [Jackson, Mississippi], please come on back. And so that job was sitting there waiting for me, that was no, that was no problem because I had done that second semester of freshman year and the following summer. Went away to college in the fall of '69 [1969]. I don't think I came home for Christmas, I think I just stayed at Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut] for the entire time until I came back home for good the following May, right after Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio], right after Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] shootings, and went back to work at [W]JDX FM. While I was also fighting Local Draft Board 18, which classified me 1-A, that's a whole other story but, anyway. Speaker 1: So if you're classified 1-A then you're, how do you get out of that? Speaker 2: (Laughter) God. Because I was told that Local Draft Board 18 never reversed a classification. And to this day I don't know how it happened, I just know that because I had been at Wesleyan and because I had been around people who were like, you know, the antiwar movement and because I was in Washington [D.C.] in that previous November, November of '69 [1969], when all those people were arrested in Dupont Circle [Washington D.C.], and so I had an awareness that you could fight against going to the [U.S.] Army. I wasn't trying to be conscientious objector. What I was just trying to do was keep my 2-S. And (laughter) I'll never forget the, the lady at the draft board in Jackson [Mississippi] told, I called her and I said, "Ma'am, I think there's been a mistake." She says, "What kind of mistake, son?" I said, "Well, I'm a college student, I have a 2-S Classification and I just got a letter in the mail telling me that I'm classified 1-A." She said, "Well where were you in college?" And I said, "Well, I was at Wesleyan in Connecticut and school is out, and so I'm at home now, and I'm going to go Millsaps [College, Jackson, Mississippi]." "Uh-huh and when you're going to Millsaps?" I said, "Well I'm going there in September." "And what are you doing now?" I said, "Well I'm working to save money to buy books in the summer. So I got a summer job." She said, "So you were at Wesleyan?" "Yes, ma'am." "And you're going to Millsaps?" "Yes, ma'am." "And you're working right now?" "Yes, ma'am." "Well that makes you eligible, son, come on down." And that is how they drafted a lot of people who were in college, especially down South. Friends of mine who were in college, drafted out of college and they went. In the South, you're very patriotic. I mean everybody is. I, my friend's father was a Army recruiter, Sergeant Willie Thomas (ph.). And I suspect that if I had asked for his advice he would have told me just go ahead and, and, you know, get it out of the way 'cause you're gonna have to go anyway, 'cause that's the way people thought. But because I had been at Wesleyan, I called people in Connecticut, I wrote letters, I called, I don't know who I didn't call or write. And by late July or August, I got my 2-S back. Speaker 1: So really by writing and getting people to, to help the process-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't know who or how it happened. And I, and it's, you know, I said somewhere those records, I don't know if they still exist, but I would really like to know 'cause (unclear) it was a board that met that voted, you know. It wasn't done in the dark of night and it's probably a record there that that talks about when I was classified 1-A and when I was reclassified 2-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 171927 Speaker 1: So are you working and going to Millsaps [College, Jackson, Mississippi]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at the same time? Speaker 2: Stupid, dumb thing, yes (laughter). I'm taking a full load at Millsaps, which was really crazy and I didn't have the wisdom to know that one should not try to work thirty hours a week and go to school full time. So I, but that's what I was doing. I was working thirty odd hours a week at the radio station [WJDX FM, Jackson, Mississippi], initially. And then when the TV [WLBT, Jackson, Mississippi], the Saturday night TV deal came along, I'm working six days a week, five days for radio, one day for TV. That was all through my junior year. Speaker 1: So WJDX, is that--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Is (unclear), is radio. Speaker 1: --is radio. And then the TV was-- Speaker 2: WLBT, in the same building. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Owned by Lamar Life. Speaker 1: By who? Speaker 2: Lamar Life Broadcasting. LBT, Lamar Life Broadcasting Television [sic, Lamar Broadcasting Television], LBT, which was a Texas firm. And that was this license that was challenged in the very famous, [Office of Communication of the] United Church of Christ v. FCC [Federal Communications Commission, 1966]. That was the station-- Speaker 1: Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Story_ID: 171928 Speaker 1: This really began with Medgar Evers, which I didn't know at the time. It began with Medgar Evers, who while he's trying to register people for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], he's trying to get black parents to sign their kids up to desegregate schools. He's holding rallies. He's all over the state, you know, fighting for the cause. He's, the other thing he was doing that almost no one knew, not even his wife remembered this, Mrs. Myrlie Evers-Williams, he was writing to the TV stations to try to get permission to present an opposing point of view to the editorials that they were running from the White Citizens' Council, who were saying, you know, it's just outside agitators who are stirring up all this trouble. The colored people in Mississippi are happy. And these Communists are doing all of this and so, you know, the, the this is, this is illegal and we're gonna stand up for states' rights and, and sovereignty of our government. And this is what the white people were saying on TV. And the, and the owners of the stations were saying, we don't have to let you, Medgar Evers, say anything because we represent the community and, and we don't have anybody else like demanding to say all these things. Well, and Medgar was saying, no, no, there's another point of view here, and those people are wrong and this is what we really believe. And so anyway, long story short. So he starts this in the late '50s [1950s], by 1963 they say, okay. We'll give you fifteen minutes to have you, you know, say your piece but we are gonna tell you now that there are people threatening to blow this place up, so we want you to tape it. So he came in, he taped it, it's a very famous speech that he gave. He talks about being a veteran, being an American, being a patriot, paying taxes, just wanted the same opportunities as everybody else has for their families and friends and, and that we, we as Negroes in Mississippi just want equal rights with everybody else, the right to vote, the right to public accommodations, you know, the, the stuff. Well, one month later he was assassinated and some people say that it was that speech that he gave on WLBT [Jackson, Mississippi] that made him the marked man that sent Byron De La Beckwith to lay outside of his house as he came home that night, the same night that [President John F.] Kennedy gave a speech, very famous speech about civil rights, one of his few, and maybe one of the last ones because a few months later he was assassinated. So this is '63 [1963]. Story_ID: 171929 Speaker 1: And I don't know this for a fact, but it is my belief that a minister named Reverend Everett Parker with the United Church of Christ, who had founded the Office of Communications, saw what Medgar [Evers] had done, knew about it, and he was looking for a test case to open up broadcasting to everybody. That is to say not just white people, and not just white men but everybody in the community. Under the provision of the Federal Communications Commission [FCC], the, the Communications Act of 1934 that said broadcast licenses are a public trust and broadcast license owners are supposed to operate in the public interests, convenience, and necessity, and that's everybody's interest, convenience, and necessity, not just white folks. So Reverend Parker selected Channel 3 as the test case to challenge the license renewal that the FCC had granted. And the FCC ignored Reverend Parker's entreaty and granted the license renewal anyway. Said, yeah they did all these things, they didn't let black people on, they don't have any black employees but they promise they're gonna do better, so we're gonna give them their license. And so Reverend Parker with some help from some very wealthy people, filed a lawsuit against the FCC and that's why the case is called [Office of Communication of the] United Church of Christ v. FCC. And the judge, who later went to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, a name I can't remember now, ordered the FCC to rescind the license, and open it up for comparative hearing. And while all of that was going on, for other people to apply for the license, they created a, an interim licensee, a nonprofit organization called Communications Improvement Incorporated, CII, to run the station while other applicants were competing for the right to get their permanent license. And CII rendered the premises from Lamar Life [Broadcasting Television], and ran it for seven or eight or nine years actually, and the funds that they got from that were used for a variety of different things including setting up a radio station in Tougaloo [Mississippi], which now is run by [James] Charles Evers, and some other programs. And they hired the first African American general manager of, for a commercial station in America named William Dilday, a fellow out of Massachusetts. And the board and Mr. Dilday decided, after I had been to the Columbia summer program in New York [Columbia University, New York, New York], to appoint me as the first anchor of the six PM newscast of the number one station in Mississippi. Story_ID: 171930 Speaker 1: And see this, this is sort of like a charmed story. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, and the other people that I had, that I, I had here that [Reverend Everett] Parker worked with was Aaron, Aaron Henry--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) and Reverend [Robert L.T.] Smith you had referenced. Speaker 2: Yeah he was on the, they were all, they were on the board. I well, you know, something I'm not sure that Aaron was on the CII [Communications Improvement Incorporated] Board but I know that he later became a, a part owner of the station [WLBT, Jackson, Mississippi]. Now he may have been in one of the groups, he and Reverend R.L.T. Smith, that applied for the permanent license and I think their group got it. Well, the first, one of the first groups to get it. Reverend, not reverend, yeah, Reverend Kenneth Dean, white minister, and Dr. Aaron Shirley, Dr. John Peoples from Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], Dr. Margaret Walker Alexander, if I'm not mistaken they were among the people who were on the CII board of directors who, either encouraged or told the General Manager [William] Dilday to let this young kid anchor the six o'Clock News. I remember going to Dilday, the general manager, the black general manager, and, and when I came back from New York, from the Columbia University [New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: So wait, the black general manager, is the one from Massachusetts-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that comes to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so they hire someone from Massachusetts-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and put him in. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Okay. And now here is some raw truth. Dilday did not really exactly have a correct impression of African American people in Mississippi, okay. He was heard to say at one point that we should all be happy to work with Channel 3 because most black people in Mississippi were janitors or maids or cooks. And that was probably true in a macro sense. But those of us who had gone to [William H.] Lanier [High School, Jackson, Mississippi] and Jim Hill [High School, Jackson, Mississippi], who had gone to [George Washington] Carver Branch Library [Jackson, Mississippi], who had teachers who were teaching us stuff for the day that was gonna come, that none of us knew about but they were all getting ready for it, we looked at him like he was crazy, says no, no, no. We got teachers, we got doctors, we got lawyers, we got principals, we got counselors, what are you talking about? And we should get raises, excuse me, since you don't have to make a profit, you're just trying to do it to, you know, prove a point, we didn't quite put it like that, but that's what the meeting was about and he knew that's what we were thinking and he's telling us oh, no, no, no. I'm running this thing and this is what, so, he was one of the reasons why I decided to leave. Story_ID: 171931 Speaker 1: Now how long did you work there [WJDX FM and WLBT TV, Jackson, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Okay. So from the very first job I got at WJDX FM in my freshman year [at Millsaps College, Jackson, Mississippi], which was '69 [1969], until the day that I left when I was anchoring the six o'Clock news which was '74 [1974], that's about five years on and off through college and summers and stuff. Speaker 1: So you anchored the news, 'cause I have you being hired to anchor the news in, and when you're twenty-one? Speaker 2: No, no, no, I was, well-- Speaker 1: Begins his broadcast journalism career at WLBT. Speaker 2: Actually, okay. So, actually, my broadcast journalism career really began before I was on TV. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: I did news on the radio, WJDX AM as a producer, fill-in anchor. Then in, let's see, this would have been junior year [at Millsaps College, Jackson, Mississippi], so now, junior year, early junior year, I did the Saturday night news. This is after the, you know, taking the pictures, this was like maybe, I don't think I was twenty-one now that I think about it. I think that was probably the fall of '70 [1970], maybe I was. It was definitely junior year. I may have been twenty, twenty-one. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) junior year that you get hired? Speaker 2: Junior year that I start doing TV. I was-- Speaker 1: TV. Speaker 2: --already hired. Speaker 1: But you were doing TV with the six o'clock news? Speaker 2: No, I was doing TV on the weekends. Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: And then the ten o'clock news. So I'm going to school in the day and I'm doing, first I'm just doing radio and Saturday night. Then at some point, some months later, I'm doing, I have to leave radio 'cause radio had to split off anyway. So I'm doing the ten o'clock newscast, Monday through Friday, fifteen [dollars] a night, and I'm going to school during the day. So that goes on until I finish my course requirements at Millsaps [College, Jackson, Mississippi]. So that's half of junior year, all of the following summer, all of senior year, ten o'clock newscast. At the end of, you know, something, let's see, when did I go to, I went to Columbia [University, New York, New York] in '73 [1973], okay. So yeah, so I finish my course requirements in June of '72 [1972] but I haven't graduated from Millsaps because I owe them a paper. So now first semester, so now in the fall of 1972, I'm still working on finishing this paper, and I finish it in December, and so now I've done everything I need to do to graduate from Millsaps. And so my degree is dated May of '73 [1973] but, but oh, yeah, I'm sorry. My degree is dated May of '73 [1973] but I didn't, I didn't go to, I didn't go to school. Story_ID: 171932 Speaker 1: So now I'm doing the ten o'clock newscast from all of senior year [at Millsaps College, Jackson, Mississippi] and most of the following year. And then I go to Columbia [University, New York, New York] in June of '73 [1973]-- Speaker 2: And that, that's the Michele Clark Fellowship. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Michele Clark Fellowship Program for Minority Journalists, founded by Fred Friendly, former president of CBS News. Teachers included Bob Teague, Melba Tolliver, [HM] Charlayne Hunter-Gault, Earl Caldwell. Speaker 2: A lot of people, names we would come to know. Speaker 1: [HM] Renee Poussaint was one of my classmates. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: [HM] Johnathan Rodgers was one of my classmates. Ken, Ken, Ken, what is Ken's last name? Lord, Atlanta [Georgia]--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Smikle [sic, Watts]? Speaker 1: No, not Smikle-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --no. Ken [Watts] was on the air, he was from Nebraska-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --worked for ABC News in the, last job was in Atlanta that I know about. Anyway, all of those people and then-- Speaker 2: So how many were in a class with this fellowship program? Speaker 1: Oh, well, 'cause it was a print section and a broadcast section, I'm going to, I'm, I'm just guessing, I think like maybe twenty-five, thirty people-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --total. Speaker 2: Now, that program, I mean are you the only one who has been on TV? Speaker 1: Oh, no. Speaker 2: They all had, the fellowship program was for working journalists? Speaker 1: Yes, well if, if you had only worked full time X amount of time. So I was a little bit of an outlier because I had probably more on-air experience than almost anybody else there but some people had some on-air experience. Renee, for example, didn't have on-air experience but she was like ABD for a Ph.D. Johnathan Rodgers didn't have on-air experience but he had been an assistant editor at Sports Illustrated and I think Newsweek. He had a master's degree already from University of California, he had a master's degree in journalism but in order to get on TV he had to come through this program. He knew how to be, he was writing for Newsweek magazine. So people came from, a bunch of different places. Several years earlier, a, a, young attorney named Gerald Rivers came to the program and was told oh this is not for, for Caucasians this is for minorities only. He says, oh, he said, "Was that Hispanics included?" He says, "Yeah." He says, "Well my real name on my birth certificate is Geraldo Rivera." So, that's how he got in the program. Anyway, I just love telling that story 'cause it's true (laughter). Story_ID: 171933 Speaker 1: So, so yeah, so the summer of '73 [1973] I do this program [Michele Clark Fellowship Program for Minority Journalists], I come back at the end of the summer, and I didn't know this at the time, but [William] Dilday had planned just to let me be a full-time reporter [at WLBT-TV, Jackson, Mississippi]. And he was going to let the guy who had been anchoring the six and ten [six o'clock and ten o'clock news] continue to do both of them, and the six o'clock anchor was an experienced anchor man named Mark Ledbetter. Mark had been the six o'clock anchor forever. He was there when I got there. And when I went away that summer, Dilday assigned him to ten, so he's doing the six and the ten, the ratings are improving a little bit on the ten. I was never number one at ten, I was always number two, six o'clock remained number one. Mark said he wanted more money and Dilday said no. Mark said okay, I'm leaving and you can do what you wanna do with both of your shows. So Mark left. So now Dilday has no anchor for the six or the ten. And so then the whole thing was who's gonna take the six? And so that's how I was named by the board but especially by Reverend--Dr. [Aaron] Shirley and some others, "Give him a try." And, but people said, "But he, but the white audience is not gonna accept him." And they said, "Well, he's, they been watching him at ten o'clock, so why wouldn't they watch him at six, and maybe you'll have some slippage but it won't go below what it was at ten." This is, this was the argument I later learned was going on behind the scenes. And so when I go to Dilday to ask him for a raise and he tells me well you're gonna lose some audience anyway so you're not gonna get a raise. And I said well, I don't know if I'm gonna lose audience, I say, but this is a bigger newscast, more responsibility, I think I oughta just have, not as much as Mark was making, but just a little bit more, and he said no. And so that's when I decided to leave. 'Cause, 'cause I was ticked off and I was young and I could do those things then, you know, get ticked off and make a move. Story_ID: 171934 Speaker 1: So, but, before I made the move [from WLBT-TV, Jackson, Mississippi], I anchored the six o'clock news did some reports. The November book, the first rating period there was no drop-off, there was no increase, there was no drop-off. By now I've sent tapes out to a whole bunch of places and I got, actually I sent letters out and I asked people for tapes 'cause I didn't have enough money to buy tapes to put my work on it. So they would send me tapes, the stations would send tapes to me, I would put my work on it and send it back to them. So there was this news director, legendary, God rest his soul, named [James] Jim Snyder, who told me that I was not ready to work in Washington [D.C.], which is where I wanted to work, but he had a station in Jacksonville, Florida and if I were interested, he would be pleased to recommend me for a slot that they had available in Jacksonville at WJXT-TV, Post-Newsweek Station [later, Graham Media Group]. Which was actually the first station that Katharine Graham and her husband bought when they got into TV, the second was Washington, I think, the third one was Miami [Florida]. I think it was Jacksonville, Washington, Miami, I think that's the way it went. In any event, so I accepted the job but I said I can't leave before the end of the ratings period for the, the February book. So I did that, and I left, like the day the book ended was the day that I left [WLBT-TV] Channel 3. I later learned that the ratings for the February book were the highest it had ever been for anyone, that includes Mark Ledbetter. This is according to Kay, Kay, oh, what is her name? Barksdale [sic, Kay Mills], not Kay Barksdale, the name of the book is 'Changing Channels[: The Civil Rights Case that Transformed Television],' and it's in her book. And she went into FCC [Federal Communications Commission] records and, and in that book she says, you got the highest ratings that anyone ever received, and there were more phone calls when people realized you had left than they had ever received about anything including Medgar Evers speech. And these were phone calls from people who wanted to know well what happened to him? Where did he go? Now here's the thing about that book, that ratings book, in those days, there were diaries and people had to write down what they watched. This is 1973 in Mississippi. Those diaries were not in the homes of black people. The viewers who had voted me number one were by and large white Mississippians. And in later years, when I'm trying to convince news directors in some larger markets, especially New York [City], that you know, black people can anchor the news, I was trying to get an anchor job, couldn't ever get one, they're telling me that the audience was gonna reject it, and I said well wait a minute, if white people in Mississippi could watch a young kid who didn't know what he was doing, watch TV or anchor the news, then certainly. So they didn't really get a black male anchor in New York until about twenty years after I had been working here. Well, let's see, twenty-- Speaker 2: You're talking about the '90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: I'm talking about 19-- Speaker 2: '90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: I mean, I'm talking about Monday through Friday, not weekend anchor, mind you. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) okay. I see. Speaker 1: I'm talking about main anchor. Speaker 2: Not 'til the '90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: John Johnson was the first six PM anchor at Channel 2, WCBS-TV. And that was around 1991, '92 [1992], somewhere in there. Story_ID: 171935 Speaker 1: NABOB [National Association of Black Broadcasters] is sort of a fraction of itself and so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's having (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The, the, the thing that we all slept, that is to say all people of good will who're interested in true diversity, is we slept the 1996 Telecommunications Reform Act [sic, Telecommunications Act of 1996]. That act more than anything-- Speaker 1: Messed everything. Speaker 2: --just decimated-- Speaker 1: This-- Speaker 2: --the, the ability of African Americans to-- Speaker 1: Oh, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --to, to own and to retain. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Just decimated it. And Newt Gingrich didn't like the, the tax certificate deal-- Speaker 1: The tax-- Speaker 2: --anyway, and so when that went away-- Speaker 1: There, there wasn't the chance of (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And, and the consolidation allowing one owner to have twenty, thirty, forty, fifty stations, you know, you're out of the game. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Story_ID: 171936 Speaker 1: You know, but, even, but with, even with, with that though, like say for instance Bob Teague, I told you I think passed on not too long ago, he had been a journalist for the New York Times, I mean print. And so when NBC asked him to, to join them, it wasn't that he was an inexperienced journalist, he didn't have any experience in broadcasting. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But he majored in journalism at the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] and had been working for the Times what, ten, ten odd years. Story_ID: 171937 Speaker 1: What are you learning, I mean who is teaching you when you're at W-- Speaker 2: WLBT [TV, Jackson, Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Yeah, WLBT. Who, who, and that's what, and who, I didn't really understand also is the newsroom primarily white or is it like, I didn't understand it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. The so, let me just say about WLBT and WJDX AM and FM. So there was a general manager there named Fred Beard. And when you read about him in 'Changing Channels[: The Civil Rights Case that Transformed Television]' he sounds like, and maybe was, a virulent, well, I don't wanna say virulent that's maybe a little too strong, but he had his point of view about people of color, and he also had his point of view about federal interference. And so, he didn't want anybody to tell him he had to hire somebody black in the station, no way. Fred Beard was a graduate of Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], M.B.A., World War II [WWII] veteran, you know, a smart guy. And, and was brought into TV when Lamar Life [Broadcasting Television] decided to, to, to start TV. He was, [WLBT] Channel 3 wasn't the first station. So, so I'm just saying that there were some people in ownership who were very, very close-minded. But there were other people in that building who, if you looked like you were open to learning and to listening, they gave you tips, they gave me tips. So there was this radio announcer named Tom Rhone who used to do a radio show called 'Land of Dreams.' He has this beautiful voice, Tom Rhone, 'Land of Dreams' on WJDX[-AM], anyway. He told me to smile when I did my read. Now this is on the radio, mind you, you can't see me, he said but if you smile you sound different. You sound better he says to me. So I tried that, the, Dave Meer [ph.], who was confined to a wheelchair, he was a graduate of University of Illinois, majored in journalism, couldn't get a job in the newsroom because of his disability, this is before Americans with Disabilities Act. So he ends up at Channel 3 in Jackson, Mississippi splicing movies and that's the closest he could get to the newsroom. When channel, when, L--when Lamar Life [Broadcasting Television] loses its license and they're, [Richard] Dick Morphew and some other people go away into other places because they don't wanna be around in the chaos of the license fight, they turn to the only guy with the journalism degree in the building, Dave Meer to run the news department, and it turns out that Dave is a genius. He organizes archives, he updates the, the film processing system. He is like, he, he knows how to cover news, he's a great editor. He's the person who taught me how to do a newscast, and who kept emphasizing, you know, keep it simple because I would always be looking at these other things and trying to like make it look like, you know, the networks. He said no, no we can't do that here. Don't be trying to superimpose stuff behind you. Just read the stories and, and he critiqued my writing, my, my early reports. And then I'm watching the other experienced journalists Jack Hill [sic, Jack Hobbs], among others, Choris Collins [ph.] who was, who was the first African American trainee, how they did their work, how they presented. So I'm watching and I'm listening and I'm, and I'm also being taught by people in that building. And, of course, I'm looking at the network and when I would go out of town I'm always sitting down, and so I'm, I'm learning on the job. That's, that's how that, that happened early on. Story_ID: 171938 Speaker 1: And it continued when I went to work for Post-Newsweek [later, Graham Media Group], Mr. [Jim] Snyder, who among others, hired Max Robinson and Warner Wolf, J.C. Hayward. He was the first CBS senior producer in Washington [D.C.], when 'CBS Evening News' began as a fifteen minute newscast. And they asked him to stay at CBS but he decided to stay with Post-Newsweek as the news director at Channel 9. Anyway, he told, made me aware of the unique visibility that I had in any place that I worked. And how that happened was I was in Jacksonville [Florida] and he asked me to give him a ride to the airport. So I'm taking Mr. Snyder to the airport and he says, "I notice you still have your Mississippi license plates." I said well, yeah. He says, "Well why haven't you changed to Florida?" I said because in Mississippi you have to pay a lot of money, with those ad valorem taxes and it was two hundred and some odd dollars when, you know, that was a lot of money, still is. I said well and they don't expire for another eight months so I'm, you know, gotta get Florida and whatnot. He says, no, no, no. He said you are being watched by everyone and you have to make sure that you always keep, oh, keep in your mind that people are watching everything that you do, and by not complying with the law, you could be arrested. You could be stopped and they'll look at your license and look at where you're living now and they watch you on TV and so they know you've been here beyond the limit. So you have to be very careful. Then he told me some other stories about some other people, some things that had happened. So, you know, people are giving me life lessons. And that's, I'm just learning a lot of different things along the way. Speaker 2: So you, did Mr. Snyder that's at WJXT? Speaker 1: Yeah, but he wasn't there. He was at WTOP in Washington but he was the vice president of news for all the Post-Newsweek Stations. I had applied to him for the job in Washington but he sent me to the Post-Newsweek Station in Jacksonville. Speaker 2: I see. So-- Speaker 1: And, and remained, and remained in contact with me for the rest of my career until, until he died. Story_ID: 171939 Speaker 1: So was he [Jim Snyder] a person just naturally looking for diversity or what is the role of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] in all of this? Or is it or does NABJ play a role in your life, much at all? You know, 'cause a lot of people their story is that they got their job through NABJ. Speaker 2: Well, obviously I didn't because-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --I got my first job before NABJ was founded. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: But I will say, that people who were part of the founding of NABJ played a role in my development, if only as role models. For example, Max Robinson who was one of the charter members, and [HM] Maureen Bunyan who was one of the charter members. I didn't, I can't say that Max and I were buddy, buddy but I remember specifically traveling to Washington [D.C.] when I was, from WJXT from Jacksonville, Florida, to hang out, to, to just be around that news, 'cause I still, 'cause Washington was where I wanted to be. I wasn't trying to get to New York [City] or L.A. [Los Angeles, California] or Chicago [Illinois], I wanted to work in Washington, I don't know, there was just something about that city that I was drawn to. And so Mr. [Jim] Snyder said okay, well if you come up, you know, come by and Steven Miller [ph.], Steven Miller was his assistant news director, will show you around and, and, and maybe you'll spend some time with Max. So I'm sitting in Max's office and Max says, "Watch this," and so one of his producers comes in and Max kind of beats him up around the head and the guy leaves the office and he says, "Okay, I was little hard on him but when you're the anchor man, you have to like keep 'em on their toes." And then he, yeah, I mean he's giving me like little, like really, important lessons in management in the moment. In the little time that we had there. And then he said okay, come on out on the set. And you can sit over there while here's doing the news, you know, and Max had this oh, he was just brilliant, just, I just love him. So we're in a commercial break, he says, "Okay, now, when this next guy comes out, I want you to look for his script." I'm thinking, okay. Look for his script, he says to me. When the guy comes out he has these little pieces of paper in his hand, and I'm looking for his script, and I'm thinking somebody's gonna bring this script out, nobody brings a script out. He sits up, end of commercial break, he starts talking to the camera, looks at this little piece of paper, talking to the camera, look at his little piece of paper. Then he would say, "Okay, let's go to the video tape." It was Warner Wolf, the sportscaster, who at that time did all of his newscasts off the top of his head extemporaneously. Let's go to the video tape was the role queue because in those days these big machines needed four or five seconds to lock in before you could actually see the video signal and since he didn't have a script for the director to mark five seconds before he gets to his last word, "All right let's go to the video tape," was the role queue for rolling the video and then Warner would talk over it and look, and the pieces of paper were the scores. Anyway, so Max showed me what someone could do who was really like way over the top skilled, you know, with his, with his craft. Story_ID: 171940 Speaker 1: NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] though, you asked me about NABJ. So in that sense Max Robinson was a mentor but not directly. Oh, the day that I went to see Max they said, "He's not here, he's at a hotel, at a meeting." I said, "Well what hotel?" They said, "Well it's not too far from here, you know, you could get there," and I don't know if I took a taxi, I must have taken a taxi, or maybe I drove 'cause I had my car. It was the organization meeting for NABJ. I stuck my head in the door and I heard a bunch of people talking about, you know, they were like I don't wanna say they were arguing but, you know, but they were trying to figure out what they were gonna do and how. And I thought it was a Washington [D.C.] organization. So I think I asked Max if I could, you know, see him later. He said, oh yeah, come back tonight and, and, and sit in on the show. If I had stayed at that meeting, I would have been a charter member of NABJ (laughter), but I didn't know. [HM] Allison Davis, do you know Allison Davis? Allison, did she tell you that story? How she went to the meeting because she was there with a friend and they, and she's telling, and she wants the meeting to hurry up and get over and she knew Robert's Rules of Order, and she's telling them, you all don't know what you're doing. You should do this, this, and this. And someone else says well, since you know so much about it miss, you're gonna be the parliamentarian (laughter). And that's how she became a charter member. Anyway, but so I cannot say that NABJ directly played a significant role in, certainly not in my early years but I have no doubt but that NABJ's development and rise played a role in the continuing interest of some broadcast owners to try to maintain some diversity into their newsrooms. And, of course, you know, then it's like well were you hired because you were black or were you hired because you were this because you knew what you were doing. I would like to think that even if I were hired because of the color of my skin, I certainly didn't keep the job because of the color of my skin, no, no matter where I was. You, you might get in the door because your uncle owns a station or because your wife's brother is the news director, whatever the reason you get in the door, doesn't keep you in, unless you can perform. And so we all come in through different paths and that's why when the people start talking about affirmative action is, is, is bad and it, it puts a cloud over, over the person who, I said that's a, that's, that's malarkey. Unless you're going to say that family action or wealthy action or gender action or spousal relationship action is, is that, is that gonna be a problem? Because everybody gets in different way, and excuse me, it is not based on ability. It's based on a lot on who you know, and, and what break you get at the moment. Now once you get in, you're gonna have to do something. But getting in is the key. Story_ID: 171941 Speaker 1: So it was Mr., you said Mr. Scott [sic, Jim Snyder] what was the one who, who took, you know, took you and was talking about how you do, he was advising, who owned the station, Mr., started with a S, no, he took you, he was, you were working for a station in Jacksonville [Florida]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Mr.-- Speaker 2: [Jim] Snyder. Speaker 1: Snyder, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, it was with a S, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah Snyder. He was the vice president of news for Post-Newsweek Stations [later, Graham Media Group] and-- Speaker 1: Oh, he was vice president? Speaker 2: Of news for Post, he was also a news director at Channel 9 [Washington, D.C.]. So he was running Channel 9's newsroom, hired Max [Robinson], hired J.C. [Hayward], hired Gordon Bonds [sic, Gordon Peterson], the whole legendary Channel 9 news team that's now been split to the winds because, you know, it's not all about Post-Newsweek, anymore. The only mistake Mrs. [Katharine] Graham every made was letting that station go. But anyway, that's a whole other story, you know, she flipped it for Detroit [Michigan], you know, about that? Okay. So there was this point, I gotta write a book, so there was this point that they thought the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] was going to-- Speaker 1: What period of time are we talking? Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s], like '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: So she is, in '74 [1974] you, that's when you're working in Jacksonville [Florida] anyway. Speaker 2: Yeah, but this is when the talk began about the FCC forcing stations that owned newspapers to give up one or the other. And so Mrs. Graham thought that she was gonna get in front of that rule, so she found a company that owned a station and a newspaper, and flipped. So she swapped Channel 9 in Washington [D.C] for DIV [WDIV, Channel 4] what is now DIV in Detroit [Michigan], and the Detroit Evening News got Channel 9 in Washington and she got Channel 4 in Detroit. So Detroit Evening News kept their newspaper and Washington Post kept their newspaper. Well, obviously it turned out she didn't have to do that. She could have kept Channel 9 because my God, would you rather have a station in Detroit today or in Washington, D.C. today? Well, who knew? But that, that was like the only goof that, that she made. But, but Mr. Snyder was her vice president of news throughout the, for all of her stations, for that one, for Detroit, for Miami [Florida], then later they bought one in Orlando [Florida] and then one in Texas, by then though, I think he had retired. Story_ID: 171942 Speaker 1: So what takes you, what, what makes you leave WJXT [Jacksonville, Florida] and go to WFSB [Hartford, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: I wanted to go to law school. Remember that was my goal when I came back from Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut]. The, the, the desire to go to law school came about because, and we didn't talk about this other influence in my life, sorry to be skipping around, so recall that I lived on Hamilton Street in Jackson [Mississippi] and but then we moved to Church Street. Well, in the old days Church Street was the street. As a matter of fact, one of my former high school teachers, has written book called 'Church Street: The Sugar Hill of Jackson, [Mississippi].' I think that's a little bit maybe--but her point was that Church Street was the first street where a black church was located after slavery, Mount Helm Missionary Baptist Church [later, Mount Helm Baptist Church, Jackson, Mississippi]. Named for the white man [Thomas E. Helm] who donated the proper at the corner of Lamar [Street] and Church to build the first edifice, it later moved up the street to Church and Dreyfus [Street]. It was the street where the largest African American landlord in Jackson lived. His name was [Sidney Dellon] Redmond, I can't remember his first name but he was a doctor and an attorney. It was a street where business leaders lived. [Walter] Duke Williams who was insurance and in banking and restaurant. Frank Conic, who beauty and barber supply. Doris [Tharp] Hall who was a philanthropist, humanitarian. Sidney Tharp who was an attorney, well he went to law school, didn't graduate. The, parsonage for Central United Methodist Church, Central Methodist Church was on Church Street. There was a hotel on Church Street, Edward Lee Hotel for black people where, you know, the bands, black bands when they couldn't stay downtown that's where they would live. And, of course, [George Washington] Carver Branch Library. So it was a bunch of stuff going on, on Church Street. Well, anyway, the owner of the property that we lived in on Church Street, was the son of this doctor, lawyer, Redmond, his name was Sidney R. Redmond. By the time I came along, Mr. Redmond was practicing law in St. Louis [Missouri] and visiting his property once a year in Jackson, and he would always come by our house and talk to my mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)], the sixth grade, but she was very wise and he just liked talking to her. So he, he'd be out there in the swing and she and dad [Warren Wallace (ph.)] would be out on the porch, I have no idea what they were talking about, but before he would leave, he would always call me to come out and give him a report on what I had been doing, what I had been reading, what'd I been studying, how my grades were. And he would always conclude the conversation by saying, "Always ask questions, young man, always ask questions." And he was, he had this, always wore a three piece suit with a, with a pocket watch, you know, I remember he looked very regal. And he lived in an apartment in his father's house that, that, his father that was now passed, but by now was a rental property two doors from us. So I saw this man off and on for years. Didn't know until I began to do some legal work that he had been one of the attorneys who handled the precursors to the Brown cases [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483]. He handled Gaines v. Missouri [Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. Canada, 305 U.S. 337], which was, you know, before they started to desegregate the second, secondary and elementary schools the NLLDF [sic, NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund], Thurgood Marshall and Hast--was it Hastie [William H. Hastie], you know, that bunch. They first tried to desegregate grad schools, then colleges, then high schools. So he handled Gaines v. Missouri, Redmond did. What I did not know until I read this book by my teacher two years ago, was that the man sitting on my porch encouraging me to always ask questions, was the grandson of one of the first African American United States senators. His name was Sidney R. Redmond, his mother was Alice Revels. Her dad was Hiram Revels [Hiram Rhodes Revels] who was the United States senator from the State of Mississippi along with Blanche K. Bruce, the two U.S. senators from Mississippi during Reconstruction. So I'm talking to the grandson of a United States senator and didn't know it. Now, of course, when you talk about my life being magical, and, and, and there's, I have really lived a charmed life especially considering where I came from materially speaking. But as you point out, there's no lacking of anything, there's just an abundance of knowledge and teaching and training and encouragement. That thank God, you know, I've been able to do a little bit with in these decades I've been here on earth. Story_ID: 171943 Speaker 1: So when you, when you want to go to Connecticut and you say to go to law school-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what are you thinking law school, are you thinking you're gonna leave journalism-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and go to law school? Speaker 2: That's exactly what I was thinking about doing. Because by the time I'm in Jacksonville [Florida], I didn't really like Jacksonville, anyway. It's a nice enough town but I didn't really wanna live there. And, and this is my first marriage. Speaker 1: I was gonna ask if you had gotten married. Speaker 2: Yeah, first marriage in Jacksonville. I got a job offer in Nashville, Tennessee at the station owned by Grand Ole Opry. Now there's a guy associated with Grand Ole Opry named Elmer Alley. I think he was program manager, I don't know what his, he had some high ranking job. So when I'm starting out in Jackson, Mississippi, anchoring the ten o'clock newscast that I mentioned to you, one night he comes by the station into the newsroom and offers me a job in Nashville, Tennessee. Now, remember I didn't wanna be a reporter and I didn't really know a lot about it but I did it and then started doing it, it was better than working in a office supply company. So I don't know anything about market sizes. I'm working at Channel 3 to get my degree from Millsaps [College, Jackson, Mississippi] in history. I'm still thinking I'm gonna try to go to law school. He says to me, "Well, you can go to law school in Nashville." And I said, "Yeah but I'm, I'm here to, to stay with my mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)]." He said, "Well, she can move to Nashville." I said, "Nah, she'd a never move to Nashville, she's not gonna move anywhere but Church Street [Jackson, Mississippi]." He says, "Well, you can send her money." I said yeah, I said, "Well I'm gonna try to do that once I get out of college anyway but I just wanna stay here with her now, you know, 'cause my dad [Warren Wallace (ph.)] died and I just wanna like spend some time with her as long as I can because I know I've gotta go at some point but I don't have to go now." So I basically turned down a job offer to go from Jackson, Mississippi which was like the eighty-fifth market, to Nashville which was like the thirty-second market (snapping fingers) and I would have been twenty-one-- Speaker 1: Now, oh, you think that, well twenty-six, I have. Speaker 2: No, no I-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh, this is earlier? Speaker 2: This, this is in Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Oh. Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jackson, Mississippi when he comes to visit me. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He comes to visit me in Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is before I've gone to-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --this is before I finished college. And I'm like not, I don't know market sizes, I don't know anything. And I thought later, my goodness, if I had gone to Nashville would I have met Oprah [Winfrey], but anyway? 'Cause this is the, she's a few years younger than me but I would have been there before her. Anyway-- Story_ID: 171944 Speaker 1: So now, flash forward, I'm out of college [Millsaps College, Jackson, Mississippi], I've been to Columbia [University, New York, New York], I've anchored the six o'clock news, I've gotten a job in Jacksonville, Florida, I'm trying to get out of Jacksonville, Florida, so I think, hmm, I wonder if that station in Nashville [Tennessee] would still like to hire me because they do have a law school there and I think I'm gonna go to evening division, so I apply. And they offered me a job. John Tesh picked me up from the airport, the John Tesh. Takes me to the building and while we're driving to the station, he says to me, "They don't know this but I'm going to be leaving soon. They're gonna offer you a job to anchor the weekend and to do this public affairs thing but I'm telling you that as soon as you get there, they're gonna try to make you anchor one of these shows that I'm doing." I said, "Well where are you going?" He said, "Well I can't tell you but I am leaving so you just need to know that." I said well thanks, John. I really appreciate it. So sure enough they offer me the job weekend and public affairs, you know, do two public affairs shows a week and anchor the weekend news, not a week, a month, a thirty minute specials, 'cause I had done that in, in, in Jacksonville, not, I'd done a public affairs show every day in Jacksonville, I wasn't doing the news there I was doing a talk show. So I said thanks, John. And they offered me the job. So I went back to Jacksonville and I told the general manager and Mr. [Jim] Snyder up in [Washington] D.C., look these people have offered me a job in Nashville and I gotta get out of Jacksonville and they said well what about Miami [Florida]? I says, no I don't wanna go to Miami. It's too far south, 'cause I'm trying to like figure out a way to get back to Mississippi to see mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)] when I have to. They said well, we don't have a job opening for you in Washington [D.C.], I said okay. I'll go to Nashville. They said well, wait a minute, we just got this station in Hartford [Connecticut], what about Hartford? I said, Hartford, Connecticut? They said, yeah. I said, oh. So now I call Nashville up and tell 'em uh thanks but no thanks. And that's how I stayed Post-Newsweek [later, Graham Media Group] and went from JXT in Jackson, in Jacksonville, to FSB in Hartford and applied to the University of Connecticut School of Law [Hartford, Connecticut], which had an evening division, and was accepted and went to law school. And so I wanted to go to law school so by the time I got into like second year of law school I had decided I wanted to be a communications lawyer because this is about the time the tax certificates are beginning, this is about '76 [1976], '77 [1977]. Ben Hooks [HM Reverend Benjamin Hooks] is, is on the-- Speaker 2: FCC [Federal Communications Commission]. Speaker 1: --FCC. And he was the one who proposed it initially I think, he and some others. And I figured it would be a good time 'cause my goal was to be an owner, a manager owner of a broadcast property. That was, that was what, that was why I was going to law school at that point. Initially, it was to go because of civil rights but by the time I got there, it was to become a communications lawyer. Story_ID: 171945 Speaker 1: So you, are you in law school [University of Connecticut School of Law, Hartford, Connecticut], how long does it take to get through the evening, with the evening-- Speaker 2: Four years and two summers and I barely made it (laughter). Speaker 1: That's a lot of work. Speaker 2: But I mean, yeah. It was a lot of work and the first marriage went by the boards during that time period. Speaker 1: Too much work? Speaker 2: That and relationship, it just, I'll put that in the book or maybe I won't. But the other thing that happened while I'm in law school one day, I'm in a parking lot, it's snowing and I see this yellow Corvette with the vanity license plate Cheryl. And I'm thinking if I had a Corvette, I would park it in the faculty lot right behind the building and pay the five [dollars] 'cause if I had a Corvette I could afford to do it. I wouldn't be parking it like a half a, a quarter a mile away over here in the midst of all this mess. So I'm standing there thinking this and this woman walks up to me, "Hey you're Randall Pinkston aren't you?" "Yeah, hi, how are you?" "Hi, I'm Cheryl Chase [Cheryl Chase Freedman]." Cheryl, Cheryl, "Oh, yeah, my dad gave me this car. I just wanted to tell you that I watch you on TV and really like your work." I said, "Oh well thank you." I said, "Well, I like what your dad does." She says, "What, you wanna be a developer?" I said, "Oh no," her father was a developer, he built like a lot of skyscrapers in Hartford [Connecticut]. I said "No, he owns WTIC AM and FM, right?" She says oh yeah. She says, "Yeah, my brother runs that." I said, "Well, someday that's what I'd like to do." I'd like to, you know, own a property. She said, "Oh well good luck." And I said good luck to you. She was two years ahead of me in law school and that was that. A year or so later, I'm still in Hartford, still in law school, I get a call, it's Cheryl. Cheryl says, "You remember that conversation we had in the parking lot, I wanna talk to about that, my, my brother and I." Long story short is they invited me to become part of their applicate group for Channel 61 in Hartford. Offered me 3 percent for thirty thousand. I had to put up my, my ten thousand [dollars] myself, they would lend me the other twenty [thousand], I'd pay them back over time. I was required to be the vice president over news and public affairs at a fixed salary. And it was going to be a competitive license and there were several applicants. And the other members of the team were gonna be, [James] Jimmy Grasso, the governor's [Ella T. Grasso] son, and Edna Negron Smith, who was a prominent educator, so they had an African American male with broadcast experience, they had a Hispanic woman with educational experience, they had the governor's son, Jimmy Grasso with, you know, governor's son, and they had Arnold [Arnold L. Chase]. And Cheryl had to drop out because her money was to intertwined with her father's and you had to have independent cash, and somehow they figured out how to make Arnold's money independent but not hers, I don't know how that worked. Had to go to [Washington] D.C. for a comparative hearing. And about a year later, I got the job at Channel 2 in New York [New York]. Story_ID: 171946 Speaker 1: Actually, actually, I'm skipping around. When I graduated from, from law school [University of Connecticut School of Law, Hartford, Connecticut], I had been accepted as a minority legal intern for the National Association of Broadcasters [NAB]. What is his name? I can't remember his name. But he said, you know, there are a lot of applicants and they have much better grades than yours, some of them have been on law review, but nobody has ten years of broadcast experience. So we're gonna give you a, give you a try, and this is the salary. Well the salary was about half of what I was making at Channel 3 [Jackson, Mississippi], and I was gonna do it. And my friend said, well, what are you gonna tell your creditors? I said well, you know, tell 'em I'm making less money now, pay them when I can. He said, "Are you crazy," you know, anyway. So, but that was what I was gonna do. So no I'm gonna be that while we're waiting on this license thing to come through. Well, before I could leave Channel 3, but after I had accepted the NAB's offer, Krasnow, Erwin Krasnow, he was the legal counsel, Erwin Krasnow. I got the call from WCBS-TV, come down because they had seen my work and they wanted to talk to me. So I drove down to New York [City]. And they said, so, you have a very nice career and we would really like to offer you a job as a reporter. I said well, I'm in law school. They said yeah, we know, but we need somebody right now. I said well, I've been in law school for three and a half years, I've got like another semester to go. I, I can't, I can't just, I really want to get my law degree. They said well, thanks a lot, that's too bad. We'll move on. I drove back home to Hartford [Connecticut] and I says okay. Still going to NAB. They call me back, Channel 2 does, a month later. "Well, look, you know, we still looking around and we still haven't found anybody and tell you what, we'll offer you this amount of money and you can finish law school. You know, what do you have one day a week?" I says yeah, I'm just taking a seminar. They said yeah, okay, well, you, you can do that and here's the salary. I said, well, now remember, I was gonna be taking half to go to NAB, so they offered me a little bit more than I was making in Hartford, I said, "But that's about what I'm making in Hartford," but they didn't believe that. They said, really? I said, yeah. I said I anchor every day and we get fees and this is, I said you, you know, Dan Gold [Daniel E. Gold] was my general manager when I started and by now he's working for CAU [WCAU], CBS in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I later learned that they actually called Dan Gold up and said this kid, Pinkston, he says he's make this amount of money and Dan said yeah, he could have been making more than that if he had taken the six o'clock anchor that we offered him but he didn't wanna do that because he didn't wanna leave his evening law division, that wasn't really why I didn't take it that's another story, but anyway, he said, yeah. It that's, that's why, that's true. That's the amount of money that he earns and he could have been earning more. And so then CBS called back and said okay. We'll pay you your money, your, your money. Now will you come? And I said, and I can finish law school? They said, yeah. And you can prepare for the bar but we're not gonna put that in writing. I said what about anchor? They said nope, no anchor. So, that's how I got the job at Channel 2. Story_ID: 171947 Speaker 1: Now, a year and a half later, Arch Communications gets the license, goes on the air as WTIC-TV [Hartford, Connecticut], which was the old Travelers [Insurance] signage before Post-Newsweek [later, Graham Media Group] bought Travelers' station from them and changed it from TIC to FSB, so now TIC, AM and FM is on the air with Arnold's [Arnold L. Chase] running the radio, and now he takes the name and applies it to the TV station, and says, "Okay, Randall, come on, we got the station." So now I'm looking at this salary that I had agreed to, which is now like much less than what I was making in New York [City] and now I'm about to get married again. So I had to tell them that I couldn't take it and they said well, sign over your 3 percent. I said well, what do you mean, just sign it over? They says yeah. 'Cause that was the deal, you know, you're supposed to come back, you're not coming back. So my friends told me, you don't have to do that, you can insist on some money because 3 percent of a station about to go on-air is worth something. Well, long story short, now you will understand why I'm not in business, I got not a dime. I signed the papers, gave them their 3 percent back, never paid the ten thousand [dollars], they never gave me anything. And they told reporters at the point people were asking about me, "Well where is Pinkston?" And they said, "Oh we bought him out." That's why I was asking you about the consideration thing 'cause, you know, since that point I've become very keen about (laughter). Speaker 2: We're gonna change. Story_ID: 171948 Speaker 1: And I didn't tell you this one, so while I'm in Hartford [Connecticut], and I'm anchoring the, I'm anchoring the noon news, yeah, noon news-- Speaker 2: And you're in law school [University of Connecticut School of Law, Hartford, Connecticut] at the same time? Speaker 1: And I'm in law school at the same time, right. So, I'm, I'm anchoring the noon news, I'm going to school at night, nodding off in class. Anyway, an opening develops for the six o'clock co-anchor 'cause the, the co-anchor who was working there left to go to Florida, Al Terzi. And my dear friend, Adrianne Baughns [Adrianne Baughns-Wallace] was filling in and everybody thought that she was gonna get the job. Or maybe I was during the weekend, maybe she was doing the noon and I was on the weekend. No, no, by the time she was doing this I was doing the noon news. So one day Adrianne, decided to go on vacation because they weren't coming up with the money that she thought they should pay her, especially since they had not really paid her what they should have paid her initially, so she just took off. So I was filling in for Adrianne who was filling in for Al. And I don't know what I was thinking that day. But the main anchor, a guy named Pat Sheehan, read this long copy, I mean it seemed like it went on forever. He turns to me and he says, "Randall," and I said "Okay, take a break Pat. In other news today," da, da, da. Ordinarily I wouldn't have done that, I don't know why I did that, it just felt like the thing to do, so I did it. So I later heard that the general manager called the news director who was in the control room and said to him, "I think we've solved our Adrianne problem." And they called me to the general manager's office right after the broadcast, and said, "You know, we've been watching you develop and we think that you and Pat would make a good team. How would you like to become the six o'clock anchor? And, of course, we'll give you a raise." Now, I told you that I told them that I didn't take that job because I didn't wanna go to the, I didn't wanna change my studies. But the other reason, the real reason I didn't the job was because Adrianne was a friend, I thought Adrianne deserved more than she had received, I knew Adrianne really wanted that job, she had, she was a single mom, she had a son she was raising by herself, she had been very nice to me, very kind, very supportive. There was no, you know, no kind of relationship thing just, and she was older, she had been in the [U.S.] Air Force before coming to broadcasting, she started in Albany [New York] and they heard her reading the, reading and she just has a voice that, she could read a phone book and you would listen to her. So I told them no because of school but the real reason was because I really thought that Adrianne should get that job. Now with the benefit of, you know, maturity and everything, I now understand that it's not up to me to decide who, 'cause they could have turned around and given the job to somebody else. So it was kind of like dumb on my part in a way but I felt that it was the right thing to do. And so I found a plausible reason for turning it down, although the real reason was because I wanted my, and she did get the job. And she stayed there for years until she got ready to leave. Story_ID: 171949 Speaker 1: The addendum to that whole story is that years later when I'm in New York [New York] and I'm starting out at C, Channel 2 WCBS and I'm living in Brooklyn [New York, New ], Adrianne [Baughns-Wallace] calls me up and tells me that she has a house for rent, that her, her, her dad had died and she wanted me to rent her house in Queens [New York, New York] and I was, she knew that I didn't like my studio in Brooklyn, although with the benefit of hindsight I should have kept that thing, $190 a month, could have bought it for ten, now, it goes for a quarter million. Anyway, so I said, you have a house, I said but you're gonna be charging me more rent than I'm paying now. She said yeah but you can get roommates, I said oh yeah you're right. So, it was three bedrooms, and they had a tenant in the basement. So I said okay. So I get in her house, three months later she calls me up and tells me she's gonna sell me the house. I said I can't buy your, Adrianne, if you had told me you were gonna sell the house I would have stayed in Brooklyn. I can't buy it, she says, "Yes, you can, yes you can, you can buy it. It's very easy, very reasonable, I know you can do this." And she was right, I mean, but I just, my money was going, you know, coming out of a marriage, sending money home to my mom [Lucy Wallace (ph.)]. So I bought the house. I still have the house to this day and that's where our oldest daughter, my oldest stepdaughter and her family have lived for the last fifteen years raising our granddaughters. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Thank you very much Adrianne. Speaker 2: And that was in Brooklyn? Speaker 1: Queens. Speaker 2: --in Queens and in Queens (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Well I was living in Brooklyn but the house was in Queens. Speaker 2: It is in Queens? Speaker 1: Is in Queens, yeah. Story_ID: 171950 Speaker 1: So now when you get to WCBS TV [New York, New York], who is in this market, because this is 1980? Speaker 2: Yeah. African Americans or period? Speaker 1: African Americans-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and also others but African Americans. Speaker 2: Okay. At Channel 2 at WCBS TV on-air when I arrived, Carol Martin was anchoring the weekend news. Vic Miles, who had been a fill-in anchor at 11 when I was at Columbia [University, New York, New York] in '73 [1973]. Vic had been anchoring the news at eleven o'clock but not on a permanent basis, and he was number one but the bosses decided that they didn't want an African American male to have that position and so they put Vic on the weekends. So he and Carol were dividing weekend news duty. And me, oh, Chris Borgen who is Haitian, so I don't know if Chris ever identified himself as being black but he was Haitian. He had been a police officer, he had been a detective sergeant, like the youngest detective sergeant in New York City Police Department at the time that he left. He was also a poet. J.J. Gonzales was a street reporter. J.J. was, or had been a, an amateur boxer. And Arnold Diaz, who I'm not sure that he ever identified as being Hispanic but he used a Hispanic last name. So those were the individuals on the air at WCBS-TV when I arrived in 1980. Speaker 1: So who's at NBC and who's at ABC? Speaker 2: At NBC at the time Bob Teague was a reporter. Carol Jenkins, I think she was anchoring weekend news, she may have been doing the morning news cut-ins but I think she was doing weekend news. And, of course, Sue Simmons was the main anchor with Chuck Scarborough at six [o'clock] and eleven [o'clock]. And, oh, well, when I came, okay, so, but within a year after I came my friend, Reggie Harris came up from New Haven [Connecticut]. Reggie and I had an interesting history. He replaced me when I left Channel 4 in Jacksonville, Florida, and I moved to Hartford [Connecticut]. Then he got a job at WTNH [New Haven, Connecticut] and we kind of got to know each other 'cause we didn't really know each other, you know, personally except, you know, we saw each other on TV. And then I came to Channel 2, living in Brooklyn [New York, New York] subletting this apartment and he got a job at Channel 4 and he lived with me for a minute. He moved to New Jersey and after I got married we were visiting him one day and we saw this house and we moved to New Jersey. And the tragic part about it is that Reggie died, heart failure, about fourteen years ago when he was forty-six, forty-five, forty-six years old. Anyway, so, Reggie came afterwards, so that was it at Channel 4. At Channel 7, John Johnson was the weekend anchor, Roz [HM Roz Abrams] wasn't there yet, Melba Tolliver I think was anchoring but I'm not sure if she was doing Monday through Friday but I think she was still at Channel 7. Melba had been one of my teachers at the Columbia summer program [Columbia University, New York, New York] as well. That, oh, what's her name? Rojas, Gloria Rojas, she was either at four or seven [o'clock], I can't remember which one. She was a reporter. And did I say David Diaz was at Channel 2, it was Arnold Diaz at Channel 2, David Diaz was at Channel 4. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. At Channel 5 Bill McCreary was co-anchoring the news, I think, with Bill Jorgensen, I think. And then later Bill just had his weekend program 'The McCreary Report.' And I don't remember anybody of color being on channel, oh, Fred Casey (ph.) was the, was the African American reporter on Channel 11. And that, and then at 'New Jersey Nightly [News],' there was Pat Battle and Rolonda Watts. Speaker 1: The, I mean, when you say that the numbers seem high, you know, compared-- Speaker 2: But they weren't anchor, wait except for Sue Simmons. Speaker 1: Oh, they weren't anchoring, they were reporting. Speaker 2: Except for Sue Simmons, there were, there were no Monday through Friday anchors except maybe Melba, although I am not sure if she still had the job at that point. And the other anchors were all weekend or-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. There were no anchors. Story_ID: 171951 Speaker 1: Are anchors the only ones that use agents you know, or get agents (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Well, a lot of on-air people were using agents. Speaker 1: So did you have an agent? Speaker 2: Not to enter. I had a friend who was a communications lawyer, a contract lawyer, who advised me. He had been my resident advisor at Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut] in freshman year. He was also a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] grad. His name is Daulton Lewis [Jr.]. Speaker 1: Oh, I know him (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. He's J.D.-M.B.A.. And, you know, he gave me some tips, like he was the one who told me not to accept that first deal that Channel 2 [New York, New York] offered because they would always offer me something low first, and he said and this is the number you ought to be trying to get them to get to because this is what, this is like the max but this is what they're paying people at this point, at the max. And so I got the max. It was fifty thousand [dollars] a year. In 1980, good money. Good money then, good money now (laughter). Story_ID: 171952 Speaker 1: So when you come into this market this is, [Edward Irving] Ed Koch is mayor [of New York City]-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Um-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what is the state of things and what are the things that you're reporting on? Speaker 2: You mentioned Ed Koch, I think, so in this job of reporting, I find that there's always a lot of learning to be done. One of the things I learned from Mayor Koch, you know, that, that when you're in, New York City is not Hartford, Connecticut. It's hardball. And you have to bring your A game every day. And you do not assume anything. You don't think that just because you're asking them a polite question that you're gonna get a polite answer. So my first experience with, with Mayor Koch that I, that I remember, well, it was, there were a couple but this, this was one that, that I, I repeat to students. So I'm interviewing Curtis Sliwa of the Guardian Angels, which was a group of young people who would go around and, you know-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A vigilantes service. Speaker 2: --city was high crime, vigilante, yeah. Speaker 1: Sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah vigilantes. But not-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not, not quite. Speaker 2: Not like, not quite vigilantes but they were like self-appointed defenders of whoever. So Sliwa had some kind of beef with the mayor, I forgot what it was. And so we interviewed Sliwa outside [New York] City Hall. And then we go into city hall to interview the mayor, you know, to get the other side, you know. Stories always have more than two sides but anyway, you, you at least wanna get two. So the mayor consented to an interview and I repeated whatever it was that Sliwa said to me. And the mayor gave me that Koch, "Well how do you know that happened? Did you research that?" "Well he said it Mr. Mayor." "Well, do you believe everything people tell you?" And, you know, it was like, it was, it was confrontational but it was also teaching this rookie from Connecticut a lesson, if you're going to come to Koch, you better do more than just come in with a polite, you know, what's your opinion about this Mr. Mayor, you better be ready. Some years later, with that memory in mind, there was a big scandal, series of stories about medical examiners autopsies, the city medical examiners autopsy with respect to deaths in police custody. And I had gone to some book somewhere, did some research, written down the exact quote, came back to a city hall news conference and waited for my turn, and I asked the question and he didn't answer it. So I asked the question again, and he didn't answer it. So the third time I said, with all due respect Mr. Mayor, the question is blah, blah, blah. So he gives me that Koch look again and he says, "You ask the questions, I'll give the answers." And with that I asked no other questions and I got back to the newsroom, and when I walked in the door the assignment manager said, "City hall has been calling us since the end of their news conference, what did you do to the mayor?" I said, "I didn't do anything to the mayor I just asked, you know, this is our story, this is--" He said, "That's what you did?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "Well they're telling us not to use that sound bite." And so the news director said, "Well, that's exactly the sound bite we're going to use (laughter)." As I said it was a wonderful time. I like Koch. You know, Koch, was like straight shoot from the, you know, like take no prisoners kind of guy. Story_ID: 171953 Speaker 1: I mean there were things then and now, that were not right. One of the early deaths in police custody that I covered [for Channel 2, New York, New York] was this death of Michael Stewart, a young African American artist, graffiti artist, who was allegedly found to be scrawling on the wall of a subway station, and he was arrested for that and before he was taken to Bellevue Hospital [later, NYC Health + Hospitals Bellevue, New York, New York] he died in police custody allegedly at his own hand. Well what had actually happened was that Michael Stewart had been out with a white girl, this is 1980 [sic, 1983] in New York City, this is not Mississippi 1954, they parted company and kissed each other good night, he goes into the subway, she goes wherever she's going, cops follow him into the subway, and allege that they caught him writing on the wall. Take him into custody, put him in the back of their car, take him to the [New York City] Transit Police Department Station, and Michael Stewart ends up dead. Big trial, four police officers, all acquitted. That was 1981 [sic, 1985]. That happened in the Koch Administration [Mayor Ed Koch]. And there were other stories of that sort, then and now. When I see this, these things happen, the choke hold, the man on Staten Island [Eric Garner], and Michael [Michael Brown] in, I mean, I've been out here a long time now and, and it, and the young people are incensed and I understand that and, and my, my, my thought then and my thought now is that, in this society the only answer to these problems, well its two-fold, you've got to participate politically, you've got to vote, and then you've got to be guardians and stewards over the people that you put in office, you just can't like put somebody in office and expect them to do the right thing. You gotta like sit on 'em even after they're there. And, and that, you know, there are failings on all three of those fronts, always have been. But in part because of all of the, at, at least in New York, you did get David Dinkins elected, now I'm not saying that solved anything but it did bring a, because of those demonstrations and because of the pushback, we have black police commissioners, you, you got some things done. In New York, when all is said and done, it's one of the most progressive cities, even with all the problems. You know, you, you, you have police commissioners who even when they are not exactly the way you want 'em to be, they're not as bad as they could be. And they certainly aren't as bad as they are in some places where you've got the officers pointing assault weapons at law-abiding peaceful demonstrators. Story_ID: 171954 Speaker 1: How does this newsroom differ from the other new, newsrooms? Speaker 2: Which one? Speaker 1: CBS [Channel 2] here in New York [New York]. How does that-- Speaker 2: Differ from-- Speaker 1: The other newsrooms in Hartford [Connecticut]-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) where, where-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where you worked? Speaker 2: Where I've worked? Oh, hmm, I had less freedom to do the kind of stories that I wanted to do when I wanted to do them but I had a lot more to do. I mean, every day I was doing something, so I'm learning something. So I'm, I'm engaged with, you know, this day is maybe Bensonhurst, Brooklyn [New York, New York], tomorrow is Staten Island, New Jersey. I mean, I'm all over the place, Harlem [New York, New York], Brook--you know, Queens [New York, New York]. Political people, community people, crazy stories like dog, Frisbee catching fetch contest, double dutch. A lot of ethnic type stories. Festivals celebrated by Italians, by Polish people, by Jewish people. I, I learned the dreidel song, you know, because I'm doing stories on Purim. And this is just a much larger, more complicated place to, to get my arms around. And so, and so what I did was, I just focused on what I had to do that day. And then later when I became the New Jersey correspondent, you know, for the State of New Jersey I was doing a lot of political stuff with, with governor, gosh, I can't remember his name [sic, James Florio], I'm having, hmm, he had been a congressman and he was a Democratic governor and he raised taxes and he got bounced out after one term in office. Did a lot of stories down in Atlantic City [New Jersey] when those casinos, which are now being shut down, were being built. Speaker 1: Now did they always have, when you first got to, to WCBS, did they always have a New Jersey correspondent? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, yeah. They had a New Jersey correspondent and they had a Long Island [New York] correspondent and I distinctly remember asking the, one of the assignment editors, you know, I said, he said, you, I'm gonna apply, I said I wanna apply for the Long Island 'cause I was living in Queens at the time, I wanna apply for the next time this slot becomes open. And he told me, that there was no way that they were going to ever, he said this is just between us Randall, he said look, then he said here's the deal. I know you fill out in Long, fill-in Long Island a lot and you fill-in for the New Jersey correspondent a lot but we probably wouldn't hire you to be the bureau correspondent in any of those places because there are so many white viewers. I said, and I won't use his name, you know, but I said you, you're kidding me. And then that's when I told him the Mississippi thing, I said, you know, white people were watching me in Mississippi, they watch me here. They, why do you think that they wouldn't accept me as a reporter? He said just because those two markets are very important to this station and they don't wanna take a chance that they will alienate any viewers. Now, if I were to go to this guy today and ask him if he remembered that he probably wouldn't, if he did remember, he probably wouldn't acknowledge it, and he doesn't work for CBS anymore, but I remember he told me that. So, you know I didn't report it or anything, who am I gonna tell? Story_ID: 171955 Speaker 1: But before I left there, I ended up covering [HM] Jesse Jackson's presidential campaign in '84 [1984], and in '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: And I wanna talk about that because '84 [1984] is half way through your tenure-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --at the station. You began in 1980-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and so '84 [1984]. And I a lot of people, you know, we've talked to people about this period. I wanna hear your experience and what that opened up and what exposure that gave you. Speaker 1: Well, by '84 [1984] there was no doubt on the part of the managers at WCBS-TV [Channel 2, New York, New York] that I could do, that I could sub-anchor that I could, I could anchor actually, or I could cover any story, anywhere. That, that wasn't a, a question at all. And I asked to cover the Jesse story and, you know, the idea was well he can probably, probably knows him and can get on the inside or whatever. And nobody really thought Jesse was gonna do much in '84 [1984]. Remember he came in late and he started in New York [New York] and he started at the churches, that's when I met [HM] Reverend [Calvin O.] Butts, actually I had met Reverend Butts a little earlier now that I think about it, and [HM] Reverend [Dr. Herbert D.] Daughtry out of Brooklyn [New York, New York]. So Jesse did his church thing. And we, we meaning me and my photographer and my sound man, a guy named Trace Emory [ph.] and Keith Dabney [ph.], which, and I didn't have a producer, so we would cover events and then I would come back to the building to write the story and I would send my crew out, I said okay get Jesse doing this and get someone doing that and bring it back and we'll put in the piece. And so we had a very fun, exciting time covering Jesse's launch of his presidential campaign here in New York City. And in the course of doing that, of course, you know, I'm, I'm interviewing or running into the legendary Percy Sutton, the Godfather, as, as we called him in broadcasting and in politics, the first Borough President of Manhattan, African American. Ministers, political leaders, Carl McCall [HM H. Carl McCall], just a bunch of folks that I'm not getting to hang out with them but at least I know them, they know me, they see my work and I think that kind of helped over the long term. Now after it was over, I mean I was not sent to the Democratic National Convention [San Francisco, California] that year. I wanted to go but I, I, I wasn't sent, they sent other people. So, you know, that happened a lot, you know, that stories that I would really wanted to do and I was really like dying to go to these places, I didn't get the call. You know, I can do some stuff but not other stuff. But in '88 [1988] when Jesse ran again, and I covered him the second time from soup to nuts, I did get to the Democratic National Convention [Atlanta, Georgia], and you may recall that Jesse was the second highest vote getter in terms of delegates. And ordinarily that was the person who got the vice presidential nod but nobody really thought that was gonna happen and it didn't. Story_ID: 171956 Speaker 1: But after that, I said to, to, to the, the same guy who told me I couldn't be the Long Island [New York] or the what, I said well look, it seems to me that we need more than one political reporter. Let, let me be one of the political reporters. Well that didn't happen. But they did make me the New Jersey correspondent, and that turned out to have been a fairly nice place to be. Oh, at Channel 4, my friend, Reggie Harris had been the New Jersey correspondent for most of his tenure at Channel 4, all of his tenure at Channel 4. So that's, so they, so, so the fact that Channel 2 [New York, New York] didn't wanna hire a black person as a borough correspondent was kind of crazy since the NBC affiliate, which was, I think, 2 and 4 were always in a fight for number two because Channel 7 was almost always number one. It didn't matter to their, to their ratings but that's, that's the way it went. You know, and, I guess because I grew up in Mississippi and because I saw so many things that weren't fair, that as far as I was concerned it, unfairness didn't really mean too much. It was like okay, so you don't get this or this doesn't happen for you, you know, this door closes, look for a door that's open. I mean, I'm not gonna be beating on a door that somebody has like locked, slammed in my face. I'm just gonna turn and try to find something else to do, somewhere else to go. And that's sort of have been the, has been the template for how I have dealt with not getting things that I wanted or thought I deserved or should have had from. And, and most of that experience happened from my time in New York [City] because remember until New York, things were just being thrown at me. You know, it's only been from my time in the Big Apple, where allegedly everything is, you know, democratic or whatever the heck, that I have really confronted some of the most challenging periods of my career. Story_ID: 171957 Speaker 1: So can you describe that, the 1988 Democratic National Convention [Atlanta, Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Ah. Speaker 1: --'cause that's your first time. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was a, it was exciting, it was thrilling, and it was, it was difficult, you know. But there were two of us so I wasn't doing all of it, I was just doing some pieces, Josh Mankiewicz was doing the, the caucus, the, the main, the main nominee. I don't remember too much about it except that I was filing stories every day. Speaker 1: Now who are you meeting? Are you meeting other African Americans for the first time or not? Speaker 2: I don't remember, well certainly I had met Donna Brazile. I think I met Donna Brazile in '80 [1980], I don't, I don't, I think she was with them in '84 [1984], I think, but I know for sure she was with them in '88 [1988]. But by '88 [1988], now Jesse [HM Jesse Jackson] is, Jesse doesn't have as much time for the local reporters as he had the first time. So I didn't have as much access, so, you know, there was that difference. And, you know, I could get like little snippets if I was in the right place at the right time but whereas I could like meet him or, or be at Abyssinian [Baptist Church, Harlem, New York, New York] to make sure that I got an interview with him, you know, by '88 [1988] that was by the boards. You know, he was network then. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 171958 Speaker 1: How does it happen that you become White House correspondent in 1990. I mean just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --really two years later it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're having trouble even becoming New Jersey correspondent, I mean, correspondent, so how does that-- Speaker 2: Well, when I started working at Channel 2 [New York, New York] and they knew or someone knew that I had done public affairs programming for all of my prior career at Post-Newsweek Stations [later, Graham Media Group]. Are you familiar with "morning news ghetto," that, okay. That's the time when they play these public affairs shows. Speaker 1: Oh, so, oh, you're talking about the concept of morning news ghetto, yes, yeah. Speaker 2: When they play these public affairs shows that nobody wants to do and they don't think anybody is gonna watch and for the most part they are kind of geared towards minorities or, you know, ethnic minority issues. So I had to do those shows. I wasn't getting extra money for it but we had one called 'Public Hearing Up Front,' I can, there was a series of them and for ten years. And, and some of them frankly were interesting and the guests were interesting. For example, I interviewed Senator [Daniel Patrick] Moynihan, [Richard] Ravitch the guy who fixed the New York City subway, the big developer, Helmsley, Harry Helmsley. I'll never forget asking Mr. Helmsley what's the secret to acquiring the amount of real estate that you have and he said when you buy, never sell it (laughter). So I had done all these, and you know, environmental issues political issues, cultural stuff. What I did not know is that one of the managers of CBS who had started as a news director later became the general manager then was a vice president of news for CBS Television Stations then went to the network, was a public affairs nut. Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] graduate named Eric Ober. So by 1990, August of 1990 he's the president of CBS News. And he knew that I had been continually trying to find a weekend anchor job 'cause that's, I just wanted to be a weekend anchor reporter that's, I just kept looking for that, could never could get, could get it. Well, there were two occasions when I maybe could have gotten it but I, it didn't happen. But anyway, so he calls me to his office and he says, I know that you've been trying to get a weekend anchor job and we haven't been able to get that for you and you haven't been able to find it on your own but I have another idea for you. I want you to go to Washington [D.C.]. So he's in the president's chair at CBS Network News, I said you want me to go to Washington, I'm thinking because he had worked in local he still kind of, you know, running it or, I said, but Eric, we don't have an owned and operated station in Washington, do we? Unless we're buying, are we buying Channel 9? He says, no. He says, I'm not talking about, he said I'm the president of the network, I don't work in local, I don't work in CBS Television Stations. I'm offering you a job at the network. I said, oh, the Washington Bureau? He said yeah. I said well, okay. But what do you want me to do? He said well you think about it. He said but we were kind of thinking that we wanted to put you in the White House. He just kind of like said it like that. And like I'm, I'm hearing him say this and I'm, and I'm knowing that I have no Washington experience, no White House experience, no, I'm thinking about all the deficits that I don't have. And I'm like not sure that I should do it, even if I really, really wanted to, and I wasn't quite sure I wanted to, so he said think about it and get back to me later this week. And here's some people you might wanna call. Story_ID: 171959 Speaker 1: So I called Jacqueline Adams, you know Jacqueline Adams? And so Jackie tells me that it's not the kind of job [White House correspondent] that they ordinarily would, that she would see me in because the particular job that she was thinking about that most people got was the weekend news job where you're chasing paper all week, you're doing a little radio, you're never on TV except on weekends and a lot of times there's no weekend newscast and it's usually what they give people who are just starting out in the network and you've, not in the network but you've been, you know, at Channel 2 [New York, New York] for a long time, you're an experienced journalist and so, you'd find this very boring and I don't know, Randall, I'm, I'm not urging you to take this 'cause you're not gonna be the number one White House correspondent she says. I said no, no he didn't say I was gonna be number one, just one of them. She said well, you know, there are three and, you know, you'd probably be number three. So I thought about that and, and that was sort of the same kind of advice I was getting from people who had done the job or people who were familiar with the job. But I still had this little idea in the back of my head that I could like maybe get some kind of media ownership. And so what I was thinking was, ah, so I really only have to work two days a week, and I can go to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and do some research and go to NAB [National Association of Broadcasters] and get to meet some people, and I'm thinking about all this free time that I'm thinking I'm going to have, where, yeah, I could do this with my eyes closed, if this is the job, you don't want me to be on TV every day, and see the other thing is I can't really remember ever really wanting to be on TV. I mean it was like not like something that I was dying to do. I really wanted to be a lawyer which is why I spent those four years and those two summers in law school [University of Connecticut School of Law, Hartford, Connecticut], I really wanted to do that. But I can't really remember that I gotta be on TV. So while most people go to [Washington] D.C. wanting to be on TV, if they didn't wanna put me on TV I would have been perfectly fine with just doing two days a week. That would have been fine and then I could do what I wanna do with the rest of my time. This is what I'm thinking. So with that in mind, I said yes. And then I said okay so what about a raise? And he says to me, no raise 'cause you're already making more than we would ordinarily pay, and then that went right to what Jackie was telling me, that he was really offering me a beginner job and he's telling me that we paying you more as a local reporter at Channel 2 than most people would be paying for this job if they were coming in. And I'm saying but I gotta move my, he said well, we'll move you but, you know, no raise. So I moved from Channel 2 to CBS Network News in Washington with no raise, thinking I'm gonna have this free time and thinking it would be a nice experience and I always wanted to work in Washington. I get to Washington, December, 1990, President [George H.W.] Bush is in Latin America somewhere, I don't know where he is, he's not in town. So I have little bit of time to get oriented, I think I had to work through the holidays. I think I start in the White House like late December or early January. Two weeks into January, [Operation] Desert Storm [January 1991] starts. And I am on the air on the lawn of the White House every morning, twice a morning. Two times a day, five days a week, and I'm working weekends. And I'm covering the Gulf War from the White House. Story_ID: 171960 Speaker 1: So what happened, so I was asking, so you were number, you were in the number three job. Speaker 2: I was in the number three job but the number one correspondent [White House correspondent]. Lesley Stahl, had a different assignment. She wasn't in the White House every day so the number two person, Wyatt Andrews, became number one and I became number two. So instead of Wyatt being on the news every morning, he was on the news every evening, and I was on the news every morning. And there was no number, I mean I was number three but there were only two of us so I was also doing the number three job on weekends, and I was doing radio. So, that was how my White House career began. It was kind of like the way my broadcast journalism career began, I start out as a producer, writer and anchor of a fifteen minute newscast, and the network, instead of coming up as a general assignment reporter and getting a beat and then ending up in the White House, I start in the White House. I could be facetious and say it was all downhill from there but that's not quite true. Although there were times (laughter). Speaker 1: So what does Jackie [Jacqueline] Adams say about that? Speaker 2: Well, I never asked her whether she had envisioned this happening because no one did. I, you know-- Speaker 1: What about salary at that point also, if you're, you know, thinking you're doing two days and you end up doing four, six, whatever, six, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The bureau, the, the bureau chief of CBS News at that point, Barbara Cochran, now Cohen, said to me at the point that it was clear that Lesley wasn't coming back and that Wyatt was going to be the, the number one, and so therefore I was definitely going to be doing the morning news every day, she said, "Randall, in the [U.S.] military we call this a field grade promotion. You're being promoted to CBS White House correspondent for morning news." I said oh, so what about a raise? And she said, that's what a field grade promotion is, it's a promotion with no raise, and she laughed. So there was no raise, not at that point. I did, I later got a raise but, but not, not then. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: You know, I mean I got the raises that were a part of my deal from channel, from, from WCBS [Channel 2, New York, New York]. And then that deal had been extended by another two years, so there was like those bumps and that was it. Story_ID: 171961 Speaker 1: But this is the thing, it's, here, you know, national news, news desk-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --the White House, there are protocol rules of the trades, priorities, I mean, all, so how are you learning that? Speaker 2: A lot of it came from colleagues in other organizations. Ann Compton of ABC News was particularly helpful. Helen Thomas and her team. Speaker 1: Helen Thomas is like, became iconic, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Reuters, AP [Associated Press], John Cochran was a little helpful. Not so much from my people at CBS, some were, I remember Rita Braver pointed out a book and said this is a book that you should make sure you always have. And it had all the phone numbers of all the departments and the agencies and, you know, the names. Well, I probably would have figured that out but no one had told me. I didn't know for example that early in the morning when Marlin Fitzwater first came in to the office, if you went upstairs, right outside his office, you could get a little tidbit of information that you could use in your morning newscast. Now it's, it's not being, well these days you know, everything goes out on the, on e-mail, so this is before the formal news conference. And with that, you could, you could like maybe break a little news or at least update whatever had been reported on the night before. I found that out from someone else, not from someone in my own organization, who certainly would have known. So I'm learning from a lot of different people but not necessarily from CBS because, because I later learned that there was some resistance inside the Washington Bureau to making a local New York City reporter a White House correspondent. And there was also the belief that I was, no matter how smart I was, not able to come up to the requirements of covering such a complex, you know, weighty topic as the president of the United States in matters of, of, of national and international import. There was that belief on the part of some, I cannot name names, probably could but, you know, they never said this thing to me, I just kind of figured this out as time went on. And it was especially apparent when at the end of the administration of President George Herbert Walker Bush, and I thought that I was gonna remain in the White House to cover President [William "Bill"] Clinton, I got a phone call one day telling me that I was going to be placed on general assignment, and I said oh, okay, why? And they said well because we wanna put [Bill] Plante and he's, you know, a seasoned hand, he's been around a while, and we're gonna move him in with, with President Clinton. And I said, "But I thought you wanted to," but they said no we, we're gonna move you out and it's gonna be Clinton, it's gonna be Plante and Susan Spencer. I said okay, well, what about another beat? Well, no there's no other beat. Well in Washington [D.C.] if you didn't have a beat, you're dead. You have to have an agency to which you can attach your name otherwise you're gonna be a general assignment reporter and that is really rough in D.C., especially in the CBS bureau. So that's when I realized that no matter what I had done and no matter how well I thought I had done it, it wasn't good enough for the bosses in D.C. Story_ID: 171962 Speaker 1: [HM] Randall [Pinkston], I wanna go back 'cause during that time, you know, you, you were covering the, you know, doing, besides the, the Gulf War, right the Gulf War, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Or Persian--you were covering the President's [President George H.W. Bush] trips to places like Spain, Greece, Turkey-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --and other ones Far East-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Are you traveling as part of the White House pool that's traveling? Speaker 2: Sometimes I was White House pool, most of the times I was White House press corps. You, you know, the difference like the pool is the one that's in the, with, with the president-- Speaker 1: On, on Air Force. Speaker 2: On Air Force One. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Force One. Speaker 2: So, yeah, I'm, I remember one particular pool trip that I, probably could have done without, it was from Washington [D.C.] to, where did we, Australia I think, and I was on, I was on Air Force One the entire way afraid to go to sleep because if somebody came back, you know, you, you had to be ready to record. You know, I, I did nap a little bit but it was one long grueling trip. So we flew from D.C. to Hawaii, refueled, and then on to, I think it was Australia, it may have been Singapore. So-- Speaker 1: And how many usually travel in the pool when it's in the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So there's a, there's a tight pool, there's, there's a reporter for newspapers, a reporter for magazines, a reporter for each wire service, AP [Associated Press], UPI [United Press International], a still photographer, reporter for broadcast, and a crew for broadcast, and a producer. So and, and I may be missing someone but in those days about ten people will be in tight pool. And, and there's a section of Air Force One where the pool reporters sit. When I was there that section was right in front of the, the kitchen, the galley. Someone wants to come in. Oh, so, you know, of all of those trips, I mean, that we went to, Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, England, Turkey, Singapore, Korea, Japan, Australia, three places in Japan, in, in Australia, Canada, Martinique, Bermuda-- Speaker 1: Now this is over what, what period? Speaker 2: Over two years. Speaker 1: Over two years, that's a lot of-- Speaker 2: Wait, and every state in the lower forty-eight, plus Hawaii. Every state in the lower forty-eight plus Hawaii. One day we went to five, I think it's five states in one day. President George Herbert Walker Bush went to every state plus Hawaii, he may have gone to Alaska but I wasn't in the White House at that time. Plus all of those other foreign places. Poland, and there were some foreign trips that I did not make like the one to Russia, I think that was the week I was moving from, from New Jersey to, to Maryland, missed that one. Yeah, it was very interesting. And it was a lot to learn. But now, here's the other thing that my dear friends in Washington who had some questions about me didn't know, keep in mind, I've been listening to the news from the time I'm like able to talk, I actually have heard of Quemoy and Matsu [Taiwan]. How many people even know what those little tiny islands were and what that deal was about? I mean I did. I knew when John Foster Dulles was still alive, and his name was in the news all the time, I mean [Nikita] Khrushchev and [Alexei] Kosygin and yet, you know, these were not like foreign things for me. I didn't know all of the White House protocols but I knew a lot about government and its national affairs that that I just knew it because I had been reading all of those things all of my life. So I did quite nicely in terms of being able to report what I had to report. You know, there was some confusing things, CSCE for example, Committee for Security and Cooperation [sic, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe], I didn't really know what the heck that was initially. This umbrella organization of European states and America. G-7 became the G-8 [Group of Eight], figured that out, soon enough, and anyway. Story_ID: 171963 Speaker 1: And then, of course, President [George H.W.] Bush has this moment in Japan when he has stomach issues. Speaker 2: And then you were, you broke that, the news on that too. Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: So can you talk about that? Speaker 1: Yeah, that, so in the first place, ordinarily the number one White House correspondent would have been going on all of these trips but this was a time period when all of the networks were trying to save money. So they didn't send the number one White House correspondent because they would always, if they sent the number one they would have to send two people because the number one is not going to cover around the clock. The number two, me, they could make work, you know, horrible, well ridiculous hours, and I'm not going to complain because, you know, I'm happy to be there. So they were keeping the number one, Susan Spencer back in Washington [D.C.]. So she's doing reports on the president's trip from her listening post at the White houst--at the White House. I am the body watcher person just in case something happens. Well lo and behold, but and I'm also doing morning news. So every morning one of the networks would buy the bird, buy time on the satellite to feed material back to the states and the other networks who didn't buy it would buy pieces of it from the one that did buy it, and so everybody got their morning news done like that. Come the day that President Bush has his moment in the [Akasaka] Palace [Tokyo, Japan], CBS for whatever reasons, bought the bird that day, so we owned the whole hour. The preceding evening, I had interviewed the president, one on one, along with John Cochran, Brit Hume [Alexander Britton "Brit" Hume], Charles Bierbauer. When we're going back to the building, all of us realize that he had asked all of us about our health. I think it was Brit who said, did he ask you about your health? And I said, yeah. Did he ask you? He said, yeah. And then Cochran and said, yeah he asked me too. And I said yeah did he talk about he was not feeling, he said yeah he said he wasn't feeling well and that he had had a bug or, or something. So we all kind of like, kind of tucked that back and we didn't really talk about the other issues that we, you know, we all had our questions that we put to the president. Well, Brit, Cochran and Bierbauer, all went out for dinner. I, on the other hand, nervous about, you know, everything didn't wanna, I mean I'm like, even at this point and I've been there for a while but I'm still like don't wanna slip up, so I'm hanging around the newsroom, I'm feeding radio, I'm watching the feed coming in from the palace, and one of the Reuters, Gene Gibbons, he, comes up to me and he says, "You interviewed the president today, right?" I said, you know, I was one of four. He said, "Yeah, I, I can't find these other guys but did, how did he look to you?" I said, "Well, you know, he said he had a little bug but he looked fine enough." I said why do you ask? He says, "Well one of our people in the palace, Reuters Tokyo [Japan] people, saw the president going into the men's room and saw someone else who looked like a medic going in behind him." I said, what? He says, "Yeah." He said, "We, we don't know what it's about but that that what's it looked like. We don't know if the guy was a medic or a doctor, we don't know what's going on." I said well where he is now? He said, "Well he's back at the table." I says, oh. So now, I file that back. Now I'm really hanging around the, the, the press room. Then suddenly I'm looking at the monitor and we hear our pool reporter, Mary Tillotson, who worked for CNN, call in to say that the press is being put out of the palace. That all of the cameras have been told to turn off. That she doesn't know what's going but she think it has something to do with President Bush but she doesn't know what it is. Then we see a big sheet dropped over the, the entries to the palace. And so I think, okay. And then we hear that President Bush is ill. So that's all I have to know to pick up the phone and call CBS Radio in New York [City] because now I know that he hadn't been feeling well, I know that he was telling us about his health, I know that he's asking us about ours, I know, these are things that I know that I can report. And I can also report we don't know exactly what has happened, we just know that he's been, we hear that he's ill, we will let you know what we know when we find out. Story_ID: 171964 Speaker 1: Well, all of the other reporters are, are, this phone that I picked up by the way, is something known as the white line. And in those days you would buy a clear line back to New York [New York] or Washington [D.C.] so that you will have audio quality for radio reports and you shared it. You know, so I do mine, AB--well, I was on the phone probably three minutes as CBS Radio was asking me questions and, you know, I was telling them what I knew, and all the other guys are standing around me taking notes because they didn't know any of this 'cause none of them had interviewed the President [George H.W. Bush], right. And so one of them says to me, all right, Randall, you've been on the phone long enough. (Laughter) and, and that was, I said, oh yeah, you right. I said I gotta go, the guys, guys gotta take the phone. And so then we, my producer Clem Taylor, God rest his soul, he just passed a few months ago, he comes and tells me that they want me on camera. So we go to the camera, and so by now Brit Hume [Alexander Britton "Brit" Hume], Charles Bierbauer, and John Cochran have heard about this, their beepers are going off, they're back at their work stations and Brit wants to move the camera inside to be close to his work space. But I knew that it had to be a vote because the camera was owned by NBC, we had the bird, so I said, wait, I don't think you can move unless there's a vote by the producers, and the NBC guy says you're right. All right, well call your guys, we'll call mine. And I said okay. So I called Tom Mattesky who was the senior producer on the, on the ground, he said who wants to move the camera? I told him, he said, well wait a minute, so they had their meeting, so they all voted to let the camera stay where it was. So I didn't have to move. So, I began doing my reports for CBS Morning News with Harry Smith and Paula Zahn. While I was doing the report, the director, I forget, I don't remember his name, was telling me what they were feeding and that they had video of the president actually slumping at the table because the Japanese had left their camera on, that's that fuzzy shot that you see from a long distance 'cause see, they couldn't light it 'cause they had to turn the lights out and they covered up the little red light on the camera but they kept it rolling. So that's how we see President Bush, you know, fall out like that. Anyway, but by now, he's in the hospital, and we know he's in the hospital, we don't know his condition. I later heard that CNN was about to report something really dire and some producer came rushing out saying don't report that to his CNN person on the air. But I heard Mrs. [Barbara] Bush in my ear, and Mrs. Bush was back at the [Akasaka] Palace [Tokyo, Japan] where their banquet was still in progress, and she was cracking jokes. This is Barbara Bush. And she said, "President Bush played tennis with the Prince [Crown Prince Naruhito] today and he lost and those Bush's just hate to lose. Bush's do not like to lose, maybe he just got a little upset about that." And it was, she was making a joke but with, later I realized that whoever it was, and I don't know who it was who made the decision to ask her to come to the mic, but she was the only person in the world that the mischief makers internationally would believe. If you had put up Vice President Dan Quayle, or National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft or Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater. Russia and who, the Soviet Union, I think, at the time, was still in existence, they wouldn't, they would have just thought it was political. That whatever people were saying to them about the president's condition wasn't true. So they wouldn't believe it. But if Mrs. Bush stood up there, you knew that he couldn't be too bad off because if he was, she wouldn't be there. And I don't think she ever got enough credit for that and maybe she didn't want it or maybe the people who made the decision didn't want it. So I saw her for the first time since that, since my White House days, I saw her about a year or so ago at a, at an event in Texas. I was moderating a literacy panel for one of her literacy organizations with her son, Neil [Bush]. And I told her about my recollection of that day, and she said to me, Randall, that was a close one. That's all she said. And I thought, hmm, I'm wondering if it was a lot worse than we knew, but she said that was a close one. That was really a close one. Speaker 2: So what that that means, that it was a lot worse than we knew. Speaker 1: That's, that's, I don't know, she didn't say that but that's, that's my take away from it. Story_ID: 171965 Speaker 1: So let me ask you about, 'cause you also covered the, the Clarence Thomas hearings, right? Or did you not? Speaker 2: I didn't cover the hearings. I covered the White House during the hearings. Speaker 1: The hearings, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, the question I have is, what was the [George H.W.] Bush White House like and what was the press operations like? Were they, you know, 'cause different people, different way of operating, more formal, less formal? Speaker 2: Well, and this is just really memory and, and, you know, all of this stuff has been really memory but here are a few things I remember about the Clarence Thomas hearing. Speaker 1: But I'm even talking about the White House-- Speaker 2: The White House, yeah Speaker 1: The White House and how they, how, know just the White House and how they, press secretary is under Bush is Fitz-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Fitzwater. Speaker 1: Fitzwater. Speaker 2: Marlin Fitzwater. Clarence Thomas' nomination was vetted by a Republican senator from Missouri who was a minister whose name I can't remember now, ooh, what was his name? There's a, he had worked, isn't Monsanto based in Missouri? Speaker 1: Monsanto is based in Missouri. Speaker 2: Okay. So this senator had some kind of connection with Monsanto and apparently Clarence Thomas had at some point worked for Monsanto. And then, of course, Thomas was appointed to the bench I think in the [Ronald] Reagan administration, no he was appointed to the office of-- Speaker 1: EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. Speaker 2: EEOC-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --in the Reagan administration. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That's where he met Anita [Hill]. And then he was appointed to the bench, either the Reagan administration or early Bush, not quite sure which. But he had a relatively rapid rise from that position with EEOC. So the White House was quite defensive about Clarence Thomas, and they kept insisting that he, 'cause the question was well, is this the only person, is this the best person, is this the most qualified person? And let's assume that we're just talking about the most qualified African American person, is, is this the best you could do? And Marlin and whoever else was answering questions at the time, continued to insist that he was well qualified, that he had served honorably, and that all of this would be revealed in the hearings, this is what I remember about it. I don't remember it being any more contentious than any other situation that the White House dealt with during that time. Story_ID: 171966 Speaker 1: Can we talk about 'CBS Evening News' and Dan Rather? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. So you, you, you're there for two years and then what happens next? Speaker 2: Then I go to, then I go to general assignment in the Washington [D.C.] Bureau and I don't get a lot of assignments, you know, I get some but not many. So I begin to look around, that thing about the door closing, you know, so I thought I was gonna be the White House correspondent but I wasn't so now what I'm going, and then I wanted a, I wanted a, an assignment attached to [U.S.] Department of State or [U.S.] Congress or some agency. I wanted a beat and that didn't happen. So now what am I going to do? So what I did was to look at all of the news programming that CBS was doing and someone advised me to do this, I can't remember who it was, and I began to pitch stories to 'Sunday Morning' ['CBS News Sunday Morning'], for example. So that was the beginning of me doing a lot of 'Sunday Morning' reporting. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And then I got some '48 Hours' assignments. And then I got, 'CBS Reports' "Legacy of Shame[: Migrant Labor, an American Institution]", which was the (speaking in French) of all of my investigative assignment because that was the follow on to 'Harvest of Shame.' And Dan Rather was the principal anchor but I was the guy out in the field interviewing the farmers and the, and everybody and that, that documentary garnered a few awards. And I was hoping that based on the strength of that, you know, I might get a magazine assignment on a full time basis, that never happened, but I did get a lot of 'Sunday Morning' assignments, did, some years I was doing more than the staff 'Sunday Morning' correspondence but I could never get a permanent assignment. Speaker 1: You know, and I, I don't know the history of 'Sunday Morning TV' [sic] but it, it appears to the, just continue to gain in popularity because it's the time that people tuned to besides '60 Minutes.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, people were really tuning in (unclear) the serious reporting on issues of-- Speaker 2: Well the, the, the nature of the stories has changed a little bit because the management of 'Sunday Morning' has changed, and that was one of the reasons why I no longer, at, at after a point I did not do as many 'Sunday Morning' reports when the management changed. I still did some but not, not so many. But yeah, when, when I was there, there was always this thing called the, the, the first block story that usually had to do with the hard news story of the week. So I did it, some of those. And then there was another segment that sort of dealt with, I guess, Charles Kuralt's common man" kind of stories. So I did a lot of those. Met among other people, profiled Walter Mosley, Selma Burke, Thorpe--Jim Thorpe's daughter, Grace Thorpe. She was on a campaign to try to keep Native Americans from using their reservations for repositories of nuclear waste. In, in later years I did Phoebe Snow. I did the profile with Ashford and Simpson [Nick Ashford and HM Valerie Simpson], the, the last one before his death. The, one of the few TV profiles with Camille Cosby. When she invited me to ask her whatever I wanted to when we sat down and I knew what that meant and I opted not to go there, maybe I should have, but I didn't. You know, and this was after the stuff with Bill [Cosby] and-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --the putative daughter. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: [HM] Danny Glover, profiled him. This famous photographer, Arnold Newman. Story_ID: 171967 Speaker 1: So, in fact the guy who just called me on the phone Rodney Comrie, was the person who saw the [HM] James Cameron story, I think it was in Jet magazine, and it was a little blurb that said he was, he had written a book called, 'A Time of Terror, America's Holocaust.' I think that's exact title, 'A Time of Terror America's Holocaust,' [sic, 'A Time of Terror: A Survivor's Story']. And when they, you know, in New York [City], the word Holocaust has a particular kind of resonance, and so Rodney being the curious young man that he was and remains, he's now a full-fledged producer but at that time he was an associate producer on 'Weekend News' and '[CBS News] Sunday Morning.' And he did some, made some calls and told the producer, Raylena Fields about that story and we pitched it to Missie Rennie who was the senior producer--the executive producer of 'Weekend News' and 'Sunday Morning' and she said, oh, well go do it. So we went out to Wisconsin, met him at his home and he had this collection of books and artifacts and stuff, you know, that he'd put together for his museum. And he told a story about being the victim of a lynching, you know, except for being killed he was lynched. He was arrested, he was taken to a jail, a crowd dragged him out, put him under a tree, put a noose around his neck, and as he tells it, the voice of an angel cried out he didn't do it. And so they cut him down and he lived, and he did have to serve some time. And this happened in Indiana in the 1930s. And he later moved to Wisconsin and always kept in the back of his head that he was gonna tell that story someday and he did. And so we were privileged to tell it first on 'Weekend News' and when Missie Rennie saw the 'Weekend News' version she sent us back to get him to tell the rest of it and to take him to that jail in Indiana if it still existed. So we drove Ray and Mr. Cameron and I drove from Wisconsin to Indiana, Marion, Indiana, where he took us to the place where the murder had happened. The nutshell of the story is that he was a young kid hanging out with some older guys and a white girl. The older guys and the white girl, the black guys and a white girl had this scam where they would get some wealthy white person, man, to come down to this lover's lane and the guys would rob him and they would split the loot. Well, this one time Mr. Cameron was with them when he was a kid, and something went wrong and he heard a gunshot, and he started running and he said he wasn't gonna look back to see what happened. Turned out that the, the, the robbery victim was killed. And the girl accused, or the girl's parents accused the black guys of, you know, forcing her into it and whatever. And so the black guys were arrested, and Mr. Cameron having been with them, was also arrested. And they were lynched, they were killed. And the voice of the angel that he thinks he heard, he thinks it was either the girl or her mother because they knew that he was just a sweet, little kid who didn't know what he was doing, and that he didn't deserve to die for that. So, they said he didn't do it. So they cut him down but they made him serve for being an accomplice before the fact or after the fact, served his time and left. Years later he gets a vacant school building that he dreamed of making his museum [America's Black Holocaust Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And when we saw it, it was a jumble, it was like nothing, and all of his stuff was in his basement, including among other things, the rope that had been used to almost hang him. And we went to the place where the lover's lane existed and we met a farmer, I mean a man who said that his dad had provided the rope. We went to the jail and Mr. Cameron showed us where he was held and the other guys were held and pointed out the window where the tree was. We come out of the jail and the most amazing, I mean, there was like a series of miracles, we find, he runs into the nephew of the man who was killed and they make amends there on the sidewalk. I said, we, Ray and I sent our camera crew to interview, oh this, there was this iconic picture of white people in the foreground, these two guys in the background hanging from the trees, from the tree, on postcards, you know, everybody's seen this picture, well we found the son of one of the women in the picture. And we went to interview him and he talked about her mother, his mother not hating them but, you know, not really liking them, he used the n-word. And then, and I have to give myself credit for this one, we're walking up the steps and across a plaza in front of the old jail, oh, which was opened for us by the sheriff who, it was no longer in use by the way, but they opened it up for us to do the story. And this, I see this car coming down the street and I guess as a reporter you get a sixth sense about things. And I kept looking at this car and it slowed down as the driver was watching us walk up, and I said to the photographer, I said, "Tom [ph.] keep rolling but keep your eyes open for the driver of this car." She gets out, the woman gets out of the car, walks up, and as she's walking up she says, "Mr. Cameron," and, if you watch that story you'll see me ducking out of the way because when Tom heard her say Mr. Cameron he swung around and I was still in the frame but I ducked. And he said, "Yes," and she walked up and she said, "I just want to say that I'm really sorry about what happened to you and I just want, I just wanna let you know that we're really glad you're here and, and we're so sorry." And Mr. Cameron said, "We're all really, really sorry about a lot of things that happened," and they embraced and that was the end of our story on 'Sunday Morning.' That was my story. Story_ID: 171968 Speaker 1: So how long would those stories, would you work on them? Speaker 2: Eight or nine o'clock--eight or nine minutes. Speaker 1: No, no but how, like that trip, the two-- Speaker 2: Oh, the two trips? Oh, well that was an unusual deal 'cause usually you only went on one trip and that was max. So, and, you know, you go, go and come back, but that one was probably three weeks, a month. But that, but I mean the, the time on the ground-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) but the coincidence-- Speaker 2: --the, the time on the ground itself took place, okay so the first version the weekend version was maybe two days. And then when we drove him [HM James Cameron] from Wisconsin to Indiana and shot all of that stuff, that was probably another two days. So actual shoot time no more than five or six days max. Speaker 1: I know but it's, it's curious that all those people were in the right place, and that's what I'm, it's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's magic. I mean that's, that's, that's God, that's universe, that's-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it's intended to be because we didn't, we didn't know the nephew was gonna be there, we didn't know we were gonna find the farmer who provided the rope, we certainly didn't know that lady was gonna drive up. We didn't know the sheriff was gonna open the jail, we thought we were gonna be doing the, the interview with Mr. Cameron outside the jailhouse. That's what we thought but Ray [Raylena Fields] said well let's just see if we can get inside. Then the guy lets us in, and then so now we're walking around to the cells and the shadows and that, so many of the stories that that I have been blessed to do, which is why I know I'm probably have done the thing I'm supposed to do but I thought I was going to be lawyer but I've done this all of my life, it's, it's not stuff that I would, I couldn't have planned it. Like the President [George H.W. Bush], you know, I couldn't have planned the sequence of information bits that I was able to assemble at the point that they were really needed. And the one thing I remember having read books about press coverage and presidential coverage, never kill the president until, you know, for sure he's dead, you know. If you don't know for sure, don't, don't, don't go there, yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause that could end your career. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, please. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know, don't-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --don't I mean (unclear) I meant like don't announce that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Announce that, no I understand. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that that he's gone. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 171969 Speaker 1: So now the other things you worked on, you worked on the Montana Freemen Siege [1996] and then Betty Shabazz's daughter [HM Ilyasah Shabazz]-- Speaker 2: And the Unabomber [Ted Kaczynski]. Speaker 1: --and the Unabomber. That was a big--the Unabomber. Speaker 2: That was right after the Freemen. I mean, I was at the Freemen and I was sent to the Unabomber. And I was on the air live that night as he was being arrested but the information that I was getting was coming from Washington [D.C.] 'cause I had, they, it was so top secret until they didn't even tell me when I was leaving the Freemen story what I was gonna be covering when I landed in Billings [Montana]. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And then the assignment editor said well get yourself together, you're gonna be on the news. I said doing what? He said, you're doing the Unabomber story. I said what, oh, you know. Here's another one about the Unabomber. So, you know, there's this iconic image of the Unabomber in his orange jumpsuit going down the, the, the street. Here's how that happened, and you can, the photographer's name is Bob Bessolo. So a, a [CBS] Newspath correspondent named Manuel Gallegus and Bob Bessolo knew about the Unabomber story but didn't tell me. They thought I knew and wasn't telling them but we all flew there together. And when we got there and I found out what the story was, Manny said, well I know you don't have a photographer, you can use my photographer if you need him. I said well okay, well thanks. I said because I don't have a photographer. So we go to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] office, we go to the sheriff's office, we go to the police department. So we find out that if in fact he is arrested, this is how he will come in and this is where they will take him out. And we get this from one of the janitors who told us this is where they bring everybody in and this is door and this is the way they go. I said, well thank you very much. 'Cause we just talking to everybody. I mean I always make it a point to talk to everybody. So we get back to our position that the bosses have sent us, and they tell me, we're sending you a crew in from Denver [Colorado], and so when your crew gets there then you guys, you know, you go over and get the Unabomber arriving. And I told them, okay. Then I said to Manny, I said Manny, I'm gonna have that crew come here to meet me here. I said I want you to take Bob back to that building where the janitor told us how the, the route was going to go, and you guys get the Unabomber 'cause, you know, the doors and all of that. And I'll have these guys come here 'cause they don't know, and they already know us and they know you, so go back. So that's how we got that shot. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah. I countermanded the bosses but if I hadn't, no one would have gotten that because only Bob knew exactly where to go and he found out, you know, well you can wait here but you can't wait there and they did that because we, we had already met them. Speaker 1: So when you, so this, where, right now this period of time, 'cause the, the Montana is 1996, is Unabomber in 1996? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And then Betty Shabazz's daughter is '96 [1996]. Speaker 2: Okay. I didn't realize that. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then, oh, no, no, no, I'm sorry. No that's not true. That's-- Speaker 2: She was before. Speaker 1: --'97 [1997]. Speaker 2: It's '97 [1997], okay. Speaker 1: You were getting a prize, that's '97 [1997]. Story_ID: 171970 Speaker 1: I wanna go forward to 2001 with September 11 [2001]. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And can you talk about that because, you know, that was a time when people felt that the world was, not coming to an end but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a scary time. So that was my day off. Most of my career I've worked the weekends so I was always off on Mondays and Tuesdays. And I think that was a, it was a Monday or a Tuesday I can't remember which one. But that morning I got up late 'cause I was off, turned on the television, it was right after nine o'clock. Bryant Gumbel was working for CBS at the time. And I remember hearing his voice after nine o'clock, and I'm thinking, why is Bryant still on the air after nine? And as I'm listening to his voice I turn around and look at the television, there's a tight shot of a burning building and I hear him saying something about a plane. And I'm thinking, now this is the first plane, and I'm thinking that this building is in Kuala Lumpur [Malaysia] or some, somewhere where there's these big tall buildings. And then it pulls out, the shot pulls out and I realize, oh my God that's World Trade Center [New York, New York]. And so now I'm frozen, and I'm standing there watching it and I must have been a lot longer than a few minutes because the next thing I know another plane hits. And at that point I called the desk and said okay, and I, I probably should have called her when I saw the first plane but the second plane I knew this is, this is like a major, major, major event and everybody who could possibly report needs to like be somewhere to do it. And so I was told to come in. So I'm hurry to getting dressed, and then I'm listening to the radio and they said that all of the bridges and tunnels were closed. So I called the desk and, and they said, yeah, we know that you can't get in, so we have crews in New Jersey so meet them at Liberty State Park [Jersey City, New Jersey] 'cause that's supposed to be the triage point. I said okay. So now I live in Teaneck [New Jersey], and ordinarily getting to Liberty State Park would take, I don't know an hour max even on a bad day, but traffic and every road was clogged, every overpass was being checked by authorities, you know, for devices as you were driving down there. And I took my personal video camera, first and only time I've ever taken my personal camera with the intention of shooting video, you know, in, in noncompliance with union rules, because I really didn't know if I was ever going to see my crew, and I wanted something to be able to record whatever it was that I saw, en route, and, and, and at the scene, so I had my little kit with me. I get to Liberty State Park and I shoot these EMT vehicles coming in and the crews laying out the litter and the kit, and we all are looking across the water at the smoke and the embers popping and you could barely hear the explosions 'cause we were such a distance away but you could see, you know, things exploding. And I'm wondering like well, what else is, what's being destroyed and how are those people getting out. Nobody came across the water, no one. So after some hours and I eventually did find my crew, but that first video of the ambulances, if you watch 'CBS Evening News,' that's my shot that I managed to feed later 'cause nobody was there except me. So we, we end up at this, I meet my crew at this ferry landing as people are coming across encased in white smoke, looking, looking like ghosts. They're the survivors. And they come off and some of them go to their vehicles, other people go to taxis or whatever, and I'm looking at the parking lot and it, it occurred to me that a lot of the cars in that parking lot were driven there by people who would never be back to claim them. And in that moment, you know, I mean I've been working all day, now I'm just like (making sounds) and at that moment like, I didn't cry but it, but it, it was a very hurtful moment just in that, you know, you know, you're looking at it but when you look at those cars, and you know that somebody left that car there this morning and they're not, they're not coming back. And some of those cars were in those lots for days if not weeks, you know, still as authorities continued, continued that investigation. So most of my reports for the next several days were in New Jersey, were in the communities where these people came from. And yeah, I eventually went back to Manhattan [New York, New York], had to go down and get my press pass and I recall in, in our taxi going down the East Side and around 60th [Street] or maybe 50th [Street] or 42nd [Street], blocks from the police plaza at the tip of the island, there was this odor in the air, the smell of death, that far from the World Trade Center. Story_ID: 171971 Speaker 1: And so I volunteered to go wherever they wanted us to go. And from there I went to London [England], to Islamabad, Pakistan-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to Peshawar, Pakistan, no, to Quetta, Pakistan, to Peshawar, then to Jalalabad [Afghanistan] then to Tora Bora [Afghanistan]. I was gone for about two and a half months. The longest foreign assignment I've ever had. Speaker 2: Can you talk about that because you had, the last time I'm hearing you do, you know, foreign assignment, it's as one, part of the White House, you know, press corps, and I'm not saying, the last time I-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh, oh, well I had actually done other foreign assignments after the White House press corps. I had done a couple of earthquakes, tragedies in Turkey and in Italy. I'd done a '[CBS News] Sunday Morning' piece in Paris [France], Barbara Chase-Riboud, 'Sally Hemings[: A Novel]' author and, and artist. So I'd had a few, Haiti had been, I had been to Haiti several times during the [Jean-Bertrand] Aristide exile and the [Raoul] Cedras era, 'Sunday Morning' and '[CBS] Evening News' pieces. So I had done some other foreign assignments after the White House, but certainly in terms of breadth and-- Speaker 2: On the ground? Speaker 1: --on the ground that-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 1: 2011-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and it's-- Speaker 1: --was, 2001-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 2001. Speaker 1: --2001 was definitely the longest. Speaker 2: Be, because think about, I mean this, there, there's havoc in the United States and you're part of this group that is looking for Osama bin Laden? And-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and everybody's looking. Speaker 1: Well, you know, the thing that I was struck with, so today, and Western journalists would, would be, would be hard-pressed to get into Quetta, Pakistan, period. But at that point, you could go, and you knew they didn't really like America because there would be demonstrations with effigies of President [George W.] Bush held high even then but there were others who would say we're so sorry what happened and we'll do whatever we can to help you. And we could go to refugee camps and people knew if you were American, "We're so sorry." You know, there was a, an outpouring of international concern and commiseration for the attack on our shore by that organization. So it was a moment, and obviously as political observers have said this, that President George W. Bush frittered away when he could have taken a different approach and been more embracing and inclusive and accepting of the assistance that people were offering because there was no great love at that point for what Al-Qaeda had done. Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 171972 Speaker 1: But, but I ended up in, in, in Tora Bora [Afghanistan] in part because we couldn't get any of the reporters in. I mean, our CBS crew was very small, we didn't even have our own fly away, our own satellite dish, so we were renting, renting satellite from, one day we rented it from the, a Polish TV organization, most of the times we were renting it from CNN, just enough to feed our stories back, not to do live shots. We had a computer that we would, it would, do, use to feed the audio, and CNN would let us buy ten or fifteen minutes of time to feed the video, and that's what we did every day for the time I was there. The first day that they allowed Western journalists in to the area where there were allegedly looking for Osama bin Laden, I looked around at these caves and tried to figure out which am I wanna go into, 'cause we had heard, you know, these caves were big enough for tanks and trucks and all of this, well I didn't see any of that immediately visible. I did see one Western journalists coming out of a cave, and I says ah, he went in, he came out, that's the one we're going too. So, I do a stand up, walking towards the cave and you see this guy with a turban in the distance, he was our guide and what he was doing, which I later figured out, was pointing out a path to make sure that we didn't step on any mines. I wasn't thinking about land mines, I didn't have my producer, my producer had been called back for something else, it was just me, my photographer, my sound man and our guide. And he didn't speak English, he could understand it but he didn't really speak it. So we get to the cave, another guy who didn't speak English but sort of understood it a little bit, says come, come. So I tell my photographer, the sound man, you guys stay out here take a picture of me going in, so you see me going into this hole. I get in and the Afghan cave watcher lights his candle and he says, "See, see." And I look, and in a room about this length with a L shape, ten feet maybe nine feet tall stacks of cases, and he takes one down and he opens it up and it's fifty caliber shells with Russian writing on them, and then he pulls another one and it's Chinese. So this is like an ammo depot in a cave. So I say to my photographer, hey about the light, and my photographer who's British says something to the effect of, "Randall, we know we need a blipping light." And I says, "No, no, no, when you come in do not have the light on, there's a lot of ammunition in here and it's very dry." "Oh, okay, well, you take the light." He shoves the light through the hole gives it to me and then he shoves his camera and he gives it to me and then he comes in. We leave the sound man outside with the wireless mic, wireless pickup because I wanted somebody to be out there just in case, you know, to tell what happened. So we do a stand up, and I turn the light on, on the floor and raise it very slowly, give it to the Afghan guy to hold it on me and we do our stand up and I talk about what's in the cave. I do two takes, he gives the light back to me, I lower it to the floor, turn it out and we get out of there. That was the first visit of Western journalists to caves. I mean there, there were other Western journalists in other caves but that was the first day. And then no one was able to go back to those caves for about a month. So about a week later I left. Story_ID: 171973 Speaker 1: You left-- Speaker 2: I left Tora Bora [Afghanistan]. Speaker 1: Tora Bora, but then you went, you went to Jalalabad [Afghanistan] was it? Speaker 2: No, Jalalabad was first. Speaker 1: Okay. Jala- okay. Speaker 2: Jalalabad was first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then Tora Bora. Jalalabad. So the very first election in Afghanistan happened before the war ended. It was called a mini jirga as opposed to a loya jirga. Big meetings, small meeting as opposed to a big meeting, with all the tribal chiefs electing the governor of Nangarhar Province. Happened in the King's [King Zahir Shah], former king's winter palace [Shahi Qasar]. That was in Jalalabad. That's what we went there to cover initially but then everybody's trying to get to Kabul [Afghanistan]. So from the palace we go to Jalalabad to the Spingar Hotel. Stay there for a few days to try to get to Kabul. Comes the morning everybody's gonna go to Kabul, we can't go because we gotta wait on gear. Italian reporter comes up to our photographer who's Italian, and says listen I really wanna ride in your bus, we had a bus but my photographer doesn't wanna wait. So he's saying come, come, come, (unclear) let's, let's go. So she and her photographer and these other people get in the convoy for the sixty mile drive on the rough roads to Kabul which is sixty miles north of Jalalabad. We go out to do a different story 'cause we gotta wait on some gear, and we find some guys in a prison, in a makeshift prison, and we, our story is there which was also another kind of scary. But they spoke English and they knew that we were from America and they wanted their story told and so I did a nice interview with them, did a stand up left, came back to the hotel, and everybody who had left that morning is back at the hotel. And we're saying well why are you guys back? And they said, there was an ambush. And we said, what kind of ambush, what happened? Turned out that the Italian reporter who had met with our photographer that morning and her photographer and two other people had been stopped on the road, taken off the road, and killed, executed. And the executioner said to their drivers, "Go back and tell them the Taliban is still here." Taliban being the people who controlled Afghanistan before the war, who hosted Osama bin Laden. And, you know, we were thinking oh my God, how did this happen? Well, the, the convoy wasn't tight. You know, it was like leapfrog, people would take off, stop take off, stop and so they, there wasn't a whole bunch of them. So when there was like three gun men with a gun, they could stop two cars, and they did, and they killed them. And our team thought about just leaving ourselves and we did, we went back to Peshawar [Pakistan], through the Turken [ph.] border back to Peshawar, Pakistan. And our boss said look, if you don't wanna stay, you don't have to stay. I think one of the networks never, never got there. I think ABC never came to Jalalabad. Mike Taibbi from NBC was there. CNN was there but ABC never sent anybody. Geraldo [Rivera] was there but ABC didn't send anyone, either time. So we said okay, we'll go back. You know, we had a level of trust with the people we were working with. And we figured if you didn't break the convoy then maybe you would be safer. And in any event we weren't going to Kabul. So we went back and spent, and that's when we went to, on this, on the return trip that's when we ended up going to Tora Bora. Story_ID: 171974 Speaker 1: What about Andy Clarke 'cause, you know, when he, you're in an area and you're actually cooking, you know, there's no place to stay-- Speaker 2: How'd you know about Andy Clarke? Speaker 1: Okay. Well I just (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You do some, wow, fantastic. So this is, this is Tora Bora [Afghanistan], when we. Okay, so we were in Jalalabad [Afghanistan] in the hotel [Spingarn Hotel] and people were traveling to Tora Bora and returning, and traveling to Tora Bora and returning, and finally somebody said this is crazy, we should just stay up there, 'cause that's where we can see the planes dropping their bombs, that's where we think Osama [bin Laden] is, that's where the, the three military leaders, our allies were conducting their operations. So everybody got together and found places to live and we ended up finding a, a hut, a mud hut with mud floors, mud walls, wooden windows, wooden door, big room, and whatever family lived in there rented it out to us, and then there was an adjacent little hut where our drivers and, and other people, the guides lived. And the facilities were outside, no rooftop, flat earth and a shovel. That, those were the facilities. And we had a generator and we had a Greek sound man, George Inanetes [ph.] who loved to cook, and so did the photographer. So this, the, the supplies that we had been waiting on that day, the day that everybody else left and the four people were killed, some of those supplies were food supplies because our guys said well if we're gonna have to go, we don't know what we're gonna find there to eat, so let's ship all the food that we think we're gonna need for the next three weeks in from Pakistan and we'll take that with us, water, pasta, sausage, you know, what, I don't know what they, 'cause I don't cook, but they ordered enough stuff. And so every night George or Masamo [ph.] would fire up the little portable grill in the corner and cook for all of us. Same thing in the morning. And we all slept in our sleeping bags in that room on the floor. Good for the back, I have a bad back. Story_ID: 171975 Speaker 1: --Not only dangerous but even before we arrived in Tora Bora [Afghanistan], where we could see bombs dropping, someone told me if you can see a bomb falling it means it could fall on you. Thankfully, the laser guided bombs went where they were supposed to go and did not fall on the journalists. But before that in Jalalabad [Afghanistan], we actually walked around some of Osama's [Osama bin Laden] camps, you know, those training camps, and we're going into the little hovels and caves and structures looking for stuff, looking, I don't know, you know, looking for things that may have been written or (unclear), you know, whatever. Of course, any of those locations could have been booby trapped, could have been a mine field, any of those location, which you only think about afterwards. But that was probably the most dangerous thing that we did, even before getting to Tora Bora. Speaker 2: Now when journalists go in like this do you have briefing from the State Department [U.S. Department of State]. I mean I hear this, you know, you're picking up a guide here, you know, you're having food flown in, you're, you're getting, whatever the hotel is but is this, you know, 'cause there's responsibility on the part of the, the network and the station, I mean they don't want-- Speaker 1: Well, you know, the, the deaths of those four, in fact, in 2001, I used to know the exact count, I think there were maybe eight or nine journalists who were killed. My former colleagues [HM] Byron Pitts was in the north, and someone was killed in the compound where he was living. Okay, we had four killed on the road to Kabul [Afghanistan], so that's five. I think there was an accidental strike in another location near Kandahar [Afghanistan] and another journalist was killed there, that's six. The, the several journalists were killed in the, in the 2001, 2002 era, and, and because of that, all the companies, the mainstream media companies, decided collectively that in the future, everybody was gonna have to have survival training. So we all went out, you know, the, so initially, anyone who wanted to go could go with no training. I didn't have any first aid training-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --anything. There was no briefing that I had with the state department or anyone else. Now maybe the bosses did. I would like to think that they were talking to high level Defense Department [U.S. Department of Defense] and state department people, but in that kind of environment it really didn't matter because you're not really dealing with Americans. You're dealing with the local people who are running the fight because we didn't have boots on the ground at that point. We were running the fight from the air and through them. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So our survival depended on our relationship with the local people with whom we were working, and the local people who were being hired by us to provide food and some fuel and transportation and protection for us. Later, for the 2003 war [Iraq War], everybody had training before we went, and there was much closer coordination, I think, between media and government officials with respect to our movements. There was one particular moment where our convoy ended up on the road to Baghdad [Iraq] at night, while the U.S. troops were still engaged in battle. And the rule is that if they see anything moving, doesn't matter who's in it, if it's moving, and it's, and it's like, you know, identified friend or foe, and it's not U.S. Army, it, it gets blasted. So there had to be some calls made between our moving convoy and our people in London [England] to New York [City] to Pentagon to American commanders in the field, "This convoy is headed in this direction at this speed at this time and when you see it, do not shoot," and they didn't, thank God. And the reason for those calls being made is because the convoy included a certain anchor man. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Dan [Rather]. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: There's more to that story but that's going in my book (laughter). Story_ID: 171976 Speaker 1: So, what, this is at a time too, and you've alluded to it that, there are dwindling resources, right? And you even talked about, or was that always the case that people, networks were collaborating with resources and pools or, you know, sharing things, has that always been the case? Speaker 2: No, not always. Most of the, well, you know, there have always been time periods when there have been layoffs and cut backs but, but I think from probably 19--I can't really put my finger on the exact year, I just know that over time there were fewer people trying to do some of the same thing, and there was greater reliance on partners to get some of the things done. And usually that worked fine enough but every now and then you would have a situation where you put some video on the air that's shot by one of your partners and then you find out that the video, that that they said, that claimed to be this was really shot six months ago somewhere else. Didn't happen a lot but it, it has happened. And it, you know, always causes the bosses to rethink, well maybe we shouldn't rely so much on other people to get things done but you go back to it because it's easier and it's less expensive. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 171977 Speaker 1: Did you have questions about the claims that the [President George W.] Bush Administration were, were making, you know-- Speaker 2: When, when in 2003? Speaker 1: In 2003. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And, and, you know, the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --thing, you know, [HM] Colin Powell, General Powell gets caught up in-- Speaker 2: Secretary of State Powell. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Secretary-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of State Powell. Speaker 2: Well, he's always gonna-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --be a general, right. Yeah, well, well, a lot of reasons. Now recall that I had been in Afghanistan in 2001, and I knew a little bit about the Sunni-Shia differences, and I knew a little bit about Saddam [Hussein] and secularism and the fact that Saddam wasn't really, ever considered by anyone as religious. And if you went to, in the '90s [1990s], oh, that's the other thing I was in Iraq in the '90s [1990s] after President [George H.W. Bush], yeah, after leaving the White House I did one of the foreign trips that I, one of the foreign assignments that I had was the search for weapons of mass destruction when Sergeant [William] Scott Ritter [Jr.] was leading a group around, you know, and there was a, and there were a few drone strikes. When you went to sections of Baghdad [Iraq] even then, and you saw women walking, you know, shopping, if you didn't know you were in Baghdad you would think you were on Fifth Avenue [New York, New York]. I mean their skirts were up to their knees, they wore stockings, they had makeup, they weren't wearing burkas, this is Baghdad. They drove cars, there were women engineers, women scientists, Saddam in many ways was the most people, Western of the Arab leaders, even more so maybe than Jordan where there were restrictions on women that did not exist for women Baghdad, in, in Iraq. And certainly much more progressive with respect to gender than Afghanistan ever was. So, so if you knew that about Saddam, and you knew that Osama [bin Laden] was religious and pious, and more tending towards conservative, however you could define conservative Islam, then you knew that they could not have been in bed together on anything, and in fact they weren't. Osama didn't like Saddam. So when you hear them saying well, "Baghdad is behind Al Qaeda," it didn't, immediately I began to think well, wait how, how is that? How, how, how could that possibly be? Just based on what I knew anecdotally. And then they started talking about yellowcake [uranium powder] and Niger. And now we find out that that was based on some document that some student wrote. Valerie Plame's husband had gone and put the light of that, but no, no, nobody paid attention to what he was doing. By the way, my friend, Rodney [Comrie] that I mentioned to you earlier, we had the assignment one weekend of trying to track down Joe [Joseph C. Wilson], general, Valerie Plame's husband, I can't--and we reached their home, Rodney has this ability to find out everybody's number, and she answered the phone. And I said oh, Mrs. Plame would you care to do an interview with us. She says well, maybe someday but not right now, and I'll put Joe on the phone. And she, you know, we spoke to her husband and he came in to do an interview for us. But, the, the McClatchy Group [McClatchy Company], the newspaper group, they did some extraordinarily accurate reporting in the, in the run-up to the war in 2003 [Iraq War]. And they were the only ones to do consistently (unclear) reporting, while the venerated New York Times and the Washington Post took the speculations that were being handed out from Vice President [Richard "Dick" Cheney] and Douglas Feith and whoever else, and just put them out there and scared the bejesus out of everybody. You know, we're very easily frightened, we Americans are, but why I don't know. And then the next thing once we're frightened then we wanna go to fight, we get frightened and then we wanna go to fighting. And we don't think, you know, does this make sense? And so now we've invested all this time and money into this place and now because we've invested all of this time and money in this place, you gotta invest more time and money in this place so that what we invested won't be wasted. Ah, talk about circular logic. But anyway it's minds way beyond mine and that's probably why I'm a reporter and not in policy and politics because it is too crazy. Speaker 1: It's just, you know, it's that bandwagon though, it's the, the hurt approach that everyone then starts repeating it and then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it becomes even more true. Speaker 2: Yeah, well it doesn't become more true-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) well it-- Speaker 2: --when people believe that-- Speaker 1: That it's true. Because it's the (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, the perception, yeah. Speaker 1: Well it's the press saying it too or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --whoever is saying it. Story_ID: 171978 Speaker 1: What is that period of time because, you know, you're, you do this coverage here in, in 2003, 2000, between 2000 and 2003-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then what is happening in between, 'cause, you know, you're also, let's see, I don't know, you said you were in Haiti, well, that was (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Haiti was in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Right, in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So what are the 2000, what do they represent for you, Randall? The rest of the 2000? Speaker 2: Yeah, so my last foreign assignment in Iraq was the execution of Saddam [Hussein]. And I think I, that was 2006, 2000, December of 2006, I believe. Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: And I came back home January of 2007 and I, we at CBS, we, CBS began to, to, to scale back its coverage. And, you know, only a few correspondents would go in and out. And frankly, you know, I was one of the few people even before then willing to go. But then after a point when the, when Baghdad [Iraq] became explosive device city. And I mean every, every fifty yards seemed like there was a road side bomb going off. Lost my friend, photographer Paul Douglas and his sound man. Speaker 1: You loss them where? Speaker 2: Well, well I mean they were killed. Speaker 1: Killed. Speaker 2: Yeah. Kim, [Kimberly] Kim Dozier almost died. Lara Logan was in a vehicle that was hit. Cami McCormick lost a limb. All these people work for CBS. And so I figured, you know, God had blessed me and my ancestors had like watched over me for all the times I was going in and out doing these crazy things and so I didn't have to go anymore, so, enough with that. Story_ID: 171979 Speaker 1: The other thing that was happening in the 2000s, however, is that there was a big management change at CBS and the new managers who came in were not as supportive shall we say as the previous managers had been. It's like the inevitable cycle, some people are always okay, and then there are others who are sort of on the bubble from time to time. And, and keep in mind that my entry into the network was a bubble deal, never quite got out of that bubble no matter what happened. And the, the beginning of the end occurred when I was covering the death of a medical student in New Haven [Connecticut], Annie Le at, at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. We had precious few resources, everybody else had, I don't know, a cajillion producers, whatever, we had nobody. And the president of CBS News at the time, singled out my story as an example of what not to do and he did it in a public fashion and used my name. And everybody who knew anything about my reporting, I mean, he didn't really, I mean he's, had been there but he hadn't really been part of the news unit, he was the head of sports. But everybody else who had watched me through the years and, you know, knew anything about my work ethic thought it was horribly unfair for him to do that. Speaker 2: What did he do? What did he say? Speaker 1: He said that my story was an example of what not to put on the air. Speaker 2: Why did he say that? Speaker 1: Well, now you would have to ask him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I have no idea. But if he didn't like it and also because we weren't, we weren't getting, we weren't breaking news the way the others were but we couldn't because it was just me, a producer, and a photographer, and that was it. Other people had bookers and associate producers and sources in Hartford [Connecticut] and everywhere. You know, I roll in and I'm, we can't report what the others are doing unless we're going to cite them, right. So he wasn't pleased with the coverage and instead of correcting the coverage picture he chose to-- Speaker 2: Decimate. Speaker 1: --decimate my reputation or at least attempt to. So that was like probably October, November of 2009. And then I later figured out why he did that. That preceded by two months the decision to demote me from the network into '[CBS] Newspath.' So that criticism was the harbinger of what was to come. Now, people say, well you weren't fired. I said, yeah but it's like, you know, you're playing in the major leagues and you're busted, busted back to Double A or Triple A, you know, or A, you know, the, the lowest minor league team you can find. Because now from, instead of doing network and some '[CBS News] Sunday Morning' and, you know, occasional foreign travels, now I'm in 'Newspath where the stories are sort of prepackaged and, you know, you get a chance to do some writing, some reporting but it's much more customer driven based on what the local affiliates want. And it is definitely not the kind of job that seasoned correspondents would aspire to or be expected to go to. And they put three of us in that slot, me, Sheila MacVicar, and Sandra Hughes. Sandra Hughes was a veteran network correspondent in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Sheila MacVicar was a veteran network correspondent who had come from ABC who was in London [England], and me. So that was what the rest of the 2000s were like. I'm, I'm, I'm sort of okay until about 2007, 2008 then, you know, Dan [Rather], not that Dan was like protecting me or giving me a, but he didn't kill me, so, I could function. But Dan leaves, the, the senior vice president Marcy McGinnis leaves. Andrew Heyward who had been the president, he leaves. And these, this new group comes in and I couldn't finesse that. So the, the transfer, which I called the demotion which is accurate, to 'Newspath' was intended to make me angry enough to quit but I decided that I was not going to quit. It was also intended to be a way to put me in a place where I couldn't function because at 'Newspath' you work long hours, you have to do a lot of live shots and most network correspondents don't do a lot of live shots but I came out of local. I mean live shot was nothing for me. So then they also thought that the news directors weren't gonna like me. Story_ID: 171980 Speaker 1: But what happened was, what happened was, if a local anchor asked a question that didn't make sense, I would give the correct answer but not make the anchor look stupid. And some of the news directors began to appreciate, you know, that it's good to have somebody who is not just gonna answer a dumb question with a dumb answer but better to have somebody who actually knows what, what's really going on and what the question should have been. So by the time my, we worked out this deal where I was gonna leave after, at X date, by the time that date came, they asked me to stay in '[CBS] Newspath.' And I thought about it, you know, and I decided well, you know, maybe it's time for me to leave, so I did. But so their, their effort to get rid of me turned into an effort to keep me and I, then at that point, was free to like choose to stay or go, and I made the decision to go after thirty-three years, three months, and three days. Which was a date that had been selected by them, but when I realized the 3's and I was born March 3rd. Speaker 2: You're like perfect timing. Speaker 1: That's Sweetie [great-grandmother, Annie Brown Pinkston (ph.)] telling me, time to go Ran. Story_ID: 171981 Speaker 1: I mean you had a really magical career and at this point, in many ways, this is happening to tons of people. Speaker 2: (Nodding). Speaker 1: On the print, on the broadcast-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --I don't know about radio but-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --in those two, it is happening all over the place. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) all over the place. Speaker 1: There is bleeding going and all these very talented people-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --are, really, I mean they're, it could be at the end of their careers or whatever but the fact is that they don't have, and not enough schools to take people and to teach. Speaker 2: (Laughter) so true. And don't think for a second that I'm not cognizant of the fact that I'm like one of the blessed few to be, have been called. I didn't apply for Al Jazeera [Media Network], they called me. I didn't apply for Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], they called me. I didn't apply for CUNY [City University of New York, New York, New York] grad school, I was called. So these things-- Speaker 1: That's a blessing. Speaker 2: --have been, and so I do them because I'm thinking well, I gotta give it a try. It's the same thing when Reverend [Wendell P.] Taylor said go down there and tell them I sent you. I could have been like a young person and said I don't wanna do that and not gone and I would have been working at the office supply company and, you know, would have gotten my degree and maybe would have gone to law school, who knows. But I tell young people now, just because you don't wanna do something doesn't mean you shouldn't at least try it because you might discover that there's something that makes you better at whatever it is you want to do. And you may even figure out that eventually you like this thing-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --that you thought you didn't wanna do. But you'll never know if you don't try. You know, and don't turn things down before you at least give it a try. 'Cause it's difficult to try to convince today's young person that, who knows this is what is I wanna do and I don't wanna do that and that's all I'm gonna do, and it's hard to, to get them to see this, this, this, I call it kind of psychic possibilities, 'Possibilities,' that's the name of [HM] Herbie Hancock's new book [sic, album]. Anyway, yeah, I just interviewed him the other day for Al Jazeera. You know, but [HM] Byron [Pitts], this, he's now at, he's now at ABC he has this saying, you know--(unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Is this Byron Pitts? Speaker 2: Byron Pitts, yeah. "Plan your work, and work your plan." To which I say, well I can't really say I had a plan, you know but I do work whatever plan turns, that I find myself dealing with, I work. I have goals, you know, sometimes I have a plan but most of the times my plans don't exactly work out the way that I thought they were going to but it all works out. Story_ID: 171982 Speaker 1: So where are you right now? What do you wanna do that you haven't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I need to write a book. And that is going to force some decisions on my part in the very near future, which would probably mean working less at Al Jazeera [Media Network] or working less period, 'cause I really can't do both and write. I really need to do that. I need to do it for myself, you know. And, and it probably is two books, you know, one about the career and another about the life. But so many of my friends in this business, left this world without their stories having been told in their own words. Among them, my friend, Reggie Harris. My friend, my dear friend, Harold Dow. I, you know, Ed is more an acquaintance than a friend but obviously he was a huge role model. Max Robinson-- Speaker 1: You mean, Ed Bradley. Speaker 2: Ed Bradley, I'm sorry, yeah. Ed Bradley and Max Robinson. They, you could just take those four people, all of them had incredible stories, incredible careers but none of them wrote their own story. So, and I'm sort of--Bill Whitaker, in terms of African American correspondents, I think Bill Whitaker is the only person still working who was a network correspondent longer than I was. I'm not talking about anchors, I'm talking about, you know, field reporters. Troy Roberts didn't really do a lot of stuff before he went to '48 Hours,' not, not a lot of, you know, network travel around the world kind of stuff. I mean he's a, he's been there for a while too. But, but Bill Whitaker started in '85 [1985] in, in Charlotte [North Carolina], or Atlanta [Georgia] and now he's '60 Minutes.' But all of which is to say that we need to tell the story even, you know, it's going, it would be my fist book so it won't be that great, I don't guess, but I just gotta do it. So I would, that's what's, and I'm being told this, you know, people have told me this for years. I was at church yesterday and the minister was talking about this from Psalms 50: 1-12 and, you know, if you live seventy years that's a good thing, if you're really in great shape you'll live for eighty and, and then he said, you know, the average life span for African American males is this number, take your age and subtract it and that tells you how much, about how much time you have left and I thought oh, shoot (laughter), not a lot. Certainly less going forward than there is behind us so, we have to use every moment that we have, this precious time, everybody should use every moment that they have. You can figure the way when you're young but certainly when you get older time flies. It's the same time, it just goes faster when you're older. And when you look at the things that you really wanna do and need to do, that you haven't done. So that's where I am now. I'm like really grappling with what exactly is it that I absolutely must do and then plot that and do it, while I'm still here. Story_ID: 171983 Speaker 1: What, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I'm gonna leave that to somebody else (laughter). I can't sit here and say. My great-grandmother's [Annie Brown Pinkston (ph.)] favorite song was, 'If I Can Help Somebody.' So I guess if I had to, if I have to sit here and choose a legacy I hope that at the end of it all, somebody will say he tried to help people. Story_ID: 171984 Speaker 1: I have a question because of where you, you know, you grew up in the heart of the, you were born and grew up in the heart of the Jim Crow South at the, the time of terrific change. And you even, your last interview was with Myrlie Evers[-Williams]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: The last for CBS, yeah. Speaker 1: The last for CBS, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: You're still working. Speaker 2: I'm still here (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear) I mean last for CBS, sorry. Well, my question is where in this vantage point and, you know, period of what fifty, sixty years, what, what are your thoughts about where we stand within the African American community as you sit here? Speaker 2: You know, I anticipated a lot of your questions but that's not, that, I didn't anticipate that one so let me just try to see if I can give you a brief answer because there's a lot (pause). I think we need as an African American people a revival of focus on family, on shared goals. When we were all victims of blatant racial segregation, the shared goal was to get from under that. Now many of us have escaped, done quite well, but there are others who never even took or were able to take the first two or three steps. This old thing about each one teach one, it was true then and it's true now but we aren't quite doing that. And I, you know, maybe we think, well if I did it, they can do it, or I gotta take care of me. I don't know what the reasons are, but I, I look at other ethnic groups, and I guess every group has issues internally, But somehow we don't seem to coalesce unless it's like a horrible tragedy or something, you know. And we need to do it on a daily basis to prevent those tragedies. So I heard a startling statistic and I don't know if it's true, but I think it's true, that in the last election in Ferguson, Missouri, the last mayoral election, that something like 8 percent of the-- Speaker 1: African American. Speaker 2: --eligible African American voters went to the polls. Now only 17 percent of the eligible Caucasian voters went to the polls but here's the thing, if you had more than 8 percent going to the polls then you might have had some change with the police department. If you had some change with the police department, you might have some change with the training. You can't really change what people feel but you can certainly change the way they behave. You can't change their attitudes right off the bat but you can change behavior that over time might result in some attitudinal changes. And when you see what these police officers are saying on YouTube publicly after the shooting about, "I killed a lot of people and I'll kill some more," one guy says this from the sheriff's department. Another guy he's on, on tape with a gun saying, "I'll blow your head off." "Why?" "Because I, you didn't move when I told you to." And we know that if it's happening there, it's happening everywhere. And that, so that's one piece of it. So we've gotta get together ourselves to, to try to exert whatever political clout we have to, to effect changes. And then the other thing, I think, that we need to do not as African American people but as Americans, we need to talk to people that we don't normally talk too. We need to try somehow to pierce through the safety of polite conversation, of avoiding difficult discussions. What do you really think about this matter? Here's what I think. Let's just have a conversation about it. You may not change your mind, but at least you'll get some communication going. We really need to do that. Are we gonna be where we, where we were and where we are ten, fifteen, twenty years from now. Thankfully young people, you know, the, the generation that, that that we all complain about, they seem to be doing some of that, some of them do, but we need to do more of it, I think. Story_ID: 171985 Speaker 1: Anything else you wanna say? Speaker 2: Well there are some names of people that I didn't mention but I'll just tell you. I'll say some significant influences in my life and you can ask me about these people later, my elementary school principal, Mr. Laverne Randolph [ph.], my junior high school principal Mr. Aaron Jackson [ph.], my high school principal Mr. Luther B. Buckley, my Sunday school teacher Mrs. Gustava Rita Mason Gooden [ph.] and her husband, who was the first African American person that I ever met who had a library in his home. He told me one day that he had traveled around the world without leaving his desk. And I said well how do you that? And he points up to his shelf and says Halliburton because this guy named Richard Halliburton used to write these travel logs, taking pictures as he went around the world, Seven Wonders of the World, and so Mr. Gooden [ph.] could, you know. I was already reading but he kind of like fed me further, fed that, that desire of mine to, to delve into books, and to learn as much as I could before I could go to places. And he talked about when you're taking a long trip, you don't think about the ultimate destination, you use mile posts so you do this and then you do that and then you do that and eventually you get to where you're going, 'cause you can't cover the whole thing all at once, you do it in pieces. So those are some of the significant people who had an influence on the way I live my life, the way I think about my life, in addition to my relatives, my, my mom, my, my moms [Lucy Wallace and Clementine Davis (ph.)], my sisters, my cousins, ministers, Reverend Brown [ph.], Reverend [Wendell P.] Taylor, Reverend Butts [HM Reverend Calvin O. Butts]], current minister. Yeah, and my friends, you know, a lot of friends, I mean it's not enough time to even start talking about them...