 Story_ID: 11582 Speaker 1: I'd like you to state your name and spell it for us. Include your middle name. Speaker 2: Timothy Eric Parker "T-I-M-O-T-H-Y E-R-I-C P-A-R-K-E-R". Speaker 1: Okay. And can you give your date of birth? Speaker 2: 4/7/60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Okay. You're young (laughs). I knew Speaker 2: (laughs). Speaker 1: --you (laughs) [unclear] Speaker 2: (laughs). Speaker 1: --were young. And then I'd like to have today's date. Speaker 2: Today is June 21, 2001. Speaker 1: Okay. And your profession? Speaker 2: I am a crossword editor. Story_ID: 11583 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Meatballs and spaghetti, . Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Bahamas. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Christmas time. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: [pause] "No weapon formed against ye shall prosper." Story_ID: 11584 Speaker 1: I want to start, you know, asking about your father. His name is James? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So can you tell--Your family's from Baltimore [Maryland] it seems. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you tell me about, you know, him and what you know his-- about his side of the family. Speaker 2: Yes. My father was from a very large family. He had fourteen brothers and three sisters. And they were country folk. We were from Baltimore. But he was from the outskirts of Baltimore in a place called Cooksville, Maryland. He didn't have much of an education. He had an eighth grade education. But yet he went on to build one of the largest cement contracting firms in Baltimore during his lifetime. And I was always amazed at his work ethic. He never missed a day of work. The only thing that would prevent him from working would be inclement weather. But he also did the accounting for his entire firm. He never hired an accountant. Didn't trust outside people in his business. And I was amazed that a person with an eight-grade education could achieve so much. And even though when I was born we were relatively poor. You know, during my teenage years, we really began to prosper through his business. Speaker 1: And did he talk about growing up at all? His growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. He hated chickens. Because he was raised on a farm that had chickens. And being country folk, they had to kill the chickens for dinner. And he really hated to behead chickens. So he used to always tell me these stories about, you know, killing the animals. He was very adverse to that and adverse to violence. And I think that was from his upbringing on the farm. But they were very poor, very country. And that was his environment growing up. Speaker 1: And this was in Cooksville? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know how he got to--do you know how--did you know your grandparents? Or how-- Speaker 2: I knew my grandfather very briefly. He died when I was about four years old. And he was a hunter. A very country type gentleman. Shooting rabbits and squirrels and making squirrel stew and turtle soup and some of those types of exotic country type dishes. But I really didn't get to know him very well because he died when I was just such a young age. My grandmother on my father's side died when I was about nine years old. And I really didn't get to know her very well either. Speaker 1: Okay. So let's talk about your mother then. Her name? Will you give her name and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Her name is Irene Crane who became Irene Parker. She married my father at age nineteen. She gave birth to nine boys and one girl. There are a lot of boys in our family on both sides and very few girls. And my sister was completely spoiled being the only girl and being surrounded by so many boys. But my mother is a very, very strong, very strong woman. She's a small woman in stature. She's only about 5 [feet]"1' [inch] , one hundred and ten pounds. It's amazing that she gave birth to such large human beings. But she's a very strong woman. She recently went through surgery last year. That--well, we were told that this surgery was life threatening. And there was a good chance that she wouldn't make it 'cause she's seventy-six years old. But she's pulled through and she's still doing well. Speaker 1: Now what do you know about her background? Her family background? Speaker 2: Very little. She [Irene Crane Parker] is very secretive and very private about her background. What I do know is she was one of four sisters. She didn't have any brothers. And that for some reason there's been a feud on her side of the family between the sisters that has gone on for over fifty years. And it is such a sore spot with her that, you know, after a while we just would never bring up, you know, any questions about her family. Because she was always so reluctant to talk about it. Story_ID: 11585 Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met? Speaker 2: Yes. My father [James Parker] was going in town, which was Baltimore, from Cooksville [Maryland]. And saw my mother [Irene Crane Parker] in a store and gave her some kind of 1925 line (laughs) or something. And she just thought he was the most handsome man. So she gave him her address. He didn't have a phone. And she did not expect him to show up at her house. But he showed up that evening, you know, really decked out with the hat and the long coat. And she--he swept her off of her feet from that one encounter. She thought he was very bold to actually show up at her doorstep that evening. Story_ID: 11586 Speaker 1: Are you saying that there were nine--you had nine sibli--you know, eight siblings? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But--Okay. I was just wondering. 'Cause not all of them are listed here. Speaker 2: Yes. Most of them have passed on. Speaker 1: Passed on. Okay. Can you give me their names in order of--you know, the names in order. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I'll try my best. Henry is the eldest. Followed by Augustus, Jerry, Theodore, Lamont, Tony, Stanley, myself and Steven. And my sister is in the middle. Her name is Irene, named after my mother. Speaker 1: So all--So it's three of you living--I mean four of you living? Three plus you. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So five have passed away. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: By natural causes or? Speaker 2: Augustus passed away from cancer. All the rest died violently. Stanley was shot coming out of a grocery store in a robbery that was taking place across the street. He and a friend. His friend got shot as well and was hit in the spine by a bullet and was paralyzed. He lives to this day, but he's paralyzed. Two of my brothers died in a car accident. One died from a drug overdose and another died from complications from the AIDS, from HIV. Speaker 1: You've got a lot of loss in your family though. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 11587 Speaker 1: Now I want you to talk about your growing up and what some of your early memories are. You fit where in the family? The yo--? Speaker 2: I'm next to the youngest. Speaker 1: You're next to the youngest. Okay. Speaker 2: I remember really being in poverty from my youngest memories of growing up. I remember being about two or three years old and knowing that in the living room I had to avoid this huge hole that was in the living room floor in which you could see down to the basement floor which was a dirt floor. We lived on a street called Mount Street in Baltimore City [Maryland]. Which to this day is more like a urban ghetto type of an area. And even back then in the early '60's [1960s] it was like that. And one of my early remembrances of that was constant police sirens just going around all the time. To the point that it became natural to hear them. And it wasn't until I was about six or seven that I began to understand what those sirens meant and exactly how dangerous it was, you know, to be in the environment that I was in. But we didn't really start to--you know, all of my childhood memories were happy. Because I was around, you know, such a large family. It was always a lot of activity going on. But it was very difficult times for my parents. And even as a young child I could tell that, you know, we just didn't have a lot of food. We didn't have a lot of clothes. We had a big family. Things were tight. It was just very, very difficult. I had a lot of memories of my parents not arguing, but being sad. And looking into their faces and them--and they used to wear sad faces all the time. And as a young child knew that something was wrong. But I don't know what--what it is that was wrong. All the other people that I knew were just as poor as we were. So I didn't understand what all the sadness was about. But then we moved in 1965 to a much more upscale neighborhood. Liberty Heights in Baltimore [Maryland]. We were one of the first black families to move into that neighborhood. My father's [James Parker] construction business was starting to just take off. And he got this very large house. Very, very large and we all fit in it very comfortably. And from that point on, from age maybe seven and up, I began to experience a lot more joy as a child. You know, playing sports in the backyard with my brothers. And it seemed that the sadness that my parents used to wear had dissipated. You know, there was still occasional bouts of it. But nothing like on Mount Street. So my childhood was very normal from that point on. Story_ID: 11588 Speaker 1: I went to a very good elementary school when we moved to Liberty Heights Avenue [in Baltimore, Maryland]. And I was fortunate enough to get a scholarship from that elementary school to Gilman School which is a prestigious boys preparatory college in Maryland. They came to the elementary school and I was recommended by the principal to go there. They had just started giving scholarships to minorities. So I was one of the first black students there. And when I went there, the first day, and this is as a seventh grader. You know, I got my first glimpse of how the other side lives. I mean there were children that were being dropped off by chauffeurs, you know, and Bentleys and BMW's pulling up. I was just getting off the [number] 44 bus myself. But it was just nice to see, you know, that there are people out there, you know, that have money. There's some other things that we can shoot for. You don't necessarily have to be poor. And then getting in conversations with my white friends at Gilman, which was a wonderful experience. It was just a fantastic experience. Because of the caliber of the school and the caliber of the education. I learned how woeful my education was at a city school. Because Gilman was so far advanced even at the seventh grade. The seventh grade I had to study courses such as Latin, ancient history, medieval history, Spanish, English, algebra and some other type of a math class. And I was actually in class from 8:00 to 5:00 Monday through Friday. And you were also required to play on a sports team. If you weren't good enough to make the school team, then you would play on an intramural team. So I got the chance to get into some uniforms and real football pads and things of that nature. And it really opened up a door. And that was my first glimpse that there is a world outside of my environment. 'Cause I got to--as I spoke to some of my classmates and began to learn from where they were coming from. And the types of upbringings they had. You know, I really began to feel that, you know, "There's something out there in the world that if you are aggressive enough and interested enough to pursue, it may happen for you." And that was the first opportunity I got to see that there's something a little different with me. Because my brothers never got this opportunity. They were always in that one environment. But I was the first one to really get into this new environment. So I thought, "Well there's something special going on." And I owe it to my brothers and to my parents to try to make something great out of this opportunity. Speaker 2: Now is that what was sort of unspoken? Or was that, you know. How were you sort of melting the two worlds is what I'm-- Speaker 1: It was very unspoken. It really was. Gilman was the type of school that was almost like an honor society. Everything was done on honor. And everyone was trusted. And I'd never been in that type of environment before. For example, in the cafeteria, there would be baskets of snacks. And you were free to take any snack you want. And you were required to make a payment. But nobody was watching you. It was an honor type thing. And also as you went around the school, I was never subjected to any type of racism which I felt was very unusual for this school. Because of all the students--and I believe at the time that I was going to Gilman School, there were eight hundred students. And there were only three black students there with me being one of the three. But during my entire stay at Gilman School, and I graduated from Gilman. Story_ID: 11589 Speaker 1: Here you had your family environment and you had, you know, the Gilman [School, Baltimore, Maryland] environment and they were different. And I'm wondering how you--was one supporting the other? Were your parents saying, "This is a good thing." Were they say--you know. Speaker 2: Actually my parents were a little skeptical honestly. They allowed me to go to Gilman, but my mother [Irene Crane Parker] went to the school to see the school. And it was a fantastic school. It was just beautiful. Immaculate, a lot of history. But my mother really had a distrust that I learned of non-black people. She just didn't trust them. I don't know if she had issues because of things that had happened during her upbringing. Which is--that's what I suspect. But she was a little, you know, she was worried about my safety. You know, being in a school with so many white students. But it really was not that difficult for me to go home and be with my brothers and be that Timothy and then to go to Gilman School and be the scholarly Timothy. But they were separate--They were two separate individuals, almost like twins. Because the Gilman environment was so different from the home environment. But it was very easy for me to fit into either one. Speaker 1: What was that home Timothy? Who was that person? The person th-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The--at home? That was a kind of shy kid that could relate to his brothers. But my brothers were all older. And they were always into things that did not involve me. So I didn't have a lot of activities with my brothers. They were into dating and just doing things that were a little more adult. Because they were older. So it was pretty easy to get into a shell at home. At--that's basically what I was in all the time. I would read a lot because I was alone a lot. Even though I had a lot of brothers but most of my fun was in watching them, not really participating in anything with them. So the home Timothy was more into studying and reading books and being into fantasy worlds and playing sports occasionally with the brothers. So it wasn't that different to go to Gilman where you were required to study. And at times you had to be in a shell just for the purposes of studying. So although they were two separate people, the worlds kind of are--were very similar. Speaker 1: Okay. And when you said that, "The schools were different." What are you talking about? What was missing? What school were you going to before? Speaker 2: I went to Howard Park Elementary School, which was considered a very good elementary school in Baltimore city. But the curriculum was so different from Gilman. I went from the sixth grade at Howard Park to the seventh grade at Gilman. But as a comparison it was almost like going from the sixth grade to the ninth grade. Because the Gilman students were so far advanced. And I had several months of just catching up to try to figure out what was going on. For example, the first day when I was told I had Latin, I had no idea what Latin was. I didn't know that was a foreign language. I didn't know what it was until I actually got into the class. And things like ancient history and medieval history. I'd never even heard of such a thing and had no idea what they were until I got textbooks and began to read about them. But the curriculum at Howard Park was very basic. It was math. It was spelling. You know, but when you go from spelling to, you know, English on an advanced level, it's almost as though you're in a different world. So that kind of put me in a little bit of a shell the first few months. Because I had to study just to catch up. And understand, you know, what these other students are actually doing. Speaker 1: And what about your father? What was his reaction? Speaker 2: My father was very nonchalant about this Gilman thing (laughs). He just--to him it was another school. And to him it was I think probably because he only had an eighth-grade education, he didn't seem that high on education. I think he felt that he had succeeded with only an eighth grade education. So that education was not that important. At least that's what I got from him. And most of my brothers did not graduate high school. A lot of 'em dropped out to work in his company and were making very good wages for the time. I mean extremely good wages. Wages that were good enough that they could have their own places, you know, and raise families off of those types of salaries. So I don't think my father really--he never really pushed me from an educational standpoint. So I just felt that he thought, you know, a real man would be able to survive and do well. You know, whether he has an education or not and that he was living proof of that. Story_ID: 11590 Speaker 1: And you said, "You were the next to the youngest." Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the youngest was a girl. Right? Speaker 2: A boy. Speaker 1: A boy. Okay. Did he go to Gilman [School, Baltimore, Maryland] also or-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No he did not. But he did very good in school. He went to Forest Park High School [Baltimore, Maryland]. Did not get a scholarship. The tuition at Gilman in 1972 was $6,000 a semester--so I was going on a scholarship. And the scholarships that they gave out was pretty rare. My brother did well. But he was never offered, you know, the scholarship that I was afforded. Speaker 1: So were you an "A" student? What was--how did you get-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. You got pinpointed. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And who was the person who pinpointed you at, you know, at your elementary school? Speaker 2: Mr. Slakum (ph.) who was my sixth grade teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. And tell us about him. What roll did he really play in your life? Speaker 2: Mr. Slakum was my favorite teacher of all time. He was a mentor. He was an African American man who was extremely proud to be an African American. And he took his role of teaching African-Americans extremely seriously. Because although we were a playful lot as most sixth graders would be, he was very, very serious. And he always gave lessons that I called life lessons. So rather than just do simple math, he would equate that. For example if you were gonna add a hundred and a hundred, the way that he would put it is, "You earned a hundred dollars from the job. And you got a bonus for doing a good job of $100. So how much money do you have now?" And I think those life lessons that he taught us and the way that he was serious about education really made me strive to be an "A" student. Because I didn't want to let Mr. Slakum down. In a way to me he was almost like a father figure. Because although my father [James Parker] was a great role model because of his work ethic, my father wasn't that interested in education. Where Mr. Slakum was extremely interested in education. Story_ID: 11591 Speaker 1: And what other things were forming you as a young person at that time? You know, I mean what other things were influencing your--or were you--you know. You said, "You did a lot--you were qui--you were shy and everything." Were you reading books and was that--I mean were you watching TV? What was-- Speaker 2: I didn't watch TV at all, really growing up. Maybe an occasional cartoon or something here or there. But TV didn't really interest me. I think the biggest things that shaped me were my father's work ethic. To actually see him go to work and come home really exhausted from this physical labor that he was doing every day. Instilled in me very early that, you know, a man is supposed to work, you know, and there's no excuse for not working. Then I think the other biggest thing would be the culture of the students at [the] Gilman [School, Baltimore, Maryland] being so different from the culture in which I was used to up to that point. These kids were immaculately dressed. They had the finest clothes and they had things that I wanted. That I knew I couldn't afford at that time. So I knew if I worked extra hard, some day I would be able to have those types of fineries that they had. Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you wanted that they had? Speaker 2: First the clothes. I mean they Bill Blass everything at this school. But I didn't have nay Bill Blass. But Bill Blass jackets, Bill Blass suits. Everybody was wearing Bill Blass. And that's the thing. If you didn't have Bill Blass on, then you're probably poor. And I didn't have any Bill Blass and it was pretty obvious I was poor. Because the [Number] 44 bus pulled up right in front of Gilman school. And when you got off that bus, I always felt that everybody is looking at me. Although probably nobody was paying me any attention. Because I was like the only one getting off this bus. Where everybody else was getting these, you know, these fancy cars depositing them at the front door. So that was a big--a big issue. But despite the fact that it was obvious I was not of the Bill Blass ilk, I wasn't treated any differently. I still had many friends. And when I would get into study groups, I wasn't treated any differently. There were a lot of study groups at Gilman where they--there would be grades given to teams. And I was usually with kids that were very well off. Very well off. And some of their conversation that they would have between themselves would be mind boggling to me. You know, they're talking about; you know "Are you coming over? We're gonna swim in the pool, you know, Saturday." And, you know, they're talking about the billiards. I didn't know what billiards were at this time. And, you know, everybody had a billiards table. And they were having little tournaments between each other with--in billiards. So one day at Gilman in the seventh grade, I was actually invited to one of my friend's houses. It was the next to the last day before the seventh grade ended. And I had to catch a bus--as a matter of fact, I had to catch several buses to even get to this person's house. And I had to walk a mile from the--where the last bus left me off 'cause his house was in the woods. And I just could not believe that there were humans that lived like this. I just could not believe it. This is something that supposed to be in the movies. But for a kid to live in these types of houses it was just unbelievable to me. And to them it was so matter of fact. You know, it was just like it was a natural thing. That this is how we live and doesn't everyone live like this? But to me, you know, it was just amazing that, you know, these kids are not just going around thanking God constantly that this is the environment in which they are raised. Because if you would really want to see something differently, you should come to my house and see how (laughs) I live with all these brothers. In what we consider a very nice house. But their houses and my houses were just a (laughs) tremendous--Just a tremendous difference. Story_ID: 11592 Speaker 1: Now what about the other black students? The two, the two that were there. Were they in your--in your age group or class? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you get along with them? Speaker 2: Absolutely. We bonded. We were the only black people (laughs) in the school. So David Robinson and Milton Boone were two students. They had to catch buses. But they came from a different side of town. But we immediately flocked together from the first day. Because when I went there, I didn't see any black students at all. And for a while, you know, I was afraid that, "I'm the only black student on this huge campus." And then I saw David Robinson. And he seemed just as relieved to see me, as I was to see him. And then later we saw Milton Boone. And we were in no classes together unfortunately. Because the schedules were different. But every chance we got to be together, we would do that. Story_ID: 11593 Speaker 1: Who are some of the other people who you developed friendships were--with? Speaker 2: It's really a tremendous amount. The faculty at Gilman School [Baltimore, Maryland] was just top notch. I mean they really made me feel that I belonged at the school. I really had difficulties, you know, feeling internally that I belonged here. You know, I did not have money. And I really didn't know what these classes were about when I first went there. So I really felt like an outcast. But it seemed like the faculty had been trained in a manner in which they would approach me and really like put their arm around me. I'd never seen teachers do this. But actually put their arm around me and say, "You know where you're going? What's your next class? Are you having any problems? Have you--if you ever have any trouble in any of these classes, even if it's not a class that I don't teach, you know, feel free to contact me. And, you know, we'll talk about it. And you know, we'll drink our milk together. And if it's any way I can help you, you know, please call on me." So that was--I felt that was really, really nice. You know, I thought that was really a great thing to do. And I really loved the Gilman environment. And I had an option of leaving Gilman after the first year. But because near the end of the year I had made so many friends among the student body and also among the faculty, that I did feel that, you know, "I do fit in. I do belong here and I can excel here." Speaker 1: So the option, was that based on you--the option to leave, was that based on you, you know, some problems at the beginning? Or was it just part of the agreement at the beginning? Speaker 2: It was an agreement from the very beginning with Gilman that after the first year, if you don't feel comfortable here, you know, "We're gonna recommend that you go to [Baltimore] Polytechnic [High School]," which was a public school. But was considered at that time the finest public school in Baltimore. And they said that they could open the door to Polytechnic with a phone call. You know, if I so desired. Story_ID: 11594 Speaker 1: What kind of person were you? You were shy you said-- Speaker 2: Very shy. I loved sports. All of my friends played sports. If they didn't play sports, then we didn't really have anything in common. Because I was shy. And I really didn't approach a lot of people. I don't know why I was shy. Because all my brothers were very gregarious and outgoing. And my sister as well. But for some reason I was just a very shy person. I didn't feel comfortable contacting--you know, making that initial contact. Especially with the members of the opposite--of opposite races or opposite genders. I really made friends with other African American kids that liked sports, that were my age and that was about it. I didn't really have a lot of friends at elementary school. But at Gilman [School, Baltimore, Maryland] it was--everybody was--seemed to be so outgoing that it was just easy to make a friend with anyone. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have dreams? You know, we're always--when we're young we dream to be something. What were your--what were your dreams? Speaker 2: I wanted to be Willie Mays. I wanted to be a baseball player and I played baseball constantly in my spare time as a youngster. Speaker 1: Okay. And what were classes that you, you know, gravitated to? Were you better in math? Or were you better in, you know, English? What were you-- Speaker 2: I was much better in math. Especially logical math like algebra, trigonometry, calculus. Those types of subjects I was always on the honor roll for. And much later in life I found out why. But early in my career as a student I was definitely better at math than any other subject. Story_ID: 11595 Speaker 1: Since you had come from another school and you had this--was the first year hard for you? Speaker 2: Very hard. Very difficult. The subjects that I knew about, such as English, and one of the advanced math classes, was still so advanced from where I left off at the end of the sixth grade to the beginning of the seventh grade, that I really had to study extremely hard just to catch up. And my first grades at Gilman [School, Baltimore, Maryland] were not satisfactory at all. Because it was such a transition. And although I was trying my best, that really gave me a feeling that I did not belong. I was in this different environment and I could not keep up. And I didn't feel that I was trained for this. I didn't feel that it was a fair situation for me to be in. That I had, you know, been an "A" student all through elementary school and now I'm put in this environment where I don't know what's going on. I didn't really think it was my fault. So for the first--about first three months, it was extremely difficult. Speaker 1: So how did you get over that? Were people--the teachers just so nice and they helped you or what--what was the deal? Speaker 2: Well everyone said, you know--even my father a couple of times said, "You know, well keep trying. Because you're just as smart as anybody else there. You just have to catch up. And you'll catch up. So just keep trying. And if you have to study harder then study harder. But, you know, stay the whole year and we'll see where you are at the end of the year." And even the instructors were saying, "You know, just, just keep fighting until the end of the year and we'll see where you are." By the end of the year I did much better. Speaker 1: Now--and was--what was your mother [Irene Crane Parker] saying? Was she saying the same thing? Speaker 2: Yes. She was very encouraging. But she was still--she was still giving me an out. That, "Well, you know, [Baltimore] Polytechnic's [High School, Baltimore, Maryland] a good school too, [laughs]." So you know, if you really don't like to be at that school, you know, you can go to Polytechnic. And I think her interest was that Polytechnic was about fifty percent African-American and fifty percent white. And I think that she thought that would be a safer environment for me. But she was still trying to encourage me in her own way. Speaker 1: Okay. Did--as you were there, did your parents feel or anyone in your family think that you were becoming too white? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely not. Because I could just turn it off [snapping fingers] as soon as I hit the door. I could adapt to the situation in which I was raised. So I was never accu--I never heard that growing up. Story_ID: 11596 Speaker 1: As time goes on are you--you know, are there things that you're deciding you wanna be or do? You know, as time goes on? Speaker 2: Not at all. I really just wanted to get through school. And then decide, you know, maybe when I get to college. I really thought that I'd be a professional athlete. I think most young men feel that way. And I was doing really well at Gilman [School, Baltimore, Maryland]. Because as a young kid I was playing baseball constantly. So I was making the varsity teams at Gilman in football, basketball, baseball. So I didn't give much thought to a career because I was doing so well on the sports fields. And then also I was starting to do well academically. So I thought, "Well, you know, it doesn't make a difference what I do. I should do fairly well in whatever field I enter." Speaker 1: And were you then--were you looking to be recruited by any of the big--you know? The major leagues or minor leagues or-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. And I actually was at age 16. I got an offer from the Pittsburgh Pirates professional baseball team to sign a professional baseball contract, which I was so happy of. That was one of the happiest days of my life. They had a representative talk to me after a game at Gilman School. And I just thought that was just the coolest thing that could possibly happen to a sixteen year old. So I took it home to my parents. And they said, "Oh that's good. Well we'll see about this." And it came about that to be a professional baseball player in the Pittsburgh Pirate organization, I would have to spend the summer playing baseball in Salem, Massachusetts, which my parents said, "It's no way that that's gonna happen. There's no way that we're gonna let you go. That you're gonna have to stay here. 'Cause we're a pretty close-knit family." And basically no one in my family had really been outside [laughs] of Maryland. So that seemed like a, you know, a distant country to them. And we really feuded that whole summer. Because I wanted to do it so badly and they did not want me to go. And because they had the upper hand, I just told 'em, "I'm not gonna play baseball any more at all. I'll just--I'm not gonna play any more baseball." Even though I did. Speaker 1: So you--were you sad about that whole thing? Speaker 2: I was so upset. That was heartbreaking. I cried like a baby for really almost a week about that. Because I thought, "That was my one big shot. This is what I want to do. I can buy them a nice house. I'm gonna be a pro baseball player. 'Cause if I get the opportunity I am definitely gonna be a pro." Those were the thoughts that I was having. And then to have that snatched out by my parents just saying, "No. We don't want you to go." To me that wasn't a legitimate reason. A legitimate reason would be, you know, if someone was in critically poor health or something. And I had to be there. Or I had to work the farm. You know, because my father, you know, can't make it out of bed. Then I have to, you know, save the family. But just for them to say, "You know, no. We don't want you to go that far." You know. I couldn't accept that. Speaker 1: So okay. So that's between your junior and senior year that happened? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. No. Maybe sophomore-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was during my sophomore year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the baseball season is at the end of the school year. So I was actually about to become a junior. Speaker 1: Junior. Okay. So--but you would have had to drop out of school though. Wouldn't you? Speaker 2: Well, they said they were gonna put me in some type of a program where it would only be for the summer and I would still play baseball at Gilman for the junior and senior year. But each summer I would have to go to what they called an instructional league. And directly from Gilman I would go into the minor leagues. I would go into a rookie league. And then start at A league and then Double A, triple A and then possibly to the majors. So to me I just thought it was fantastic. How could that--You know, how could that be a problem? It's only spending a summer away from the family. Story_ID: 11597 Speaker 1: Yes. The first two years I would say my grades would average a "B-". Gilman [School, Baltimore, Maryland] had a different type of a grading system than most schools. It was honors, pass and fail. And I was honors in math and most of the other subjects were just regular pass. But I thought I was doing pretty well. They prided themselves on not giving numerical grades. So you rarely knew if you got an eighty-five or a ninety. You would just know if you got honors, which they considered ninety to one hundred. And everything else would be a pass. And if it was below seventy then that would be a fail. The last two years I think I did much better. I think I was closer to an honor student in the final two years. Story_ID: 11598 Speaker 1: Are there other things that are impacting you during this, you know, your high school years? Anything else? Speaker 2: Probably more--probably things that are going on outside of the school. You know, the racial situations. The fact that there were so few African American role models except for sports and entertainment. That really bothered me, especially in the fields of politics, fields of science, fields of medicine. I really didn't see hardly any African Americans getting into these fields. And that impelled me to seriously begin thinking that, " If I don't do anything in sports, I should be one of the pioneers. Since I was a pioneer at Gilman [School, Baltimore, Maryland] in one of these other fields. Maybe one of the sciences, biology, chemistry, something of that nature." But also the racial situation. The racial strife going on in the United States. It would always deeply, you know, affected me. Because it seemed silly to me. I couldn't understand why there would be, you know, racial strife. What is the core issue? And the only thing I could ever come up with was the color of a person's skin. And to me that didn't make any sense at all. I just couldn't come to grips. You know. What's [laughs] the big deal about the color of a person's skin? Especially being in a situation at Gilman in which, you know, my skin color was darker than ninety-nine percent of the students there. But we all got along without any types of problems. So why couldn't the adults, you know, in business, why couldn't they get along the same way? It's not hard. It's a very easy thing. So I think that affected me. And made me feel like I needed to be, you know, a pioneer. I did not wanna go into fields that were traditionally reserved for African-Americans. Speaker 1: So were you active in activ--no. No activist activities though. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You're a little young too. Speaker 2: Gilman would not allow any type of activist activities whatsoever. Because their mantra was, you know, "We are one student body." And to do anything against that, you would--you would be reprimanded and then probably expelled. Speaker 1: And you said you had no experience of racism in that school? Speaker 2: None whatsoever. But outside of the school I ran into [laughs] plenty. But never once through my entire student career at Gilman did I have any type of racial incidents whatsoever. Speaker 1: So okay so it's--so were other things impacting you at all? Or, you know, forming you as a person? Or people or people that you saw you looked up as role models to? Speaker 2: Well one of my heroes had been even at a young age [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. Because I just thought this was a very brave individual. I didn't know what he stood for at such a young age. But whenever I saw him, he seemed so dignified and so powerful. And it seemed that the messages that he was delivering, although I didn't understand them, were very, very bold. And what really impacted me was the reaction of the people listening to his messages. How he was influencing them. How he was firing them up to this cause. So when he was assassinated, I remember the day that he was assassinated. I just heard my mother [Irene Crane Parker] screaming in the house. She was just screaming hysterically. And I thought really, you know, "That there's an intruder in the house." And when--I had to kind of fight my way through some of my brothers who had surrounded her. And she was just saying, you know, "They didn't have to kill him." And I thought they were talking about my father [James Parker]. Because I couldn't understand why she would be so hysterical about anybody else. All my brothers are apparently here. But my father was in the bedroom. So I didn't know who she was talking about. But when I found out it was [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] I was really devastated. At such a young age, I was just completely crushed. Because why--you know, that's the same question I had. You know, "Well, who killed him and why?" So after that traumatic experiences I really didn't trust any other--you know, I didn't really have role models. Because I was afraid that if they were an African American then there's always the chance that I would lose them through an assassination. So I really tried to distance myself, as odd as that my sound, from really having heroes. Unless they were in a situation that was sports-related. Because nothing ever happens to sports heroes. So I made my idols sports heroes. And I really tried to stay away--I guess I tried to shield myself away from some of the things that were going on in the world with race relations. You know, I've seen my brothers. I've heard stories that they've had of problems that they had. You know, getting service or run-ins that they would have. One of my brothers was attacked by a white gang one time and was actually placed in a coma for a few days. From some type of a racial attack. So I tried to shield myself in my own little world. So I wouldn't be subjected to some of the things that, you know, I've seen my brothers and others subjected to. So when I put myself in my own little world, that was mainly surrounding myself with books, literature, studying and fantasizing about being a sports hero. And for several years, especially through my high school years, that was the world I was in. I was in this one world at Gilman and another world at home. But most of the time, I was really trying to shelter myself from the things that were going on in the world. Because at that point I really didn't understand, you know, why things had to be that particular way. Why it was so hard for a black man, you know, to make anything out of himself in the world, you know, no matter how hard he tried. So rather than become angry about it or to become militant about it, you know, I chose to try to shield myself from it. And really not think about it that much. And I think that probably formed me into the person that I am probably more than anything else. You know, is the fact that I didn't want to deal with those issues until a later--a much later time in life. Story_ID: 11599 Speaker 1: It's time for you to graduate. And what are your thoughts about what you're going to do? Speaker 2: I knew I was going to college. Speaker 1: What year did you graduate? Speaker 2: From Gilman [School, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1978. Speaker 1: Okay. And you knew you were going to college. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And did you know where? Speaker 2: I wanted to go to the University of Maryland ,'cause our family was so close-knit that everybody had to be, you know, [laughs] in Maryland for some reason. So I went to the University of Maryland at College Park, which was no Gilman School. You know, that's when I really began to feel the heat and the anger and the hatred behind racial prejudice was at that school. I went into it thinking it would be like Gilman. But I was woefully wrong. Speaker 1: What do you mean? Speaker 2: Well on campus really wasn't that bad. But the surrounding area anywhere off campus was really a hotbed of racial injustice, racial prejudice. I went into a store one time. It was a bar just to get a Pepsi. I don't drink, never did drink. Just went in there to get a Pepsi. It was a hot, hot day. And it was maybe two blocks off campus. So I really felt safe. You know, this is my school. And I had, you know, my Maryland book bag. So it's quite obvious I'm a student. And I went in there just to get a soda and there was a chant [chuckle] that just started with the "N" word. That just started off soft and just got louder and louder and louder. And I just couldn't believe it. It was like what, what--you know, this is like the daytime. It's 4:00 in the afternoon. I go to school right down the street. You know, I'm a fairly good person. You know, I get along with white people. I went to Gilman School. But I was subjected to that. And after that, really I became aware that, you know, "This is what my brothers are talking about. This is the type of thing that they had been subject to that they were trying to tell me about." But I was thinking, "Oh, it couldn't have been that bad." Because I was going to Gilman. I wasn't really facing it. But once I got out into the real world starting in college, you know, there was quite a bit of opportunities for other races. Not only just whites, but also Asians. To start to look down on me despite my accomplishments, despite the fact that I was a good student. You know, I was still subjected because of the color of my skin to all types of racial taunts and basically just injustices. Speaker 1: And what did you choose as a major? Speaker 2: Business. Speaker 1: Business okay. And what were your thoughts about what you were gonna do? Speaker 2: I still had no thoughts. But I--on specifically what I would do. But it was engrained in me in college that I would be a pioneer in whatever industry I choose to go into. That I'm not going to go into, you know, any type of work environment that's usually reserved for African-Americans. Speaker 1: You mean--you don't mean it was engr--you mean it was--it was something you had decided you wanted to do. Speaker 2: I think it was really ingrained into me from my environment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Really because I had seen how the other half lives, you know, at the Gilman School. And then I felt it was so unfair for me to be taunted. That, you know, I have to do something a little bit different. I'm not going to be the stereotypical African American. I'm not gonna work as a janitor. I'm not gonna work in a soup kitchen. I'm not gonna be a cook. I'm gonna do something in one of the sciences. Is what I was thinking I would probably do. Or I would be in corporate America as an executive. Speaker 1: Okay. So were there other things that hel--that happened to you in college that sort of helped form you or form your direction? Speaker 2: Well, I think because of the fact that, you know, I was finally--well not finally, but I was being subjected to racial problems. I'll say--I again went back into this shell. Where I really tried to block that out and really concentrate on studying. So that I could achieve something. And that's basically what formed me. I had an opportunity to do many, many things. But because I put myself in a shell, I really chose to study and study hard with the goal of being some type of a pioneer. So I think that's probably what formed me more than anything else. Story_ID: 11600 Speaker 1: So you graduate, you know, with your BS. And so what are you--do you go to get--do you have a job before you graduate or you go out to look for a job? Speaker 2: I actually did have a job. It was with the Ezrine Automotive Centers in an executive position. And I took the job based on the salary. I was shocked to find that I was not in demand. Despite the fact that I had really good grades, I was well bred for that era. For an African American male, I thought I had done extremely well. But there were not a lot of offers pouring in. So I went with this one company Ezrine Auto Centers as an executive. It was very entry level and I worked there for several years going up the ranks to what's called the top floor. The top floor was a floor in which all the executive decisions were made for the whole corporation. It was a chain of about thirty or forty tire retail automotive service centers in the Baltimore area. They were very popular in the Baltimore area because they were heavy advertisers and they did very good business. They had a good reputation. So I thought that I could rise up well there, but not as a career. I would do well until I got to a certain plateau and then I could go to a larger corporation and transfer that title that I had attained as Ezrine to an even larger organization. Which is exactly what I did. I went from Ezrine to Bridgestone Firestone in 1987, I believe it was. And I went in as a store manager with the expectation that I would be an executive. And this is their expectation not mine. But that I would start as a store manager and then go into an executive training school within two years which I thought was a long time. But even then I found that the pickings were slim. Even though, you know, I had good grades and I had done extremely well at Ezrine. I had done everything that I was asked to do. I had excellent references. But it was still slim pickings for me. So when I went to Bridgestone Firestone I thought that was a great opportunity. Because this was a huge worldwide corporation with offices throughout the United States and in Japan. They were a $6 billion dollar corporation when I joined them in 1987. And this was my dream that, okay, it's corporate America. So what I will do now is turn it all on and really excel and rise through the ranks. Because a company that's making $6 billion worldwide is gonna have tremendous opportunity. And I--I did extremely well at Bridgestone Firestone. And I really believe that, you know, I was in a pioneer role. And practically every plateau that I was on with Bridgestone Firestone I was the only black, period, on that plateau. When I became a store manager I was the only black store manager in the Baltimore [Maryland]/Washington [D.C.]/Virginia area. Although there were over a hundred stores. I was the only black manager. And then when I was promoted from that, each level I seemed to be the only black. So I thought that I need to be doing this. Because as I do this, this will open the door for others to follow in. So therefore, I am now fulfilling the realization that I had, had from a young child to be a pioneer within some type of an industry. So in 1995, I had achieved in eight years, I was actually on the corporate board for Bridgestone Firestone based in Pennsylvania, which made policies for the 1,500 stores in the United States. And, of course, I was the only [Laughs] African-American on that board. But I quickly got very bored. Because none of my suggestions were being taken seriously, and I mean none of my suggestions. My job entailed going to a lot of meetings, studying a lot of numbers, coming up with different policies and ways that we can sell more tires and ways that we can produce more service. And I thought I was coming up with very fresh original ideas. Because not only was I the only African American on the board, but I was the youngest person on the board. And my peers on the board were all white males fifty to sixty years old. Maybe even a little older. So I thought I had a great insight. Because, you know, you haven't even been in the stores for twenty years. And I'm out there and I have a different perspective. And also you may have been tainted by coming to these meetings for ten or fifteen years. When I'm coming with fresh, new aggressive ideas. But during the meetings, I would--my suggestions would be met with approval. "That's a great idea Timothy." But they were never put into action. None of them. So I began to think that, "This is--This is not what I should be doing. I've reached the ceiling." You know, actually I'd reached the ceiling before I reached--I got on this board. But they were paying, you know, very, very well. But I knew that inside of me that there's no way I would be able to exist--coexist with myself going into meetings and making suggestions that people are not going to enact. Or that people are not gonna be taken--taking seriously. And I could not envision myself being fifty, fifty-five, sixty years old on that board still coming up with ideas that, you know, nobody's going to act upon. Story_ID: 11601 Speaker 1: Was that the time you got tested during that. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: And so tell me what-- Speaker 2: One of these gentlemen on the board came up with this [laughs] idea, which I thought was just completely ludicrous. They brought in a psychiatrist to test each one on the board. And the psychiatrist would tell each person what they were best at. And then we were all going to come together in this big board room and discuss what we wee best at and then figure where we could best help the company. So I was really against this. And I started not to even attend my psychological session. I had no idea what this person was going to say. They could have said I was schizophrenic for all, you know, I knew. But I went. And I--they--there was a series of tests. And you had to do all these psychological evaluations and you'd pick--You know, there would be a question such as, "A building is on fire and you're walking by. What would you do?" And, you know, choice A might be keep walking. Choice B might be summon help. Choice C might be run into the burning building. And choice D would be ignore the whole situation. So there were about three hundred questions like that. And I took this test. And then there was some type of a scan test where I had to find the correct answer as fast as possible. And they would be very, very simple questions. Very easy questions that even an eighth grader could do. But the object was to answer them as fast as humanly possible. So once I did all this which I really thought was just ludicrous. They came back a week later and they said, "Well we have some very surprising news for you especially." I thought okay [laughs] this is going to be funny. They said, "Well you have a gift called closure." I said, "Okay. What is closure?" They said, "That means that you know, you're able to do--to make logic out of chaos." I said, "Okay. Well that's basically what I do, you know, for work." They said, "No. You can take ten different objects and form them in a way in which they would make a logical conclusion. And it's a very rare gift." So I really thought that was nonsense until one day I sat down and I did a crossword puzzle. I was waiting at an airport and I had absolutely nothing to do. So I did a crossword puzzle. I had done one when I was about twelve years old with my mother [Irene Crane Parker] who loves crossword puzzles. But it was far too difficult for me. And it was just--I just didn't--I wasn't attracted to it. But this one time, you know--and it was still ringing in my ears about this closure thing. I wanted to know a little bit more about that and what does this mean. Because I thought, "Well maybe I can use this closure if this really is a gift in a new business. As an entrepreneur and do something totally different. So I sat down and I did this 'New York Times' crossword puzzle and I was absolutely awful at it. I mean just really, really bad. So I didn't think about puzzles at all. But that Sunday I went to church. And I play drums in church. And we had a guest speaker come in. A gentleman that I didn't know at all. His name was Elder Burke. And in the middle of his message which honestly I really wasn't paying close attention to. I was sitting on the drums and my mind was drifting. He stopped and he pointed at me, of all people in this packed church. And he says, "The Lord is giving you a good idea right now." So I was very embarrassed [Laughs] because everyone was looking at me. And I was thinking, "Okay. Well what is this idea?" And nothing came to me [Laughs]. So I just thought, "Well, you know, maybe he's a little off in his signals today." But a little later that afternoon my wife [Giselle Parker] and I were driving to a store. And for some reason I just blurted out puzzles, the word "puzzles". And I don't know why I even said that word. But when I said it-- and my wife's a very spiritual person. She said she had a feeling come over her when I said the word 'puzzles' that was a spiritual type feeling. So when I asked her to explain it, she said, "It was almost like electricity shot through her when I said the word 'puzzles'," [laughs]. So I said, "Okay. All right. Well maybe there's something in this puzzles thing Because, you know, Elder Burke said I was giving him good ideas, and I just blurted out 'puzzles' for no reason. You're getting electric shocks, so maybe something dealing with puzzles will be, you know, our future." Story_ID: 11602 Speaker 1: Well I thought that, well this must be from the Lord. There's no other reason that, that guest speaker would single me out and say that. And there's no other reason that my wife [Giselle Parker] would feel this electricity running through her, unless it's from the Lord. So I told my wife, "I'm going to quit. Bridgestone Firestone, right now and I'm gonna do something with puzzles," (laughs). And she just was so supportive. It was shocking to me. But she had a feeling that, that's what I should be doing. So I quit. And the people at Bridgestone Firestone, they were just so upset. They were so disrespectful. They were telling me things like, "There's no way you're gonna earn, what you earn here with puzzles." One of the older gentlemen asked me if I was crazy. And the way that he asked, he kind of spat the words at me. "You know, do you know that--what kind of opportunity you're throwing away?" And one of the things that I resented was another gentleman said, "You know, we've been awfully good to you." Which I thought I was, you know, had been good for them, rather than they being so good for me. But I just left. I left the whole company. I didn't know what I was gonna do with puzzles. I had no idea. I didn't know how to really construct a crossword puzzle. I didn't know if the puzzles that I had mentioned were crossword puzzles, or some other type of puzzle. So I went into my room. And for three months, I studied computer code. Because, I thought, "Well if, if I'm going to do anything with puzzles, it's gonna have to be something drastically different than anything that I've seen before." Now just as the Lord had planned this thing for me, as I was about to find out later, the Internet was just starting up. And I had never heard of the Internet. But the Lord had led me to study computer code. And because I had done well in math and logic, the computer codes seemed just natural to me. I actually learned it on myself, without any types of classes. And I'm talking about the programming code to make computers do things. I got a book, and I just started reading the book. And it was a little bit complicated. But for some reason, it just started to make perfectly good sense, after a while. So in the first month, I was just studying computer code. And I was studying it feverishly. I was studying from about 8:00 in the morning to maybe 10:00 at night. And I had all these diagrams and maps and formulas. Just like a scientist in a lab, trying to come up with some type of equation to make computers do a puzzle. So that, if you had one computer, and I had another computer, we could both play the same puzzle. But your computer would only react to you, and my computer would only react to me. Because I envisioned making one crossword, and sending it out to all these different computers. And have every single individual be able to play their own version of the game. Which was unheard of, at this particular time. You needed software. And you needed to install it, and do all these different things. But the formula that I was coming up with would send a crossword out to the Internet to one site, like a newspaper. Because I noticed that none of the newspapers on the Internet, had crossword puzzles. Although, practically every paper you buy, that's in print, did have a crossword. So I thought if I could make a crossword puzzle, that a person can play on their computer, the newspapers are gonna buy that crossword from me. And I'll give them a new puzzle everyday. You know, have all these people playing crosswords on their sight. But, it had not been possible until this new programming language just happen to pop up called Java[Script]. Java popped up right at the end of me learning all this computer code. And because I had immersed myself in this computer code, Java was very, very easy to do. Very, very easy for me to program. So for about two weeks, once I figured out, "I'm gonna make this puzzle. This crossword puzzle. And I'm gonna make it in this Java programming language. " And I finally had direction on this mysterious word, "puzzles." I took two weeks to come up with this interface. That worked better than I had ever imagined. And the day that--you know, when you're working in computer code, it's all trial and error. You do all this code, and you see if it works. If it doesn't work, you don't know what went wrong. So you do it all over again, and see if it works. One day, it finally clicked. And I was actually playing a crossword, on my computer, using this Java code. And I just went screaming and shrieking through the house. Because it was almost as if I had discovered a cure for polio or something. This was just this huge thing to me (laughs). And my wife was so happy, because she was starting to get worried. Because our savings were dwindling, seriously. During this three-month period, we were getting into a terrible financial situation and I was not working. I was working on this puzzle stuff (laughs). So it finally hit. And I was showing her. And I could tell she didn't understand what was going on. But I--it was just such a picture of relief on her face. That she was just glad I had done something. She didn't know what it was. But thank God! This man has done something with these puzzles. Please, let's make some money now. So I contacted seven newspapers. Well I contacted six newspapers and CNN. And I told them, "Hey, I've got this discovery. It's this crossword. And no matter how many people play it, it'll be a different game for each person." And they were like, "Aw, that's impossible!" I said, "Well you gotta see this thing." So I sent it to 'em. And every one that I sent it to bought it. And I didn't know what to charge. So I said, "I'm gonna charge you $10 a day. So if you pay me $3,650, I'll let you have this for a year. And I'll give you a new crossword every day." And I was just like, biting my lips, like I think I charged too much money. Every last one of them bought it. So I told my wife [Giselle Parker], "We have a hit." I said, "Everybody, including CNN, has bought this puzzle. And now it's time to celebrate." My wife is really going off now. Now she's really happy (laughs). She's like, "Oh you're a genius! It's like; all your hard work is paying off! Oh, thank you Lord!" So we were partying at the Parker house. That was just a triumphant week. Story_ID: 11603 Speaker 1: So unbeknownst to me, this huge corporation called Universal Press Syndicate is out selling their comic strips to these web sites, these newspapers on the web sites. And they happened to go to this St. Petersburg [Florida] Times, which is one of the clients that bought my puzzle. And they met with a gentleman named Paul Jerome, who was in charge of the whole web newspaper. And he told them flat out, "Hey, we don't want your comic strips. We have this guy named, Parker, out of Baltimore. And let me show you what this guy did." So when they saw the crossword, they begged him. He said they bribed him. But I don't think he actually took money. But he said, they begged him for my phone number, which he gave to them. And he called me that day. And he said, "Tim, I hope I did a good thing. But I gave Universal Press Syndicate your phone number. Because they're fascinated with this crossword. And they're gonna call you." I said, "Okay." And when I got off the phone, I was panic stricken. Because I thought, "This is corporate America about to come in and steal my discovery. Who is Universal Press Syndicate?" So I started looking them up on the Internet, and found out that they're this huge syndication company. And they syndicate 'Dear Abby' and 'Doonesbury' and 'Foxtrot'. And I was just filled with this panic. They're gonna steal this thing, I know they're gonna steal it. They probably already stolen it as we speak now. So I got a call, a couple days after that from a lady named, Darla Walker, who was a representative at Universal Press Syndicate. And I told her. I said, "Darla, you are not going to steal my work. Do you know it took me three months to make this?" And she said, "Oh, no, Timothy, we don't wanna steal it. We want to be a partner with you. We want to take your game worldwide. We're gonna take it all over the world, and you're gonna be rich." And I said, "Okay, show me the money." So they flew me out the next week to Kansas City [Missouri]. And they wined and dined me to the degree, that if I did not sign with them, I would have felt guilty. They put me up in the nineteenth floor of the hotel right across the street from them. This hotel only had nineteen floors. But the nineteenth floor was a suite. I had the whole suite (laughs) to myself. They had people coming up to shine my shoes. They would just knock on the door and say, "Do you need a shoe shine, Mr. Parker?" I was thinking, "What a great organization! I think I'm gonna sign with these people." So I went into their offices. I met their executives. They played a tape of "Dear Abby" giving me advice. And she was saying, "My advice to you is to sign this contract with Universal Press Syndicate." I was saying in my mind, "That's it! I'm signing with these people. They are the best." I did sign. The official date of the contract with Universal Press Syndicate was on April 23rd. By the next month, I had gotten my first royalty check, which was $82. They said, "Listen, these royalties are going to grow. We're going to make you rich." And I said, "Okay, I'm gonna hold you to this." Every succeeding month, they were having phenomenal success in selling the crossword. And I really do mean phenomenal success. One month, they added forty-six new clients. And the next month after that, there would be an additional forty. So I was seeing these royalty checks go from $82 to these ver--really huge sums very, very quickly. And within a year, they were telling me, "You know, this is the hit! You know, you are now our number one property of everything that we sell to the Web sites. We are gonna start selling this crossword in the newspapers." And then I said, "Well I'll tell you what, why don't you do this? Why don't you put my e-mail address on the bottom of the crosswords. Because I wanna hear people's comments. I really want to know if they like these crosswords, if they have any suggestions about them, things that I should change." And they did that. Within four years, the Universal Crossword was on eight hundred paying sites. I was getting approximately ten thousand e-mails a week from people all over the world. Sweden, the Philippines, Korea, the United States, Canada, they were just coming in from all over the place. And one of the overwhelming things that I was reading was, "Your crossword, I can actually do. I hate to do the 'New York Times', because it makes me feel stupid. Yours, even if they're hard, they'll be logical." And that's where that logic that I had coming up, became a part of my profession. Because rather than ask people, you know, "What is the northern most river in Africa?" I may ask a question. But put it in such a logical way, that even if you didn't know it, you may figure it out because of the way that the clue is structured. So that way, when you got a Universal Crossword solved, there was just this great sigh of relief. And so I built into the software, all these new cool gadgets that no one had ever seen before. I put things into the crossword, like a button that if you got stuck on a word, you could cheat. You could hit this one button, and it'll fill the word in for you. Or if you were just stuck on one letter, and you didn't know the whole word, you could hit another button. And it would just fill in that letter. And if you just were stumped, you could hit another button, and it would fill in the whole entire solution. And if you did solve it by yourself, there would be fireworks and everything going on from the game. So that all your co-workers and anyone standing around would know (laughs) that you have solved this crossword puzzle. And it became a major, a major sensation. Right now the Universal Crossword is accessed 14 million times per day. We have over five billion games played per year. It's the number one word game in the world. And I've now spawned from the Universal Crossword, into nineteen other word games including Trivia, Cryptograms, Anagrams, all types of word games. So that now I now have a corporation called Master Puzzles. Which has an office in the outskirts of Baltimore [Maryland], that is the number one word game corporation in the world. And, in fact, we became so popular, that in May of 2000, 'Guinness Book of World Records' awarded me with the title of, "The World's Most Syndicated Puzzle Compiler." Because they said that a Tim Parker game is being played every second of every day, some time, some place in the world. And they can verify that strictly from the Web. Because on the Web, you can count how many people are coming. It's so different from the newspapers, where you have no idea. So now my puzzles and games have spread into the newspapers. Story_ID: 11604 Speaker 1: So I just go back to that one day, when I just blurted out the word, puzzles. Without knowing why I even said it. I wasn't even thinking about puzzles. And I just know that this was a gift from the Lord. Because I really did things the right way. You know, I worshipped the Lord. I never caused any trouble. You know, and I really tried to bring things within myself. I wasn't a reactionary type person. I was a very shy and composed person. And I really think that the Lord said, "You know, I'm gonna reward, you know, this guy. Because he's raising his family, and he's trying to do the right thing. Now he doesn't have a clue as to what he wants to do. So I'll give him a great idea, and that was puzzles." And I would love to take, you know, credit and say, "You know, I knew all along that puzzles on the Internet was gonna be this huge thing." But it was truly a gift from God. And He tapped into the one thing. Because He knows me better than I know myself that He knew I was perfect for. Because I was so good with logic. And I had this closure thing. And I had done so well in math that if you put this guy in logical puzzles, and let him learn a little bit of computer code, you know, he's gonna do some great things. Speaker 2: What did the--was it the minister who--was it an assistant minister that said that, that day? Did you ever go back to him and ask him? Speaker 1: He is now my pastor. I go to his church now (laughs). Speaker 2: Okay, Speaker 1: He actually made me the assistant pastor last year. I'm assistant pastor under him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I felt like anybody that has that insight, I need to be close to that person. Speaker 2: So did--was he surprised by your success? Speaker 1: Not at all. He said he knew it. He said he had a feeling that day that something big was going to happen. He said that he had only prophesized like that one other time, in his entire ministry. Since he had been, you know, a pastor. And that that other prophesy had came to fruition as well. So he was not surprised at all. Story_ID: 11605 Speaker 1: It's one thing to be doing things in, you know, the room of your house.And another thing to be, you know, running a large organization. And I'm wondering what the whole process has been along the way? Speaker 2: Well I knew I was not good at crossword puzzles. I was good with the technology. So I found out who was making these puzzles for the New York Times. And, you know, the New York Times will list who made the puzzle. So what I did was, I wrote up my own guidelines which were totally different from the New York Times. They're called style sheets. And you give them to the constructors, and this is what they construct puzzles based on. It's their boundaries. You can go this far. And I want it this hard. And don't use these clues. And use this type of clue, etcetera. So I made my own set of guidelines. And I said, "Look, I want my--I do not want a clone of the New York Times crossword. I want really funny clues. Some educational type things, some literature. But definitely make it more modern. Let's put some pop culture in now. You know, if you have a rap star, for example, that's selling 30 million albums per year, then our culture should know who that person is. And they should be held accountable if they don't know." Just--and also, on the same token, I have many references to opera and ballet and things of that nature interspersed throughout these puzzles. So what I did is, I initially picked up about twelve puzzle masters. The top twelve that I could find. And I said, "Send me puzzles, and I will pay you more than you get from the New York Times, if you send me your best puzzle. And I'll tell you what I'll do, I'll make a decision on it within two days. So that if I turn it down, you can then go give it to the 'New York Times.' I won't hold your work up." And they all agreed. And the one thing that I was finding out as I was getting these submissions is, these people have no sense of humor, whatsoever. I mean they're brilliant and they're smart, but put a joke in here. And their ideas of jokes were horrible (laughs). So lame. So as an editor--I said, "I have to become an editor. I have to change a lot of these clues. Because my generation is not gonna find this funny. This is just lame." So I began to change about fifty percent of the clues in each crossword that I got. I was a very handy--a very heavy-handed editor. I think a typical crossword editor may change twenty percen t of the clues. But I found myself changing half of 'em. Because I wanted to enjoy it. And I thought if I enjoyed it, then other people would enjoy it. Because my crossword was not for people who had played crosswords for twenty years. It was for people that wanted to have some fun, get a nice light diversion, and play it on the computer. And actually cheat, if they got... if they were stumped. So that's how it grew. It grew and grew and grew. And I--And then there were clubs forming. And they were sending me e-mails and say, "Hey, we just formed a Universal Crossword club, and we get together everyday at 12:00. And, you know, it's eighty in our club." And it just grew and grew and grew and blossomed to the point that now, a lot of the newspapers are starting to pick up. Print newspapers, which traditionally do not change crosswords, because the editors don't wanna deal with letters from people. When you change something--the editors say when you change something, you're gonna get a letter. No matter if it's better, worse, they don't care. They don't wanna deal with these letters. But, you know, major newspapers, like the Dallas Morning News and the New York Post and the Boston Globe. Major publications were starting to hear about how popular this particular crossword was. And then some of the newspapers, that would have my puzzle on the Internet, but not in print were saying, "Well we're getting tremendous response on the online crossword. So let's take that same one and put it in the paper and maybe we'll get the same response." Speaker 1: Now with the crossword--what do you call them? The people who do it. The-- Speaker 2: Constructors. Speaker 1: Constructors, okay. With them, how did you--did they find this very foreign to them at the beginning? You know, the fact that you were changing. And was there resistance, or did you have to home grow some other people to be constructors? Speaker 2: Well, I was actually paranoid about that. Because to me, these are puzzle masters. Some of them had 30 years experience creating crossword puzzles. And here I am, changing half of their clues. So I expected some resistance. But it was also an employer and employee relationship. I was signing checks. So I felt that I had the right to change whatever I pleased, because I was paying for it. But I was happily surprised that a lot of these constructors would see the work, actually in print, or on the Internet, and see the changes. And would write back and say, "You know, that was really a clever change, especially at sixteen across. That was so clever. And I really liked that." So now I get hardly no resistance at all. And then those twelve--the crossword constructing community must be a very close knit community. Because I started getting these e-mails from other people, sending me in their crosswords and saying, "Hey, I've been published here and there. And I would love to construct, you know, for you." So the word was starting to get around that this guy pays very quickly. And he will enhance the work, rather than tear the work down." Crossword constructors are paranoid that their name is on a crossword, and if an editor does not do a good job, the person solving it, is going to think that's their work. So once an editor gets a reputation of being a good editor that enhances their work, rather than to tear it down, then you start to get more and more constructors wanting to come aboard the Universal Crossword ship. And now we have crossword constructors from all over the world as far away as Turkey and India, who send in puzzles. Although very few from Turkey and India are published because there are some problems (laughs) with the language. But, you know, I still get them in nevertheless. Speaker 1: So what is the composition of your staff that you have there? Speaker 2: In the Baltimore County [Maryland] office is an executive staff, that basically handles corporate decisions. Our corporation has grown. And we now extend into TV. We've sold a game show to Columbia TriStar Pictures. We're into radio syndication, now doing puzzle-- little light puzzle games that radio stations can play to amuse their listeners. And have listeners call in for a prize if you can solve this riddle. And we try to expand the games' empire, what we call an empire, the games' empire as far as we possibly can. We think this is just an extraordinary opportunity for our staff, which is all African American, not by design. But because when I first made the staff, I hired people that I knew and trusted. So of the one hundred and ten people that work for us, it's probably about thirty percent African American. But the entire executive staff--I think we're one of the few corporations where the entire executive staff is African American. Speaker 1: And your constructors? Speaker 2: They are from everywhere (laughs). Speaker 1: Everywhere. Story_ID: 11606 Speaker 1: So have you had any down points along the way, in this whole process? I mean, you know, 'cause it seems like it's all been sort of stellular [sic. stellar] upwards. Speaker 2: Well I get hate mail, occasionally. Because my image is posted all over the Internet now. It's very, very easy to find out who I am. So I do get an occasional, you know, piece of mail that would be ridiculous. But the majority of this has been, you know, a tremendous success story. I don't think, you know, a few pieces of poorly written hate mail (laughs), you know, can dampen, you know, this story. And, in fact, Universal Press Syndicate says that they want to do a movie, you know, about this. They said, "This should be on film about how this guy just--the Lord spoke to him one day (laughs). And he ends up doing something that he really was not planning on doing." So, you know, I don't know where the fairy tale is going to end. But there have been very few dark spots, very, very few. Now my competitors, other crossword publishing companies, such as, you know, the Creators Syndicate and some of the other ones, don't like this situation. They don't like the situation that, a so-called outsider. And by outsider, that's a person that hasn't been in the crossword industry for, you know, a hundred years, has come in and has enjoyed this type of success. So there have been functions for crossword luminaries, that I've not been invited to. But I know what the reason is. Because it's a competitive aspect. The majority of the crossword industry gets along. They share ideas. One syndicate will share ideas with another. But I refuse to do that. I don't share anything with anybody. As far as I'm concerned, this is my corporation, and you're another corporation. And they're the enemy. I don't give them any help. I don't want any help from them because to me, it's business. And I think that business approach really took the old boy school of crossword construction and editing for a loop. Because the New York Times crossword has been revered as the ultimate crossword. And I've gone out on interviews and honestly said, "I think it's the worse crossword in publication." And that's how I honestly feel. I think it's far too difficult. I think it's far, you know, too frustrating. I think a puzzle should be fun. I don't think it should be something that you pull your hair out with. And then afterwards, think, "Boy, how stupid am I that out of one hundred twenty clues, I could only do ten." I think that's, you know, the opposite of what entertainment should be. Entertainment is entertainment. So because I've taken that stand, and because I have not bowed down to the New York Times crossword, which I think is awful, I've been a little bit of an outcast. But that hasn't stopped, you know, one hundred employees from working with me. And the same constructors that work from the New York Times, they don't seem to have any problem with constructing crosswords for me. And I believe right now I honestly have the finest crossword product in the world. I honestly believe that. Story_ID: 11607 Speaker 1: Where do you want to go from here? I mean in terms of, you know, what you wanna do? And I mean you've had tremendous success--in a, you know, a short period of time. And I'm wondering where you wanna go from here? Speaker 2: The next frontier for us is definitely TV and TV--television entertainment. I've had the honor to be approached by the Merv Griffin production company--Telepictures. I've been out to Beverly Hills [Los Angeles, California], as a guest of studios, three times now. They've kept me at hotels like the Beverly Wilshire. And I've been driven around Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] in stretch limousines, from companies that want me to develop game shows for them. And that is absolutely the next frontier. We already have one deal with Columbia TriStar Pictures. But there's a lot of opportunity out there. I really do not like TV. I think most of it is inane, with a lot of the programming. And I really think that there is a need for intelligent programming, but entertaining programming. The old school game shows, like, 'Match Game,' and things like that, were light diversions. But, in today's era of shock TV and reality TV, you know, I think that there are ways to incorporate that type of entertainment into an intelligent forum. Where people are actually, you know, have a lot at stake to answer questions, and be smarter than other people. So that's in demand right now. And because of my reputation and because of my success, that's put me in demand. So that is the next frontier for our business. We're really dealing with Hollywood a lot now on several different frontiers, and hopefully we'll be able to make a difference. You know, my dream would be to have one of these so-called inane shows canceled and replaced with one of my shows. Story_ID: 11608 Speaker 1: Was the pay scale the same with everything that you--or you developed a whole different thing from syndication. Speaker 2: It was completely different in syndication, and I found out that I was doing it totally wrong, which really made it even more amazing that people actually paid me. But in syndication, each client pays per week to run your feature. The smaller ones may pay five or ten dollars a week, the larger ones may pay $300 or $400 per week, based on their subscription rate, and how many people read them. But it's a weekly pay period. I was charging these people by the year, and in one big lump sum. So with Universal [Press Syndicate], that completely changed. Speaker 1: And so how much--how much are your annual revenues? Speaker 2: I never say. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it is seven figures. Story_ID: 11609 Speaker 1: What were the other parts of the equation that, you know, sort of separated you apart? Do you think, it was just the code and the constructors working with you? Speaker 2: And I think the humor that I would put in as an editor. I did not have crossword editing experience. So I had nothing to go by but pure instincts. So I just made them as fun as they could possibly be. And that really caught on. I mean that really struck a cord. I didn't go by anybody's rules. I didn't try to copy anyone. I would just look at a clue, and say, "Oh, this is not gonna work." And change it. And think about it, and see how can I make this funnier? Or, how can I make this logical? So that if a person really doesn't know where this mountain is, they could still figure it out. And so I just started putting these really strange clues--honestly, strange type clues in, and they really caught on. People started to just play the crossword addictively. Speaker 1: Now if you're changing the clues, would that change the number of spaces and the whole thing? Or--I mean I'm probably naive about the whole thing, but how--when you change things; doesn't it change the shape and all of that? Speaker 2: No. The grid basically stays the same, unless there's a word in it that I don't like. So I'll take that whole part out. And I'll doctor the grid. But most of the time, when I'm editing, the words in the grid are fine. It's the clues that lead you to those that are just a little wacko sometimes. Speaker 1: And who has been helpful also in your business? In the development of your business? Has your family been involved? I see you have--you have teenagers. Speaker 2: Yes. My wife [Giselle Parker] has been instrumental in the developing of the business. And, in fact, she runs the office. She had business experience. She was a contract administrator for the Hechinger's Corporation for eight years. And she took that office and business experience and multiplied it times one hundred, because it was our business. And the zeal in which she runs that office is just tremendous. She's just been a phenomenal help. And also my daughter [Brooke Parker], who has an amazing way with words. She just graduated from high school. She's eighteen years old. She does most of our word search puzzles, which has an audience of about three million people per day. So for a teenager--I tell her, I said, "You're one of the world's top entertainers. Because you're entertaining three million people a day with your words." And I said, "If you multiply that times a year," I said, "look how many people, you know, how many times your games are being played." So she does about thirty to forty percent of our word search games. And she also does a lot of the biblical games. We developed a biblical line. Because I felt that I had to repay the Lord, (laughs) some kind of way. I have to do something. So we came out with a new line of biblical games that we're giving away to church sites, free of charge. We absorb all the cost, the production cost. And we reluctantly got Universal Press Syndicate to go along with that deal. So we're hoping to get these Christian biblical games on the majority of the fourteen thousand Christian sites that are on the web, within the next year or two. Story_ID: 11610 Speaker 1: You've talked about the different types of games, you know, that you have. But can you talk about them a little more in detail? You know, the word search. You have a--okay, [unclear] Speaker 2: Certainly, of course, the first game was the crossword. And that continues to be king of all of my games. But the word search, which is a traditional game, in which you have this grid with all these letters. And you find particular words, and circle them. I made an electronic version of that for the Internet, in which you could play on your computer, and circle the words with your mouse. And if you circled all the words, fireworks explode, and you get this big congratulations. That was the second game we came out with. And that met with great success, really tremendous success. From there, other companies began calling me, and I began charging for consultation for other companies, helping them set up game divisions. A lot of times, they would use some of my games, and I would help them make their own games. And then I decided, "Well, you know, if I'm already helping these other companies with these other newer games, I can make more games myself." So we now have interactive trivia games, hang man games, slide and solve games. Practically any type of a word game that people are familiar with. All of my games are basically ones you already know how to play. It's just that I put new twists into 'em. So you can play 'em on your computer and have a lot more fun. Or print 'em out if you want to do it the traditional way. But now we have nineteen separate word games in total. Combined, we probably have about eight billion games a year being played. Story_ID: 11611 Speaker 1: You know, that's what I also found fascinating. Was that you were promising, you know, the paper the different, you know, puzzle each day, right? Not even just the--but each day. Speaker 2: Each day. Speaker 1: And so how were you creating all--I mean this is--at the beginning. 'Cause Universal [Press Syndicate] took how long to come in? Speaker 2: Universal came in very quickly. And when they came in, I was producing the crosswords, and it was taking forever. I would--Iit--it would probably take about sixteen hours a day for me to do what I needed to do in the very beginning. And that's when I told my wife [Giselle Parker], "Hey, I have to get some people that know how to make these crosswords (laughs), because I'm staying up too late with these puzzles." And I was trying to be, you know, a perfectionist. Because I knew these puzzles were on CNN [Cable Network News] and these big sites. So I did the crosswords myself for about two months. And it was exhausting. Because they were published seven days a week, which meant even on Saturdays. And after church, I would be so tired. I played the drums in church. So I'd play the drums, go home, get something to eat and make crossword puzzles (laughs). And it was very, very difficult. But once I got the professional constructors, the editing part would only take about two hours. And because the programming, the computer programming, was already done, I had templates. So once I edited it, it would only take a matter of minutes to transform it to the Web version, so it would run. So that really helped things a lot. Now I'm back to about fourteen and fifteen hour days, just because of the sheer number of games we publish. Speaker 1: And you are--are you supervising everything still? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Does every game go through you? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Story_ID: 11612 Speaker 1: How have people reacted to you? I mean besides this hate mail. I mean, you as an African American doing this. What are they--it's not an area that black people, you know, are in. Speaker 2: (laughs) That's right. Speaker 1: And so are they, you know, sort of fascinated with you? Do they think, "Is there someone behind your organization that's really white, you know, who's sort of the brains behind it?" Speaker 2: (laughs). Speaker 1: What do they think? Speaker 2: They've been very accepting. I think they realize that, you know, this is the person. I went to a Mensa Club, that's an IQ club. They called Universal and said, "Hey, we would like Timothy Parker to speak at our Baltimore [Maryland] chapter." I don't think they knew I was an African American. And so they had arranged this. And they paid Universal [Press Syndicate] a big sum to have me come and speak. So when I walked in (laughs), it was just--it was a hush (laughs). It was so quiet. It was--I mean I had heard, you know, chatter. I was walking down this hall, and you could just hear some, you know, light mumbling. And when I went into the room, it was perfectly silent. So I thought, "Okay, as I was walking to the podium. Right now they're getting over the shock. And after I talk for about two minutes, it will be just as if, you know, I'm a--I was a old friend." And we really had a great--a great--it was a great event. They had brought in a couple of other chapters. And they had some of my puzzles laid out. And it was really great. But that's the reaction I usually get. When I walked into Columbia TriStar [Pictures], there was a hush. So I usually get a hush for about the first thirty seconds or so. And then everything warms up. But the hush I've come to expect. Story_ID: 11613 Speaker 1: Now that you're looking at TV, and you have this--you know, I'm wondering what you think of like, 'I Want To Be A Millionaire'? You don't watch TV very--but I mean-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What do you think--are you--is-- Speaker 2: I don't like that show at all. I do not like that show. I do not understand why so many people (laughs) watch that show. I just don't get anything out of it. I mean you have--I think it just--it takes too long to answer the questions. And I think Regis Philbin is a great host. But these long pregnant pauses between the answers. To me, I like things snapping and popping (snapping fingers). And it just takes too long. But obviously, that is a phenomenon. But I don't see it. I mean none of my games are built along that line. Speaker 1: And you would--so are--can you talk about the game show you envision? Or the one that you have, you know, that--maybe you should talk about that one. Speaker 2: Actually, on my show, I had to try to build in reality to it as well. So in my TV show, eight ordinary people get to cram on a subject that they are not specialist in for a month. And that subject could be anything from Asia to kangaroos. But whatever the subject is, they need to learn as much as possible about that particular subject. Then once they get on the show, they actually ask each other questions, to steal each others money. So whoever studied the most, should make it to the hot seat. Once that person, that has outwitted the other seven, gets to the hot seat, the next three, in order of money, get to challenge him with secret questions that they've tucked away. To steal part of his money. Once you get to the hot seat, you have won one million dollars. So there's gonna be a million dollar winner on every show. But, the people that get to question the person on the hot seat actually steal part of that money. For example, nine questions are asked to the person that sits on the hot seat. The first question he gets wrong or she gets wrong, costs them a half million dollars. So when they're on the hot seat, they're really on the hot seat. Because every question that they get wrong, they actually lose a huge sum of their money. And the person that asks them the question doesn't get the other half of the million dollars. They'll get a small portion of that. So we kind of tested this show. We did five. And we had one person that actually answered all nine questions and won a million dollars. But the average give away on the show, was about sixty thousand dollars. And Columbia TriStar [Pictures] loved the fact that a person won a million, but left the show with only sixty thousand dollars (laughs). So the idea of the game is to win the million. But then to actually get off with the million. Speaker 1: Now what, what--but what does what are--you're bringing to the table all the calculations behind, you know, what someone would get or--I mean I'm just trying to understand. This is a lot different from, you know, from a crossword. Speaker 2: Oh, it's totally different. Totally different. Speaker 1: So when you're coming up with the idea, what is all the idea that you're bringing? You're bringing the concept of the game. Right? And then you're bringing the--this is how it's gonna work, and these are the questions that will be asked? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Those executives out there--I mean it was really a learning procedure to pitch a show. I'd never pitched a show. And I did not expect them to just stare. Because they--the key thing they don't wanna do is show whether they like the show or not. So they would just stare at you, with no expression. And I thought I was being witty. I was cracking jokes. I was just, you know, putting on this (clapping hands) great show. And they were just staring at me with no expression. So I thought "I better make this show. Get to the point and make this show really, really good. Because these people are not gonna give me any kind of a indication. And they don't seem to have a sense of humor, because there's money involved in this." So I pitched the show and I left thinkin--when I left Columbia TriStar, I left thinking, "They hated it." Because they gave me no expression. And then, unbeknownst to me, they were talking to my agent. And he called me a few days later and said, "They loved it!" which was shocking to me. But they certainly expect you to have every single element of the show worked out. Because once you pitch it, there's this grueling question and answer segment. In which every question they ask, you had better have a good answer for. Which would indicate you really know your show. Story_ID: 11614 Speaker 1: Do you ever feel that you're growing too quickly? Speaker 2: Yes, I really--actually, I do. But the one thing that guides me is, in my opinion, this is not my business. The Lord gave me this. So obviously, these ideas for TV shows and all, you know, this is His work. And how can you go wrong, if the Lord's on your side (laughs). And that's the way I see it. The--as these opportunities come forward. And the shocking thing about 'em is the opportunities are falling in my lap. I'm rarely calling someone for an opportunity. The opportunities are presenting themselves. And some of them, it would--it seems like I would be foolish, not to pursue them. For example, 'Reader's Digest' flew me out to Pleasantville, New York recently, and asked me to make a new game for the last page of 'Reader's Digest'. And so I asked them how many readers did they have a month. And they said, "Forty-four million. So it has to be a good game. And we want a different game every month. It can't be the same game." So I came up with a prototype of one game. And they said, "That's great. We're gonna run that in the October edition." So that last page of the October, 2001 'Reader's Digest', is going to be the very first issue of this game called the, 'RD Challenge', with RD standing for 'Reader's Digest'. And I'm actually developing these games on a monthly basis. Now to me, if 'Reader's Digest' calls you and asks you if you can make a game, I don't care what you're doing. You need to drop it and go make a game for 'Reader's Digest'. And the same thing with Columbia TriStar Pictures. If someone wants to fly you out to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], and wine and dine you, and dine you at Spago's and drive you around in stretch limousines, then you need to take that opportunity. There are some opportunities that I would not take because I'm too busy. But some are so big, that it would be foolish to bypass them. Story_ID: 11615 Speaker 1: What is the--what is the--the demographics of the dif--of people who play these types of games? Is it--have you learned more about who the audience is? Or did you have an idea at the beginning? Speaker 2: In the beginning, I had no idea. But I've certainly become a student, because this is my craft now. But 62 percent of the people that play the Universal Crossword are female. And 78 percent of all players are over the age of thirty-five. Speaker 1: So not that many kids? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. And are they--are there more elderly playing it, than not, or not? No, because yours are always--No, not always. Not the 'Reader's Digest.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But a lot of your original ones were on computer. Speaker 2: The majority of my players, I would expect, are senior. I get a lot of e-mail from people that they--seniors love to tell you their age (laughs). They love to say, "I'm seventy-seven, and I'm still playing." Or "I'm sixty-nine, and I'm still playing." So I get a lot of mail from seniors. And a lot of the senior websites. Websites devoted to seniors picked up my crossword. And have enjoyed great success with them. So I know there's a lot of the senior population playing these games. Story_ID: 11616 Speaker 1: What do you wanna do else in your life? You're still very young. Do you think you wanna make--I know you probably wanna just continue to enjoy your success that you have now. But are there any other, you know, things that you would like to do? Or-- Speaker 2: There's one last thing (laughs). Once, you know, I can really get a handle on everything that's happening, because right now it's still a helter-skelter type of business. Everything's going on. Phones are ringing, e-mails coming in. But once I finally get a grip on that, I would love to write a screenplay. And I actually mentioned that to my agent. Universal [Press Syndicate] got me this fantastic agent in Beverly Hills [Los Angeles, California]. His name is Elliot Webb. He's one of the most respected agents in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. And when I told him that, I was almost afraid to say, "You know, I would like to write a screenplay. Because when I was younger, I used to write a lot of stories." 'Cause I spent a lot of time to myself. And rather than him saying anything negative, he said, "If anybody can do it, you can do it." And when he said that, it really gave me a charge that one day, I do wanna sit down and just kind of take it easy and write a screenplay. And see if we could actually, you know, have that type of success to go from a screenplay to actually having it in movie theaters. That would be the ultimate. To come from Bridgestone Firestone, hear the word puzzles and end up with a movie (laughs). I think that would be the ultimate. Story_ID: 11617 Speaker 1: What did the Bridgestone Fire--I mean Bridge--what are they saying? Speaker 2: They are in a world of hurt right now. And I--because the Lord gave this to me. I have not tried to rub anything in. But I actually bumped into a--one of the men that was on that board in a Best Buy appliance store one day. And he looked at me and I looked at him. And he turned away. And I know that he recognized me. But he knew of what had happened with me and I knew what was going on with Firestone. And rather than just go over and strike up a conversation, I thought it's best that I just leave it as is, and just walk away. Speaker 1: And what about your family? What has it--'Cause your father [James Parker] has passed away. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, recently did. But your mother's [Irene Crane Parker] still alive, right. So what about--what are--but wait, your father just passed away. Speaker 1: Yes, last October. Speaker 2: Okay. So what have--what have they said about this? This must be sort of an amazing thing for them. Speaker 1: They--my mother embarrasses me so bad (laughs). I can't go anywhere with her, without her just stopping people. And she has copies of magazine articles and she shows people. We're in the market. She shows the checkout people. I mean it's really, it's really embarassing. But it's great that, you know, this petite woman that went through so much in her life, you know, is getting so much joy out of this thing. But she seems to be enjoying it far more (laughs) than I am. Speaker 2: And are all your children involved? Speaker 1: Yes. My son is also involved, but-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You have three, right? Speaker 1: No, I have two. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You have two children. Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. My son does some of the sports puzzles for me. But I don't give him a lot because he is in college. He's at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. And I don't give him a lot. But for him to earn some extra money, I have him do some of the sports puzzles. Story_ID: 11618 Speaker 1: Do you consider your--yourself a right-brain, left-brain type person? Speaker 2: No. You know, the--I was definitely a creative person. But part of my business is--part of it is creativity. Another separate part is logic. So if I started to think about am I a left-brain or a right-brain, I feel that I would do damage to my psyche in the way that I approach my business. So the way that I view myself is, I am half creative and half logical. And I just leave it at that. Story_ID: 11619 Speaker 1: And with you, you know, as an African American who has, you know, you've come from very poor circumstances. You, you know, you stated. And you really didn't have--you didn't have a tremendous amount of role models out here. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What do you think, when you look, you know, at other African-Americans coming along, who may be coming from similar circumstances. What advice would you give to them? Speaker 2: To not put such a heavy stake in having role models. Because role models can disappoint you. You know, I've had a role model assassinated. And then so frequently you hear people, you know, that you may idolize that had, you know, a serious problem. We're humans. We are not immortal. We're not perfect. We're not Jesus. We're not gonna have the types of lives where we never make mistakes. So when you put too much stake in a person, and then they do a human thing in error, that can be very damaging. I think it's more important for you to believe in yourself and to strive within yourself. Bring out everything you can to achieve your goals, rather than to idolize another human being. If you wanna idolize somebody, then you need to go to church. Speaker 1: And for--when you look at the black community and the state it's, you know, still in, what are your--what do you think would improve the condition of the black community and the community you actually came from? Speaker 2: One thing I believe is that every African American should know their history. They need to review videotapes like "Eyes on the Prize". And really see just how pioneering African-Americans--what they had to go through. It is unbelievable to me the courage of some of our African American heroes and ancestors. I met a gentleman in a bookstore, who was selling a book out in a mall in Baltimore. I can't remember his name right now. But he was selling a little pamphlet, and it cost eight dollars. And he was in it. And in it was a picture of him escorting his younger sister to a school in South Carolina. And the year was 1964. And he was telling me and my wife [Giselle Parker], he was saying, "You know, I'm a pioneer. Because you see this picture? You know, we were the first blacks to go to that high school. And you see that angry mob? We just walked right through that mob. Because we were gonna be the first blacks in that school." And when I observed this gentleman, he was just a--just a fine stately gentleman. There was so much pride, you know, in his face. And when he was recalling what he had done. You know, it just--he just swelled up. I could--it's was almost as if I could see his chest expand as he was, you know, relaying that story to me. That, you know, my wife and I purchased his book right on the spot. Because we thought, "You know, that guy, that guys a hero." And I think if more of the younger African-Americans who have limited their scope to a certain world, a certain world of hip-hop or a certain world of TV. If they could just go out of that world for just a little while. And see what this struggle really was about and learn. And actually see videotape series, like "Eyes on the Prize," I think what it would mean to them will be more important than any other lessons they can learn in life. Because if those people, those courageous people, could pave the way for people like me, then it is our obligation to pick up that baton that's been passed to us and then carry it forward into the next generation. Speaker 1: Do you think that with proper talent that this is a colorblind society? Is that--do you think that's what's happened in your life in some respect? Speaker 2: Maybe in a few respects, you know. But it--it's still--I'm still painfully aware that I am an African American editor. I'd rather just be known as an editor. And not have the stigma of having to be called an African American editor. I did an interview with 'People' magazine. And they asked me, "Well should we call you an African American editor?" You know, and to me just for, you know, someone in a magazine that goes out to millions of people to ask that, was that, that's how ignorant our society is. Why can't I just be an editor? Obviously anyone that sees this picture (laughs) is gonna know it's an African American editor. Why would you need to put African American in front of anybody's job title? An African American, you know. You don't put Irish-American this. You don't put Asian-American that. So what is this stigma about African Americans? So I am still painfully aware, you know, that I am probably the--to my knowledge, the only African American crossword editor in the country. Story_ID: 11620 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? And you're still very young, you know. But I would just like you to at least, you know, maybe try to address that. Speaker 2: (Pauses) I would like my legacy to be of a person that is regarded as an entertainer. But of an entertainer of intelligent games. And I love to put in my interviews, when I'm asked, you know, "What do you produce?" I always say, "Crossword puzzles and intelligent games." Because all the games I deal with are all intelligent games. There's no gunplay. Nobody's shooting hoops for the most points. It's all brainpower. And when I sit back and think sometimes that, you know, I get letters every day from college professors at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] saying, "Hey, you stumped me, you know, on one down." You know, that makes me feel wonderful that the audience that I entertain are some of the greatest minds in the world. Rather than, you know, being a basketball player or a singer. So I want my legacy to be, "He was an entertainer of--with--who used intelligent games as his medium." Story_ID: 11621 Speaker 1: That's my wife Giselle "G-I-S-E-L-L-E" and that's 1981. We had been married about a month. I was twenty-one and she was twenty. We were going out to a country club. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker with his wife, Giselle, 1981. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11622 Speaker 1: Well that's me at age twelve with my niece Sherry who was two years old at the time. And that year is 1972. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker with his niece, Sherry, 1972. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11623 Speaker 1: That's my wife Giselle with our daughter Brooke. That's my second child. That year is 1982. Brooke was about six months old. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker's wife, Giselle, and daughter, Brooke, 1982. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11624 Speaker 1: That is my wedding day. We couldn't afford to get married in a church. So we were married at my mother's house. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker and his wife, Giselle, on their wedding day, 1981. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11625 Speaker 1: This was taken in Nashville, Tennessee, the day that I was elected to the board--corporate board of Bridgestone/Firestone [North American Tire, LLC]. The year was 1995. Speaker 2: (inaudible) Speaker 1: Frank Safar who was on the board. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker with Frank Safar after being elected to the board of Bridgestone Firestone North American Tire, LLC, Nashville, Tennessee, 1995. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11626 Speaker 1: In the middle is my brother Jerry. That's me with the checkered sweater on at age six or seven. The little fellow there is my younger brother Steven. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker with his brothers, Jerry (middle) and Steven (left), not dated, from the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11627 Speaker 1: This is a pretty historic picture. This was the day that I crack the code for the crossword on the computer. That's the crossword actually up on the computer. And I printed out a couple of copies and I had my wife [Giselle Parker] take this Polaroid for prosperity [sic, posterity]. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker cracks the computer code to create crossword puzzles online, not dated, from the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11628 Speaker 1: That's me holding my daughter Brooke, 1993. She was about a month old or two months old. Speaker 2: (inaudible) Speaker 1: Yeah that's right. I'm sorry You're right. thank you. That was 1982. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker with his daughter, Brooke, 1982. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11629 Speaker 1: The young lady is my cousin Kay. The little fellow in the middle is my younger brother Steven. And that's me standing next to Steven. I was probably about six or seven. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker with his cousin, Kay (left), and brother, Steven (middle), ca. 1966. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11630 Speaker 1: That is--the gentleman in the middle with the black jacket is my son Timothy. Standing right next to him in the white is my wife [Giselle Parker] who was in her nursing outfit for church. Right next to my wife, the young lady next to her is her sister Peggy. The tall gentleman is Peggy's son Michael. And the young man in the white shirt is my son's friend. I think his name is Michael as well. Speaker 2: [(L. to R.): Timothy Parker's sister-in-law, Peggy, wife Giselle Parker, son Timothy Parker, nephew, Michael and son's friend Michael, not dated, from the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11631 Speaker 1: That's me on the drums. My first drum set (laughing) playing in the backyard in 1976. I was sixteen. And I had been playing the drums on a potato can. So I was very happy to get that drum set. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker (on drums) with his cousins, 1976. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11632 Speaker 1: I'm on the far left with my three younger cousins. But I don't know which ones they are (laughing). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I have a lot of cousins and this is a young picture. So I don't know which ones are who. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker (left) with his cousins, not dated, from the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11633 Speaker 1: This was a board meeting where we got to meet Dan Rather. That's Dan Rather in the front. And you can see me looking at Dan Rather. And he had brought an entourage to [Bridgestone] Firestone to talk about--he was giving a pep talk actually. He was a paid speaker. And we got to meet him after he spoke. This was in 1995 I believe. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker (second from right) with news anchor Dan Rather (right) and others, 1995. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11634 Speaker 1: Yes, this is the press sheet for the 'Universal Word Search' that I produced. It's on about 450 websites across the world. Speaker 2: [Press sheet for Timothy Parker's 'Universal Word Search'. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11635 Speaker 1: This is the certificate from Guinness World Records that I received that stated that I was the worlds most syndicated puzzle compiler. They just sent it in the mail. I didn't know (laughing). It just came in the mail one day and I opened it up and there it was. Speaker 2: [Certificate from the Guinness Book of World Records, ca. 2001. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11636 Speaker 1: This is in 1976. And the gentleman in the gray hat is my brother Augustus. In the middle is my sister Irene who we call Rosy. And that's me in the brown outfit. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker (right) with his brother, Augustus (left) and sister, Irene (middle). From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11637 Speaker 1: This is in November of 2000. My wife [Giselle Parker] and I were in Beverly Hills [California]. And this picture was taken on Rodeo Drive, in front of one of the stores. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker with his wife, Giselle, Beverly Hills, California, November 2000. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.] Story_ID: 11638 Speaker 1: This is my thirteenth birthday with my mother Irene and my father James. Speaker 2: Who's that in the background? Speaker 1: That's my Uncle Skippy. Speaker 2: [Timothy Parker (center) with his parents, Irene Crane Parker and James Parker, 1973. From the collection of Timothy E. Parker.]..