 Story_ID: 11497 Speaker 1: (Playing flute, playing drum) My name is Lorenzo Pace. That's L-O-R-E-N-Z-O, P-A-C-E. And I am presently director of Montclair State University Art Gallery [Montclair, New Jersey] and also a professor there as well teaching African American art history as well as introduction to visual art. So after being there for almost thirteen years, its been a long, arduous process, as well as I'm an artist--multimedia artist. And that's something deals with performers art, installation art and regular I guess you would say formal sculptural ideas. Mostly a multimedia artist. Story_ID: 11498 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite color is. Speaker 2: Orange. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Fish. Speaker 1: Any specific type of fish? Speaker 2: I like flounder fish as well as the sea bass. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes. Africa. Speaker 1: Any place in Africa? Speaker 2: Senegal. West Africa. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: "What's up?" Story_ID: 11499 Speaker 1: I know you said that you were the seventh child in a family of thirteen. And your family was born in Birmingham. I mean you were born in Birmingham, Alabama. I'd like to just talk--give me your mother's name and I'd like you to talk about your mother and what you know of her family. Speaker 2: My mother--got married--her name is Mary Alice Clark and when she got married, of course, it was Pace. She bore thirteen children and my mother was a very devout Christian woman. And I would consider her like a, a saint. I mean this is one woman that had the saintly qualities of of a person that I think--I thought that couldn't do any wrong. She was a prolific quilt maker. She--and I can't figure today how she was able to make--have time to make quilts after dealing with thirteen children on a daily basis and keeping the house clean. But I later learned that the quilt making process was, was a kind of therapy for her. And she really used the quilt as a way of releasing her tension or releasing her frustration or releasing her anger. So she had eight brothers and sisters and, and my grandfather had a big chicken coop farm. And she was raised as a country girl basically. And she was like the rock. She was the disciplinarian. She did all the whippings and I've gotten many whippings from my mother. My father [Eddie T. Pace] was not a disciplinarian. She was the the person who really kept the family together. Also she was a domestic. She went and worked in the in, in white folks' homes cooking and ironing as well as doing all their work, and then also she would come back home and do the cooking and ironing for all her kids. So this was a really strong woman someone I really admire and just hold her in the highest esteem that I can hold. So Mary is a person that I, I really, really have a great admiration for. Speaker 1: Let me ask you what you know about her--was she from Alabama? Herself, her family? Speaker 2: Yes. She was born in Birmingham and raised in Birmingham--and didn't live very far from my--I knew my grandmother and grandfather. So they lived about four or five blocks from us and she got married very young. Like fifteen. She didn't--She got married when she was in high school. and didn't get--didn't finish high school. so was a devoted preacher wife. And was in the church all of her life and basically in Birmingham our community was very small. And we call her Big Mama or Mama. And she was the kind of person that the community looked up to. I mean she always walked straight and head tall and everybody in the community really had a lot of respect for her. Because she was a Christian woman. A woman that was the epitome of what you would consider righteousness. And mostly stayed with her brothers and sisters. She didn't go to other peoples' houses. She mostly went to her mother's house or went to her sister's house and was an excellent cook. Loved to cook for my dad and loved to cook for us. Many times we didn't have very much food but Mama always had a way of making a way out of no way as she always say. And always believed in righteousness and right. And loved her children. Loved her children and made sure that we grew up with a sense of dignity, respect and caring. Was the kind of woman that I think if young people today can emulate that kind of a person, it would be a much better world. You know. Speaker 1: Now what did she tell you. Just a little bit more in terms of so--did she share anything with growing up? You know her growing up with you? Or was there any stories of family, stories that were passed down did any of that? On her side.. Speaker 2: On her side, there's not very many. My mother was a introvert in terms of being able to talk about her personal life. And so was my father to a certain extent. They grew up I guess in--I guess during the Depression. You know and it was very difficult for, for them growing up in the South. But she did talk about what it was like as a African American person when they couldn't go to certain things--couldn't go to certain lunch counters or you know theaters, or anything that deals with--because you, you got to remember at that time it was black and white. In the South there was a sign saying you couldn't go here, "Colored only." The wait--white waiting rooms and colored waiting rooms when you go to travel on the bus or train. But she wasn't a angry woman. Very, you know, understood her place and always told us to--remind us to always stay in our place. And we knew what those places were in terms of--you know--in terms of--she didn't share with me the agony and frustrations she had to endure growing up as a child. Story_ID: 11500 Speaker 1: Your father? Speaker 2: My father. Eddie T., Talbert, Pace. Bishop Eddie Talbert Pace. Grew up in--near Tuskegee, Alabama in a town called Creekstand, born there about ten miles outside of Tuskegee. And he moved to Opelika, Alabama and moved to Birmingham [Alabama]. He had about nine brothers and sisters. Very dark skinned man. Basically the whole family is very dark skinned. All their brothers and sisters. My mother [Mary Alice Pace] was light skinned. My mother--my grandmother was part Cherokee so my mother has that same kind of Native American linkage in her past. And but my father, we used to tease my mother and ask her, "Why did you marry such a dark man, Mama? If you married a lighter skin man, we'd all be lighter." But--and of course at that time to be dark was to be ashamed. And but my father was--I never, I never saw that--any sense of being ashamed because he was dark, a dark skinned man. And very dignified man, worked very hard, grew up my uncle--my father was a very quiet man. He didn't on--when he really got to talking was only in the church. Didn't talk very much around the house. Mostly I recall him working and reading. He read the Bible constantly. And him and his brother, my Uncle Julius Pace, they were very close. They were very close in age. And so he moved to Birmingham, went to high school, went to--and then I guess right after high school, he married my mother and went to seminary school. So he got into the whole preaching thing very early, in her very early twenties. Then after he finished seminary school, being a reverend, he worked I recall him selling coal on a truck. I use--as a little boy I used to work with him. He used to take all his sons and we used to sell coal, ice, vegetables, anything that my father could make a dollar at, he would do it. You know a real--and then preach on Sunday. A real hustler man. You know in terms of trying to survive and take care of his family. And after--I guess in the late '50s [1950s], he wanted to better himself and so he took the whole family to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Your father. Did he share any--anything with you about growing up? About his growing up? Speaker 2: About his growing up. Yes. Now my uncle really shared with me about their growing up. Again my, my father was a very private man. He didn't talk very much about his life. But my uncle did. He really told me what it was like for them growing up together because they grew up together and he said it was very difficult for them growing up. Because their father Joseph Pace, had a big farm down in in--near Tuskegee and Creekstand and they lost their land and they worked the land in Alabama by raising chickens and hogs and pigs and things of that nature to survive. And when they grew--when they moved--when the family moved to Birmingham, they worked in the steel mills, they worked in the in the in the factories at that time. And basically he said they, they had a beautiful childhood. And they played in the fields and ate watermelons and played with the girls like--you know normal boys did and really had a beautiful childhood life growing up in the South. And he said that Dad was always a quiet man. And always was kind of a introvert and didn't talk very much to him. That was his closest running buddy. But he always said that he was a very serious guy. Very serious and wanted to be somebody. Wanted to make something of himself. And, and didn't have no laziness in his bones at all. Always a worker. Always striving to do something. You didn't see him sittin' down. The only time you see him sittin' down was reading. And, he said that also when he decided to go into preaching, it was just like a revelation for him. and he felt that he had a calling and he was the only boy in the whole family that had this calling. So the family was like really taken aback because they didn't know what to make of this preacher in the family. But he was very serious and, and, and really--you know showed the family that it's what he wanted to do. And did it to his last dying day. But those were the kinds of things my uncle talked about, about my father. Story_ID: 11501 Speaker 1: Do you know where the name Pace came from? Speaker 2: No. I was asking my uncle about that. There's a Pace Hill near Tuskegee, Alabama. And that's a Italian name. So we were on--we're going back to now where that name come from. Obviously it go--I went to Tuskegee and, and I found out that--went into the records and looked that there was a Italian family that owned at some point my great-great-grandfather. And so how we came about that name is through that family because slaves were named after their family masters during that time. So that's how--and it's a whole big area in Tuskegee. An area called Pace Hill. So that family was a prominent family in that area. And Pace is not a name--not a common name that you see everywhere. There's not been very many Paces. So like my name is Lorenzo Pace. Lorenzo Pacce and when I was in Rome, they thought I was an Italian. So that's how we I think that's how we got that Pace linkage. Story_ID: 11502 Speaker 1: In '91 [1991], my father [Eddie T. Pace] passed away and, after the funeral, we all came back to the house, my mother [Mary Alice Pace] and father's house where I grew up and we were al sitting the dinner table talking about--my, my uncle [Julius Pace] began to talk about his life and the life of my father and what it was like for them growing up in the South during that time. And he immediately turned to my mother and asked my mother, "Did she have a bag in the house that he had given"--the uncle--had given father like thirty years ago. And so my mother immediately knew what he was talking about. Went into the bedroom--my father's bedroom and came back with this bag, and a little brown bag. And my uncle goes into the bag and said this is the lock was given to him by his father, Joseph Pace, which was given to him by Steve Pace the slave in our family. And this was--has been in in our family for over a hundred years. And this is where our legacy in terms of connecting our family to slavery. And everybody was just like, aw wow. You know--really dropped their mouths open all the--you know we was all eating, partying and eating and having a good time. And then everybody kind of like stopped. Then the family decided to, as a collective, for me to be the recipient of the lock. So I brought the lock back to Brooklyn [New York] and and it was a real revelation for me as a person to receive the lock. And so I thought it was a albatross around my neck and--because what I'm gonna do with a slave lock that I felt a sense of pain, a sense of of astonishment. So I brought it back and--and put it in my studio and I let it sit for a while before I decided to do anything with it or--. And then I said, well, this is an American story. This is my story. And it's something that I should be proud of and this is something that I have a direct icon that relates to the very essence of my begin--my being here in this country. So I wrote a story ['Jalani and the Lock']. How I received the lock and made a print of the--of the lock as well as put a little story and text with it. And I did an exhibition at the Montclair Art Museum [New Jersey] called 'Honor thy Father'. Because I wanted to honor my father. And I wanted to honor his legacy. I wanted to honor what he had left and what he had given the family and given me. And that same year, when I put the lock in the exhibition and all my father's relics like his handkerchiefs, his Bible, his neckties, his shoes, and I created a sanctuary inside the museum. I built a floor that reminded me of my father's church. The floor was kind of creekity [sic] and so I actually built a floor and brought some of the benches in. And so I kind o' created his own personal sanctuary. That same year, my mother was supposed to come up and see the exhibition called 'Honor thy Father'. And she passed away. So you know the same time frame, the same month that the exhibition opened at Montclair Museum here in New Jersey. So when I went back to bury my mother, the the Birmingham Art Museum [Alabama] asked me to do something for the both of them. So I did an installation called 'Honor thy Father and Mother' at the Birmingham Art Museum in Birmingham, Alabama. And, and in this exhibition, I devoted half of it to my father and half of it to my mother and all her relics. Like her rocking chair, aprons, her cooking utensils, her family background, her--you know all the things that was very dear to her, like she loved whatnots and figurines and things of that nature. So that was two major exhibitions back to back to honor my father and mother. And I put them both up in the ceiling the picture of them. What I consider in heaven. And and that was my honor and respect for two individuals who had devoted their lives to try to do the right thing. Trying to raise their family. Trying to give us what they thought that we needed to survive in this world that we're living in. So the lock--it's amazing how that little lock inspired my work for the next ten years. And not only did I do that in Birmingham. Then I wrote a children's book--you know using the lock as a metaphor. A little boy growing up in Africa, taken away, put in locks and chain and never was allowed to play again. But he couldn't, he couldn't, he couldn't--they changed his name, his food, his clothes but they could not change his memories of home. But he kept the lock that had kept--held him in slavery. And so he passed that lock on to his son. So he never forgot where they all came from. Story_ID: 11503 Speaker 1: So the lock [a family heirloom Pace used in an art installation] is, you know--it's amazing how that has been a rallying kind of point in a number of my, my--and this monument is the latest creation that ties my family with the enslaved family in New York City. Speaker 2: Now I'm gonna go back to--how did your parents meet? You know that? You said they both were in Birmingham [Alabama] and your father [Eddie T. Pace] moved there. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Do you know? Speaker 1: My mother [Mary Alice Pace] said that they, met on a, on a street car some kind of way. You know back in those days they had the street car line. You know--and they--she was a young girl. You know? I guess they married very early in, in, in that time. And so--and they just--my father was a very young man, like nineteen, you know? And so he, they just hooked up some kind of way and, and, and the whole process started. Story_ID: 11504 Speaker 1: What year were you born? Speaker 2: September 29th, 1943. Speaker 1: And, can you share with us some of your earliest memories of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. some of my earliest memories as a child in Birmingham, Alabama--it was really a lot of fun. 'Cause we use to go--in Alabama--in Birmingham, there's hills and a lot of woods and foliage so I use to go hang out with my buddies, play in the mountains. We use to make our slides where we use to go and slide down the slide on these--in these mountains in cardboard boxes. We use to go pick blackberries and sell them to our neighbors and a lot of peaches and plums, apples--and so. Loved to play baseball. We had, had our kickballs in the streets in Birmingham and, this is all in the kind of grade school. And also I remember the aspects of growing up where we couldn't go as kids because signs were saying you can't eat out of this fountain. You can't drink out of this fountain. You can't go over here. You can't go to this movie. You had to be--sit in certain sections and, and--but I used to go and work in white folks' houses in terms of cutting their lawns, raking their leaves. I used to--very, what I call work ethics. I just seen a lot of that in my father [Eddie T. Pace]. I use to sell--started working when I was about ten selling popsicles and had me a popsicle box where I actually ride down in the community and sell popsicles. I mean I really enjoyed my childhood. I'm--I can't really say that my family was a very loving family. My grand--my grandfather, grandmother, loved, loved all my mother's children, shared with them food. Anything that they raised on the farm. I used to work for my grandfather picking--planting potatoes, digging for peanuts in the field. I used to love going to my grandmother's house in the chicken--you know working in the chicken coops. I use to clean the chicken coops out, the turkeys as well as the, the hogs. And I had a lot of good buddies in Birmingham growing up as a kid. My good buddy across the street named Claude. I also have a buddy who lives here right now who is also an artist, named Noah Jemison, who is a painter. One of my first major influence as an artist, in terms of--he was a very good illustrator. I mean he could draw very well. So, we, we like really grew up as buddies in in Birmingham. So my childhood was really, really a fun and enjoyable time in the South. And so I, I really don't have any bad moments of--I could really document and say that, you know this is something horrible that happened to me as a child. Story_ID: 11505 Speaker 1: What about the family? You were the seventh--you said seventh? Speaker 2: Yeh. Speaker 1: Okay can you give me your sister and brother's names in order--just in order? From the oldest to the youngest. Speaker 2: My--what are you doing? Get out of here. Being nosy. That's my little cat called Jespy. (Laughing) My my mother [Mary Alice Pace] had two children that--one when he was born, only lived for a broke moment and he died. Then I had another young brother named Robert Earl who was--he was younger than me but--. Speaker 1: I want you to start oldest to youngest. Speaker 2: Okay. My oldest is Eddie, then Lawrence, then Dorothy, then Mary, then Alfonzo, and then myself, then Shirley, and then Rosalyn, then Michael, and then Ronnie, and William. No, no--well no. Let's see. Myself, Shirley, William, Michael and Ronnie in descending order. And the two deceased. So that's kind of the hierarchy chain. Speaker 1: Who, who's deceased? Speaker 2: My brother Lawrence, who was a colonel in the U.S. Air Force, in 1997--5 [1995]. Him and his wife were flying back from California and the plane went down. He was the pilot and, he was killed and his wife in a plane crash. So he is Lawrence, then Robert Earl who fell off the back of a truck when he was like three or four years old. So those were the two ones and then the one that died right after my mother bore, you know, I, I didn't know his name. Story_ID: 11506 Speaker 1: Did you have any sense of yourself as a little child? You know with--you know--did you guys play a lot as a family? Did you go to church a lot? I mean what was your family life like? Speaker 2: Well, (laughing) we went to church all the time. Every Sunday and sometimes two or three times during the week. And of course, my brother next to me [Alfonzo Pace], we played a lot. Played--the other thing up under our house in Birmingham [Alabama], I used to make my toys. We use to play cars, take bricks and just pretend we have cars and we also use to play jacks together. You know. I don't know if you know jacks where you throw the ball up in the air and grab things. We had baseball. We loved base--all the boys you know would go to the playground. We played baseball and loved to ride our bikes. And those were the things that we kind of did together as a family. and then the church aspect was the major part of our coming together. We as a family use to go to my relatives' house a lot and we'd eat and have kind of little mini family reunions on a, on a regular basis. Those are the kind of things that really, we shared together as a family. Speaker 1: Now what was church more like to you? Did you feel pressured being a preacher's son? Speaker 2: Yes. And one of the things that--you know in the Church of God in Christ you, you shout and and--I mean you really get the spirit. And, and as a preacher's son, you had to live up to that role as, as a as a son and so. They said preachers' children are the worst children. (laughing) We made sure that--my mother [Mary Alice Pace] and father [Eddie T. Pace] made sure that we didn't live up to that and, and so--very disciplinarian. We had to do our homework, make sure we kept our clothes clean. Make sure that we--when we go out into the community, that we represented the family. And, show--you know it was quite a, quite a pressure because you, you had to always be on your best behavior. Because if you didn't, Mrs. Powell down the street would tell my family and before I even got back home, I was taking off my, my, my shirt to get a good shellacking on my back because I did something in the community that--but I, I think that as a, as a, as a preacher's son, I think that you develop a strong sense of discipline and a sense of wanting to do the right thing to as well. And and to be respectful of your elders. That's one thing that I remember as a kid. I was going somewhere in the community and I was laughing or made fun of an elderly person as a kid. And that got back to my mother before I got home and boy, boy, boy. I will never forget that day that I--as soon as I got in the house my mother said, "I heard you was making fun of a older person and go in there and take your shirt off." And like wow, wow, wow. Because to respect an elder person was like in higher, higher esteem thing. You know you don't--that's something you don't do. And that's something that I really learned very early that you respect your elders. And that's I think that if we can have that same kind of discipline today, where you respect--because kids today doesn't respect their elders. They think that they're, they're useless. Or they are a has been you know? So as a kid I mean, like I think that growing up in the church was a good thing. And I don't regret it to this day. Story_ID: 11507 Speaker 1: Tell me who were you most like, your mother [Mary Alice Pace] or your father [Eddie T. Pace]. Or and if you were some of both of them what is it? Speaker 2: I think I'm most like my father. But I think I have both--I have a really balance of both of them. My father was kind of a quiet guy. And I'm mostly kind of a quiet person. You know--you know--my father was--very seldom you see him show anger. Very seldom--and very seldom you know I, I--you know it take a lot to get me angry. My mother was a very patient person. So I have that little patient thing happening. My mother was very creative. So I think I take my creative side from her. She was a--I mean I love her quilts. And--but my father was, was creative in his preaching. And I see that comes out in my work. Because--not that my work is didactic in any way, but I think--like the exhibition 'Honor thy Father and Mother' has its religious overtones. And a number of pieces I've made has religious overtones. So I think the both of them gave me a certain kind of aspect of themselves that I see. That I have incorporated in my being. My father had kind of pegged me to be the preacher in the family. My father still have a church in Birmingham and none of his sons took up the mantle. And but I think I took it up in the arts. I didn't go into the pulpit bit. I feel that art is a form of teaching. Art is a form of enlightenment. Art is a form of education and, and preaching is. Has all those connotations as well. So I feel I do it in my own way. And, and that the aspect of the both that I really appreciate. Story_ID: 11508 Speaker 1: You lived in Birmingham [Alabama]. I know you were born in '43 [1943] When did you--when--how old were you when your family moved. Speaker 2: I was about fifteen. You know, you know about fifteen. Speaker 1: And was there a lot of discussion about moving to Chicago [Illinois]? I know you said you knew this part of the great migration. I mean--was there a lot of discussion? Or was it just announced one day that you were going to Chicago? Speaker 2: We're going to Chicago. Pack your bags. And my dad [Eddie T. Pace] had went first to Chicago to try to find work . And so--also to to build a church. And to--to do preaching in Chicago. So--but mother she didn't want to go. She loved her house. She loved being in Birmingham. This is all she had known all her life. To be thrown in a big city was a totally out of her character. But my father felt that he wanted to better our family. He had hear--he had relatives in Chicago and Indiana. So he wanted to, to better his life. And to better his family. None of us wanted to go. I remember I was in love with a little girl at the time. You know--my first love and it was like very painful for me to pull away from that. But the family said we had to go and we had to go. So our first apartment was on 46th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue]. Its right in the heart of the red light district at that time. (laughing) So but I think it was a good thing. Speaker 1: Now what--so how did everyone react to this? I mean I wanna ask you individually. I mean you were basically--even Birmingham was--I don't know how large Birmingham was at the time. Speaker 2: Birmingham was a major city. Speaker 1: A major city. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Still a southern--. Speaker 2: Southern town--. Speaker 1: Smaller a city. Speaker 2: Yeah smaller city. Speaker 1: So how did your family react? I mean was it an, an adjustment? Coming north? Speaker 2: Oh. A major adjustment. A major adjustment for me. A major adjustment for my mother and for my father. Because these were southern people. You know? And my father had to find a job. So he started driving taxis, working construction, and preaching part-time. It was a major adjustment for my mother because she started working in Stauffer's, in the hotels cooking and cleaning as a domestic. She had never been to a city--in a big city in her life like Chicago. So--and the kids had to adjust to schools. I went to DuSable High School and going dealing with that adjustment and, and gangs which I never had any aspect of what that was like. So it was a major adjustment for the entire family. Being in an apartment. We had lived in a house all our lives. and getting to the density of the community. You know all these people,. So it was a major adjustment for all of us. Speaker 1: And what do you think was the main influences there, you know--was it hard--do you think it was hard for your, your, your parents to keep the family intact? Speaker 2: Very much so. Because the rents were high. The food was expensive and my father had to work these long hours. My mother also had to work long hours, in restaurants. And I even had part time job after school trying to make ends meet. But my family and my mother and father was resilient. I mean they was like really determined to make the best out of what was given to them. and it was not the most pleasant experience in terms of survival. But we all ate. We had food on the table--all the time and it was not the most gorgeous meals. But we, we, we was able to survive. Story_ID: 11509 Speaker 1: Let me understand Lorenzo Pace as a teenager. So you're--you know attending DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois]. You're living sort of in the red light district. You mentioned I saw there--you know you had to go, you were going--pimps--I mean you know you would see them on your way back and forth from your house. So I'm just wondering you know what was influencing you at that--you know at that particular time? Speaker 2: The community. Speaker 1: This is like 1958. Speaker 2: Right. The community itself. I mean it was like--it was very--I mean you look at 47th Street now. Its really a completely different kind of aspect. And 47th Street was the hub of the South Side. And I lived about four blocks from the Regal Theatre, where I had a chance to see all of the major stars come through Chicago. But the density of the community and the hustlers, the pimps, the prostitutes--you know were part of the community. And that's something that--I mean what really had a major impact on me, I was going to high school one day and I saw this junkie in a stoop--you know. He started to nod and, and it was like fifteen [degrees] below zero in Chicago at the time you know. And I was like walking and I said, wow. This is something I never want to do. I never want to see myself in that kind of condition. And that was a major--because I mean I had come--you know back in the '60s [1960s] when I was growing up. I mean you know--I had a little fling with all the paraphernalias (laughing) during that time. And that incident stuck in my head when I was going through my most difficult fling in Chicago, during the heyday of marijuana, LSD, and all the things that people were doing at the time. But that incident stuck in my head as a kid and I think that was the most solid rock that I can remember that I said I didn't want to do. I didn't want to let my life spin out of control into that. So that community as diverse and as--and as unique I would say really had a influence in my being as a child growing up in Chicago. Story_ID: 11510 Speaker 1: What was the young Lorenzo [Pace] like? What did you dream or aspire and did you have dreams and aspirations and visions of things and I'm just trying to understand. Speaker 2: My dreams and aspirations to be a baseball player. (laughing) And when I moved to Chicago, I thought I had my break. Because I lived baseball and I had a chance to meet Ernie Banks. And Ernie Banks was like every black kid's hero. So, he really fell in love with one of my sisters. (laughing) And told me to come out to, out to, to the spring training one day. And I went out there and he never acknowledged me. (laughing) And so that was the end of my aspiration to be a baseball player. And that was the most aspiring thing I wanted to be. And--but art I had no really aspiration to be--. Speaker 1: What, what appealed to you about baseball at that time? What was about it that was--. Speaker 2: The love of the game. The hitting the ball, the running, the athletic aspect of it that really--and also the fact that I saw black people could excel in that area. And--and that's--I guess athletes and the athletic aspect--I guess black folks feel that that was an avenue for them to excel in. And so I felt that if I could be a baseball player, I can excel. And so when those dreams went out the window, my aspiration was to just survive and have a good time. (laughing) Story_ID: 11511 Speaker 1: You met a young lady. Speaker 2: And, right--I was about nineteen I guess, and twenty. And we were supposed to go to Paris [France]. So we said hey, let's--why don't we go to Paris. I said, "That sounds like a great idea." I didn't even know what Paris was. I mean, I was just out for the adventure. So, we bought our tickets and everything. So at the last minute, she decided she wanted--she didn't want to go. I had bought my ticket already. And I said, "Well, I'm going anyway." So I went to Paris. And I didn't even know the French spoke French until I got off the plane and people started speaking French. You know, here I am, basically a southern country boy, you know. And Paris was the city that really turned me around. I came back--I was--I stayed there for almost a year. And, my parents called me up, "Boy come home. What are you doing way over there? You don't know nobody." I didn't know anybody. I just fell in love with the city. And hung out and lived with different artists and musicians, writers. I met so many poets and creative people. It just touched my life really deeply. And, I think that--and I went to the museum The Louvre. And went to all the culture places, and hung out in the nightclubs. And got turned on to hashish and just really--. 'Cause I was a really good kid. Churchgoing boy. You not supposed to do all those bad things. And so I just did all the bad things. I was away from home. I had--I could let my hair down. Nobody to tell me what to do. And so--but it kind of challenged my essence. Because I didn't know what I wanted. I was working in a factory when I left--you know, when I left for Paris. So I came back totally disillusioned. Story_ID: 11512 Speaker 1: I came back [from Paris, France], didn't know what to do. And just started hanging out on the beach in Chicago, having a good time. And, I didn't--how I really began to get into art was this guy was sitting on a bench in, in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], on the lakefront, the [Promontory] Point [Burnham Park, Chicago, Illinois]. And he was carving 'The Last Supper'. And I asked him what was he carving. And he told me that he was carving this 'Last Supper'. And I sat there and watched him for hours. And so that evening, I went to a friend of mine's house. He had a log by his fireplace and he had some woodcarving tools. And I asked him could I fool around with it, and see if I could really do something with this piece of wood. He said, "Yeah, go ahead." And so that's my first piece I carved. and it blew my mind. And my old lady said, "Well, you didn't carve this." I said, "I did." She said, "Well, if you carved it, why don't you carve some more." So that was my challenge. So I started carving some more, and more, and more. And just kind of developed into some that--'Cause I didn't know I had any talent. I didn't know I had any kind of, sense of any creative. So when I got back from Paris, I taught myself how to play the flute. That was my first venture into, into the creative pursuits of myself. Because I knew--I mean I didn't have any sense of myself, or who I was. Or any sense of any creative. So when I taught myself the flute, the next stage was to teach myself how to carve. And so after carving for four or five years, I had my first exhibition at the South Side Community Art Center. And the dean of the university came down and really liked my work. And said, "Why don't you go to, to University of Illinois Chicago?" And I said, "I'm not--." I felt I didn't, didn't have no real sense of college. I just felt I wasn't prepared to go to a big university. You know. So, he said, "Well, we'll give you a scholarship. And give you everything you need." I was a little nervous. And I took the entrance exam and scored very high. Blew my mind, again. 'Cause I had thought I wasn't equipped to deal with a college setting. And after being there for a year, I had a run-in. I was about twenty-eight at the time. And had a run-in with the professors. Because they wanted me to do--they had said they would give me two years off. And they kind of reneged on that. So I left, and sent to the [School of the] Art Institute of Chicago. And they welcomed me with open arms. I was in the undergraduate program for a year. And then they said, "Well, we think you should go into the master's program. Your work is at a level where we're gonna just give you your Bachelor fine arts degree and put you into the master's program." And so that--in the master's program for a couple of years. And then the president of the School at the Art Institute, Don Irving came down and said, "Well, I think you should work on your doctorate degree." And said, "Well, we'll give you a scholarship and we'll--you can teach and work on your degree." So it just kind of led from one thing to another from that first exhibition at the South Side Community Art Center in--things just kind of serendipitously happened in, in succession. Which kind of lead my life on a role that I really had no control of. Story_ID: 11513 Speaker 1: I want to go back to that experience in Paris [France] a little bit. And I want to know what--I know you were sort of hanging out there and it opened up a new world. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Totally different in all aspects of the world. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Exactly. Language, food, people, color. You know, artistic expression. The whole nine yards. Speaker 1: So can you tell me how it felt? Speaker 2: Exhilarating. Extremely exhilarating. I guess it was like--'cause a lot of African-Americans went to Paris. And I didn't know anything about that history, or anything about, you know, Josephine Baker, and, you know. And James Baldwin. I mean a lot of the musicians. I mean Paris was like a hub for jazz. I didn't know anything about that. This, this girl had suggested we go and I said, "Why not." You know. And just being a--agreeing. I was just totally a green kid. But that experience just opened me up as a person, as a, as a human being. And, and I think that was the stimuli to tap into the very essence of myself. Just being in that environment where people didn't have no sense of wow! You're black. Or you're American, or you're this, or you're that. You know. People just were receptive and really open to me. I just enjoyed--I just had a ball. Speaker 1: Now how did you support yourself that year? Speaker 2: By living with artists and friends, and people that I met.--just, just met said, "Oh you can come and stay with me." And the ladies were like "Hey!" (Laughter). So that was like a real plus, (laughing). And--just--I don't know how I survived. That wasn't the issue for me. I mean, I didn't have any bread. But I was, I was--I survived. I didn't--I couldn't work because I didn't have papers to work or anything like that. And so I just hung out. One of the most exhilarating experiences of my life. Story_ID: 11514 Speaker 1: I was destitute and had no money and no way of getting money. And, just down and out. And so I went to the American Consulate Embassy [Paris, France] and told them I was stranded in Paris and had not way to get home. I called my parents and they didn't know how to send no money over to me, or anything like that. So the American Embassy cent me home. They bought me a ticket and put me on a plane and said, shoo. (Laughing). And that's the way I got home. Story_ID: 11515 Speaker 1: So when your parents saw you for the first time after that [after returning from a stay in Paris, France], what were their thoughts? Speaker 2: They thought I had lost my mind. In which I had. Because I was a totally different person when I got back here, got back to Chicago [Illinois]. And I--I kind of spiraled into hanging out, trying to find myself. Trying to--I mean that's when I really realized that, hey, I got something to do. And I got something to say. Now how do I get to that? How do I get to the very essence of myself? And that's when I went into the whole kind of, period where I was involved in the social aspect of Chicago. [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came to Chicago. And I was involved in that social movement. I started working in, in the projects, as part of the VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America], social aspect. Worked in Englewood in Chicago with the, with the gangs, the [Black] Disciples and really got involved in social issues that really affected me. You know, and the--also got involved with the Black [Action] Strategies [and Information] Center [BASIC] in Chicago, C. T. Vivian, James Morton, Dean Morton, who was Cathedral of the--Dean of the Cathedral of St. John Divine [New York, New York] for many years. He lives here now in, in New York. Just got socially active. And so those were the kinds of things that really began to affect me. And--so in searching for myself at the same time. Speaker 1: So were your parents doing a lot of praying for you? Speaker 2: Yes. Very much so. Very--a lot of praying. They thought I had lost it. And, and I had in the very essence of where I came from as a kid. And It was a very difficult period for me at that point because I had lost my centeredness. I had lost my groundedness. And in losing that groundedness, you're just kind of out there. And even a little at some point homeless for a while. I was sleeping in my brother's and sister's basement. Had kind of, lost a sense of direction, not that I had a direction of where I was going. But, after coming out of that, that's when I really began to get into the whole social aspect. And begin--and I got, and I got drafted. And I plotted a conscientious objectior. Because I didn't want to go into that Vietnam War. Muhammad Ali was our rallying point at the time. He said no Viet Cong ever called him a nigger. And he had filed for conscientious objectior. And that was like a rallying point for me. I filed for conscientious objector. And they drafted me anyway. So, I signed up for the domestic Peace Corps, VISTA, and served for two years in Baltimore, Maryland. And went back to serve two more years in Cabrini-Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois], so. And, and then, you know, working with teenagers. So I, I, I've had a, a well rounded experience. And.-- Speaker 1: I, I didn't know that people could, you know, do that. That they could have joined VISTA and still be a part of-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: --A part of, you know, the service. I want to--but, you know, this part where your life was out of control, are there things when you look back on it. What did you learn from that experience about yourself? Speaker 2: That was the most soul searching experience of my life. Because I didn't know what I wanted to do. But I knew I wanted to do something. And I knew that I had something to give. But I didn't know what it was that I wanted to give. So in my most downward spiral--I remember I was in Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And I went up under a tree and I got on my knees and asked the creator if I could just get past this moment. And if he could give me a sense of direction, and give me a sense of, of, purpose, that I would not allow myself to go back into that scene again. In that moment, it seemed like something just kind of lifted me up. And I changed my diet. Didn't deal with any of the little excessive paraphernalias that I was dealing with at the time. And began to get my feet back on solid ground. And that's when I felt that I could really contribute something. And that's when--you know, that I began to get involved in the whole social kind of things. And became conscious of my environment. And became conscious of the issues that I was living with at the time, so--. Speaker 1: I just have one other question. And then I want to move to the whole arts period. But do you think that--what do you think? You know, people often can spin out of control. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Even the most well grounded. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What do you think prevented you from spinning out of control? Speaker 2: I think the creator. I, I--and I--I guess I have to go back to my mother [Mary Alice Pace] and father [Eddie T. Pace] and their strong believe in the creator. And growing up in the church, I guess. Even though--I mean, I wasn't like one of the most fervent activists in the church. In terms of the big belief and doing the, you know. But that environment, I guess, and my mother and father, belief in the supreme being instilled in that me in the--instilled in me that, that if all other things go out of control, there's a higher, higher power that you can really have faith and have trust in. And so at my most, difficult period that's what I called upon. And that was, I consider a real major grounding force for me. And I, I really feel that, that that was a higher power that came and, and gave me a little ray of light. And, and that's what I have relied upon to get me, and even in my most darkest hour. That little ray of light always kind of give me that sense of hope. And, I know that for some people that might not be a, a way of out of their darkness. But we all have to see the light in our own different ways and different times and space. Story_ID: 11516 Speaker 1: You saw this person doing the wood. And I just want to know--I mean a lot of times when a person is working with their hands--I mean what does working with your--how did that feel to you? Speaker 2: It's, it's like a meditation. It's like a connection to something that is bigger than you. And, and for me it was a real sense of groundedness, and a real sense of something that I can connect with. I could see the wood. I could put it on my lap. I could make the incisions the way I want. Even when something that doesn't go right, or I feel that, that sense of control and power that's in the wood itself. Like for instance when I see a piece of wood. Like I was talking to my friend Ronnie about how I communicate with wood. And how I communicate with things I see. I'll see a piece of wood, and I'll get into a conversation with it. I'll say, "What's happening?" And it will say, "What's happening?" back. And I get into saying, "Well I think you are beautiful. And I think that, you know, I might like to take you home with me and see if we can get into a, a conversation." And it will say, "Cool. Come on, let's go." So I'll bring it back to the studio and it might sit there for a year, five years, you know. Then all of a sudden, it will say, "Hey I'm over here. Don't you forget that we were supposed to do this thing together?" And I'll actually began to carve based on the conversation that we have. Because it says it has its own spirit. And it talks if you listen. Because it has its own shape. It has its form. So my early work I really followed the dictates of the piece itself. And that piece coming directly from a higher force. And so that's the way I started communicating with--and it was like a, a like a dance. It's like a ritual. And when I begin to carve, I just kind of lose the very essence of myself in the process. So, that's, you know--. Speaker 1: Can we talk some about your evolution of you as an artist. I mean you start with this woodwork. And you've been involved, obviously, you know, your girlfriend says, "You know, Wow! You did that? Then you can do some more." But what, what--what has been the progression sort of? Speaker 2: Well, it started with that first piece, not knowing what I was doing. Not knowing I had any kind of talent or any aspect of--it's been an intuitive process all the way. A process that started with that one piece and have evolved, to what I, I'm doing today. And I guess I've always been a kind of an abstractionist, and not a realistic realism, in terms of, making objects that look like real things and real people, to the letter. My work has always been--kind of had a twist to it. You knew it was something real. But you couldn't kind of make it out. So the progression I, I have had has been a progression that's been, kind of have happen. Not something that I've kind of, of started out and doing at this point, I'm gonna be at another point. It kind of evolved as I was moving through it. And, again I guess I should kind of give a synopsis of that. In--from the first exhibition from working independently, just making things, mostly masks. Mostly making things that I felt. 'Cause I used to have a, a self inferiority complex about my nose. My sister always called me big nose boy. And, and just in general. I mean, I think that at some point I had a self inferiority complex about being black. And nappy hair, big lips, big nose. Those were things that were considered a negative. So in my early work, I began to exaggerate those things in my work. I began to exaggerate the nose of my sculpture, exaggerate the lips of my sculpture, exaggerate the nappiness of the hair. Because in the '60s [1960s] that was the time where Black Power, Black Is Beautiful, and a sense of an empowerment, a sense of self-worth, and the negative stereotypes were kind of pushed up under the rug. And began, began--the first time we really began to celebrate being black. And being--feeling good about being black. And, and--so my early work dealt with those issues, and dealt with the, the Black Is Beautiful essence. And as I moved through the Institute, the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois], it really began to open me up to other venues. Like performance art, installation art, and a variety of different kinds of materials. Mostly it was--my first love is wood. But when I went to school, I began to experiment with metal. Bronze, clay, fabric, fiber, and just--video All kinds of materials so it just really broadened my scope that you can make art out of anything and everything, if you can, can conceive it. So it went from that progression. And, and in my last years I began to deal with--I said, " I can really perform." And that's when I began to incorporate dance, poetry, video, film into my work. And really began to explore all those kinds of medias. And incorporate those medias simultaneously in my work. So that's where I really seen where I started and where I am today, in terms of the visual arts. It's really--I mean I really consider myself an eclectic in all aspects of, of the arts. Because I found out that you can really incorporate so many different levels and so many different ideas in so many different--and get so many points across by using so many different kinds of avenues to get to that point. And that's where I feel I'm at now, in terms of my work. Starting on a very simple piece like making a carving, and my most current piece, the monument. My first stone piece. major stone piece, in my, in my career. So you can see where I've come from, and you see where I'm at, at this point. And that's the beauty of art. And I think that's the beauty of life. It's that you start out at birth, and, you don't know where you're in. And you don't know what your road will be as you move through life. Because you're gonna move through life. And life is the teacher. It's your everyday experiences, and it's your everyday, acknowledgement of being on this planet. Because we're only here for a second. Only here for a second. In that little second, you have to try and learn as much as you can in that little compact existence here on this planet. Because things are moving so rapidly and so fast around you, constantly. And if you look at the universe and how stars are coming in and stars are being born and the galaxies are forming and, I mean, in your little point in time here on the planet is minute. And you have to try, I think, to touch the essence of yourself. Story_ID: 11517 Speaker 1: When you had your first exhibit, was there any sense of feeling about it? Or I mean was it like, "Oh Wow! What I've done!" You know, or was it just-- Speaker 2: It was, it was one of the most, rewarding experiences of, of, my early development as an artist. To have all my work shown in an art gallery setting was like, "Wow!" And they talk about installation art. My first exhibition will be--was considered installation. And that's a new genres within the last twenty years. Installation art. Where I actually incorporated cloth on the wall. The wood chips that are carved from the pieces were around the bases. So any time you incorporate anything other than the--than the material that you're working with inside the exhibition, it's considered installation. So my first piece was--my first exhibition was installation. And I go so much--got so much respect, and, and joy from different people talking about how the work, how they really enjoyed the work. How much it was really exciting to see the work. And I was like, "Hey, I'm just really doing this." And I didn't really understand the power of art at all. I didn't understand the significance of it. I'm just doing something that I just felt like good doing. And felt very great doing it. And so happened to have my work shown there. Speaker 1: Now I--you know, I don't want to--I mean people usually they go--I mean, you know, unless someone is viewed as a naive artists. You know, what they put on naive or permanent, they don't usually go from having exhibits back to school. So mean I don't just want to sort shrift this a little bit. But--and even to get to an exhibit. How many pieces did you have in that first exhibit? Speaker 2: Oh, I had about, about fifteen, (pause) about fifteen pieces in the exhibit. Speaker 1: Did they have names? Speaker 2: Yes. Right. They all had names, had labels on them. You know, I--it was very,--I mean to have never done this before. I just thought that--I thought I was--you know, I mean it came off as a, as a professional artist (laughs). I didn't know what a professional artist was at the time. Speaker 1: But had you been told about the exhibit? Or had you been just working and things just put together? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I just had to have been working. And things just kind of, happened. That has been my life. and that's the most, straightforward thing I can say. My life has been just like that. All the way. Speaker 1: And Hosea Williams, did you know him before? Or--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, I knew him from the community. I knew him from the community. I had shown in the Englewood Art Fair out, you know, in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. Showed at the--and these are outdoor art fairs. Woodlawn Art fair, the, South Commons Art Fair. Sears Art fair. Evergreen Mall Art Fair. So all those was early exhibitions. You know, and carving in those spots. While I was there showing my work on the table. Story_ID: 11518 Speaker 1: You go, you know, to U of I [University of Illniois at Chicago], you know, then you go on to the [School of the] Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois]. I'm just wondering. In that whole experience, you know, when you're in the Art Institute, was any of that sort of intimidating at first for you? Because you had been--you know, you had been doing things. But you're now going back to sort of basics learning in some respects. Was that--I know you talked about it opened up a world for you. But I'm just thinking initially, what were your Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I would say it was quite intimidating. Because I was a much older student at the time. And--and in my first critique, I remember--'cause I was doing work that I knew how to do. I mean I was mostly doing kind of carving figuratures and making things. But using different material, but mostly figurative work. And my first critique in--all the professor got around to say, "Well Lorenzo, you're doing good work. But this is not where you need to go." And maybe in the critique they, they cut you little by little and let you bleed slowly (laughing). And I--Ronne Hartfield were assistant dean at that time. And I, I mean I was just totally devastated. And I almost left the school. Because I couldn't take that critique. And that critique almost--the best thing that happened to me. I went to my friends and said, "Hey, I can't handle this. It's too.--." You know. "They're too hard, too difficult." Here I think I'm raising hell in terms of all this creative--I mean I had done a lot of body of work. And so after I got past that, and I began to heal my wounds from that scathing critique, I really, really begin to open up. And that critique really forced me to open up. Because I kinda like in my little world. And--safe things I was making, and, you know, felt comfortable. And so, when that happened, it devastated me. But got up, dusted myself off, came back and said, "Okay, boom!. I'm going for it." And that's when I just like (makes noise). And haven't looked back since. But those were the most difficult points of, my having a difficult time in, in school. Story_ID: 11519 Speaker 1: I was kind of the first to do--on the black side--to do a major piece in Chicago in performance art. And in that piece--1980 I saw the King Tut exhibit at the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois]. Which was a major kind of, exhibit. And I was really touched. Really influenced by that. And, and when I went into that exhibit, it just really, really hit my essence. So I began to look at Egyptian art and began to--I was in school. I was a student at the time. And, I'm looking at all that, and then going and looking, doing research, I hit on this thing called mummification. And I was wondering what it was like as a person being wrapped up all these years. And so I created this piece called 'Mummification with Sound' where I was a mummy. I wrapped myself first as a mummy to, to see what, what the experience was like. Then I wrote this two hour performance piece where I incorporate a dignitary to I--that I had a lot of respect for, in the city of Chicago where I used dance, video, film, poetry and music to create this two hour performance piece. Where I wrapped up the president of the School of the Art Institute [of Chicago] at the time. The NBC news anchorman, Warner Saunders, Abena Joan Brown, Margaret Burroughs, director of the African American museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], Carol Russell, a very wealthy philanthropist from the, from the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois], North Side and--. At the School of the Art Institute in--they had just created this performance space in the basement of the school. So I kind of christened it. Had three or four hundred people there. They had to turn away about 200 people, the night of the performance. NBC News came and I did a story about it. You know, and a write up in the newspaper about it, you know. So it was a very cutting edge performance. And most people in Chicago know me from that performance art piece. Because it raised a lot of controversy about wrapping people up on stage, incorporating dance music, video, film, all in the same venue. That was a very far reaching piece. I'm still after, almost twenty years, I'm still interpreting that, that piece. And then it inspired ten years or more of my work. I started wrapping everything. Wrapping sheet metal, wood, doing installations that related to performance, to [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], doing pieces that related to, like for instance you're going back in time, back in history. So mummification was, a departure for me from Chicago to New York. So when I came to New York, I was just on the cusp of doing mummification work. Speaker 2: Now, you said to me earlier that, when you did this piece--was it controversial in Chicago? Speaker 1: Yes, very much controversial. Speaker 2: Okay. Well can you just describe some of the controversy? Speaker 1: Well, Abena Joan Brown was saying that, "What? What are you doing? What are you saying?" You know? "What's, what's the, essence of, of, of what you're doing?" And, you know, "You're playing with people's lives." (Laughing). "Wrapping them up." Because people thought they were gonna suffocate with the gauze around them. And,and the press was saying I was mixing all these medias together. It didn't have any cohesiveness. And, and as an artist, I was--stepping outside the traditional boundaries, incorporating all these medias, what made it, you know. Artists wasn't doing that. They did know--you know, especially a, a black artist at the time, you know. They didn't know what I was, what I was doing. And in a way I didn't know what I was doing either. But I was just stretching my, my sense of creativity. And I think as an artist, you always have to kind of stretch your sense of creativity. You don't get sedate in your work. And as an artist, you always have to be I think striving for the new. Or something unusual, something different. Striving to push the bar a little further in terms of enlightenment for yourself as well as for humankind. Because I think art is the essence of our being as humanity. I think you do--you touch so many lives, so many--and, and touch the consciousness of so many different aspects of your life, as well as humanity. So in other words, the essence of it to make a better place for us all as human beings. And to, make a statement that can bring people together. Story_ID: 11520 Speaker 1: When you came here to New York, you felt like you needed to play on a larger stage. And you had really-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 1: --come from, really Chicago [Illinois], because it was more of a--it was home. It was a home environment. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you're here in a place where, you know, testing the limits artistically is sort of the norm. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How have you found New York? You know, and I want to give enough time and attention to, you know, this most recent project ['Triumph of the Human Spirit']. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But I want to know what--You know, you've been here for how many, almost twenty years? Speaker 2: What has been your significant--you know. What has been your path while you've been here? And how have you reacted to New York and how has New York reacted to you? Speaker 1: We've, we're, we, we, we--I use the Statue of Liberty as the queen of queens. You have to come--when you come to New York, she said bring me your tired, your weary, your destitute, your everything. You know. She is the queen mother of the world right now. I mean New York is the center of the world in terms of the creative pursuit. Rome [Italy] had her day. Paris [France] had her day. Germany had her day, and Greek and--and all the great empires. New York is the center of the world right now. In terms of finance, in terms of culture, in terms of the arts, in terms of everything. In terms of Christie's [auction house], the art market. I mean just name it. Wall Street. New York is the center for Western culture and in terms of her heyday. And I think that, because of that, and the old saying, "If you can make it in New York, you can make it anywhere in the world." It has its--it really has its truth. Because it's a very tough city. And the girl on the island say, hey, come on in. I always got room for one more. But you got to touch--you have to like acknowledge my essence. You know, and everybody want to touch the hem of her garment to get the, the nod. Because in New York you can be destitute one day and be a millionaire the next. It just has that strata in, in, in--and I've always respected the girl on the island. I didn't want to try to seduce her right away. I didn't want to, want to, grovel and touch the garment, and make me a star. You know, I always try to work in-between those lines. I tried to stay--'cause she got a very bad side, and she got a very good side. That's that thing they call the good apple and the bad apple. And I always try to stay within that middle range in that. And, and it worked for me. It--I mean I've had difficult times, you know, coming. Didn't have a place. A friend let me stay in a loft. My friend, my grade school buddy, Noah [Jemison], let me stay in his loft for a few, nine months or so. Almost a year and--until I was able to find my place. And trying to find a place is, is a difficult process. Because it's expensive. And, I didn't have a job. So I did like work part-time. Here and there, scrapped, you know. Try to make ends meet and try to get my work out there at the same time. Because when you come to New York the line of artists start around the corner six blocks down. Get in line. And so I had to get in line like everybody else and wait my turn. And it's paid off. After standing in line almost ten years not moving one way or the other. But I've been constantly moving. Constantly doing things. Constantly having exhibitions, doing, you know, installations here. Performance here, installations, exhibitions. So they--almost tewnty years I've been here, I was constantly moving. Constantly doing things. Constantly showing. Eventually you get your name out there. Eventually people let you do a little bit of something. You know, invite you to do something. So--so in doing that, I've been able to survive. I've been able to keep a sense of balance. Because when I first came I was very off balance. Because you get enthralled by the, the big lights, the city. And so I kind of partied my first year or so. And just learning the vibrations of the city. And, and getting a sense of what I have to do. And true--I've had some, some difficult moments. And, but I've been able to bounce back and keep my sense of balance. Because if you don't, it could--you could go into a spiral of, of nothingness. And then--'cause I see so much of that here in the city. And those other times I see all this--multimillionaires and richness at the same time. Story_ID: 11521 Speaker 1: What were you most proud of, in that, in the--whether it was an exhibition, or teaching at, you know, Montclair [State University]? I mean was there anything that you were most proud of up until this point? Speaker 2: Most proud--? Speaker 1: Proud in terms of your work? Any piece? Speaker 2: Yeah, well one piece I can really say I'm proud of. And that's is in the world's largest Gothic cathedral here in New York, which is [Cathedral of] St. John the Divine, in Harlem [New York]. I--they own a piece called 'Homage to Brother John Coltrane'. Which--I love jazz. I love music. And that's one of my most memorable pieces. But when I first got introduced to, to New York, the Studio Museum of Harlem [New York] invited me to, to do an, a joint collaboration piece with my friend Noah [Jemison]. So we did a collaborative installation piece titled 'To All My Friends Who Are Old'. That was a highlight of me coming to New York. And that was my inspiration to move to New York. And the other highlights were my exhibition at the Kenkelaba Gallery, here in New York on the Lower East Side. I had, and still have a continuing--a friend of mine told me to look up Joe Overstreet (ph.) at the Kenkelaba Gallery. They brought me in and did a number of different exhibitions there. It really was a major sense of like maybe I, I am an artist. Maybe I am of worth. Story_ID: 11522 Speaker 1: I just wanted to have you talk about this project ['Triumph of the Human Spirit']. How, you know, it was a competition. I mean I know it was a competition. It's been a life journey in many ways. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. When did it start? Speaker 2: Well it really started with that one piece--well. (pause) This is really--it's been a subject that's very dear to me. Africa. Africa--I first went to Africa in 1971. And--it was, a very--had such an impact upon me. And seeing Africans in Africa. And, and I've been going back ever since. But that impact, that first initial impact was such a striking one for me. So I always kind of placed it in my heart. And, so in 1991, they discovered 427 African American slave bones here in New York. And, immediately when I read it in the 'New York Times' that they discovered this, I immediately went down to the site and began to take--taking photographs. I felt that it was a direct connection to me. It was against the law to take pictures or--I jumped over the fence. Got on top of my car shooting into the burial ground where they were digging, and you know, just started documenting. And so the African American community rose up and said, hey, you know, you should leave this as a national site. Don't touch it. It's sacred ground. And--Mayor [David] Dinkins was the first African American mayor here. He was in office at the time. So there was a struggle around the very essence of the finding of the, of the remains. 'Cause they didn't expect to find any aspects of, to what they called the old Negro burial ground back in--because all that area has been totally--the subway system, all the courts, and the, City Hall, all the administration. There's been so much digging in that area. They didn't expect to find anything. But they--the old city maps had the, the old Negro burial ground. So they had to go back into the old city maps and dig this old map up. And so when they began to research and they began to find out that this area was where over 20,000 Africans were buried in this area. And they took the issue to, to--to Washington [D.C.]. Because the federal government was saying, hey, if we stop this project, it cost us a million dollars a day to stop building this building. And we're not gonna stop. Okay, so they didn't stop. But they had a mandate to build a museum. They had a mandate to leave a certain section of that ground area where they had would re-inter the remains. They also, had a mandate to build a monument. And so the Department of Cultural Affairs got the mandate upon the city. 'Cause the area where my monument is, it sits on city and state land. Where the actual remains were found were--is on federal land. So the city requested through the Department of Cultural Affairs that a monument be built on that site. And after looking at over 400 applicants, and began to look at so many different artists, I got the call. They narrowed it down to five artists and I was selected to build this monument. And when I got that call, it was like, aw man! All the things I've been working towards is coming to fruitation [sic] to honor the Africans, my ancestors. It was like a reward I could have never foresaw. Or I could never have imagined that I would be the person selected to build this monument. And I looked at it as it was a gift from the supreme directly. And I felt very honored, very pleased to have been chosen to do this. Story_ID: 11523 Speaker 1: After getting that--getting over the initial reaction of being selected to really be the artist to create this monument ['Truimph of the Human Spirit'] was the kind of thing that an artist would like to have in their lifetime. A permanent icon that will be here when you're gone, a thousand years or more. And I'm still--it's--the whole concept is still resonating through my whole body and existence. And I still haven't really absorbed the implications of that. I don't think I can absorb it in my whole lifetime. I just have to--just live with it. But, as our existence here in this country, the whole piece is surrounded with controversy. And my whole life is (laughing) surrounded with controversy (laughing) which feeds right into the--my whole existence. So the piece--the discovery of the ground was, was found in controversy because the city and the federal, the federal government didn't want the remains [of African slaves] to be a sacred ground. The community demanded that it be a sacred ground. And they demanded that they're, acknowledged. And this is an American story. Just not an African American story, this is, the essence of the founding of this country. This is the oldest site that we have on record of, of talking about our history. And New York being the second largest slave port in the country, outside of Virginia. People didn't even think we had slaves here in New York. So, all this is, a rewriting the history books. And being that we're dealing with history, it should have been something that the country celebrated. But we haven't celebrated slavery. Slavery is a very painful topic for African Americans, as well as white Americans. Extremely white--for white Americans, a very painful topic. And so and then once, once I was selected, I brought a model in for an eight feet (unclear) of granite. And I wanted to do about eight pieces, talking about the history of the site. That's my--that was my first (unclear). Then once I got the, the selection, they said, "Well that's kind of not what we want to do. So why don't you go back and think of something else about the ethnicity of the community, judicial system, the work ethic in the area." I said, "Well, okay what do you all want?" "We don't know what we want. But we know when we, when we see it." And so, so I said, "Fine." And I went back and designed a mosaic that was a semi-circle wall in that--on that spot talking about work ethic, the judicial system, the architectural structure and the whole nine yards. Then they said, "Well, that's not it either." So, I got angry and blew up and said, "What in the hell do you all want? I mean we can do--we can play this game all day. I'm not here--I mean I'm--or maybe I'm not the artist." "Oh no, no, no, no you're the artist. But we will know it when we see it." I said, "Well, what do you all want?" "We don't know but, you know, you're the artist, you're suppose to be the, you know." I said, "Well I can't keep playing these games. , I mean I'm designing. I'm putting in all this energy, you know, and back and forth. You know, this is the--". So, I went back to my studio and about, and about three months, I said, "Well, what is this whole thing about?" I said, "Its about the Africans and it's about acknowledging their ancestors, and about acknowledging their struggle and their pain while they were here in this city." So I began to look at African art, African, masks and the whole traditional--so I kept coming across the Chi Wara which is from Bamana, which is from Mali, from the Bamana people oif Mali, West Africa. And, I have a piece right there of the, of the female Chi Wara. It's two models, it's two, it's the female and the male and they dance in unisons of, the, the essence of the, the dance, the dance is a male and a female version and they dance together and it represents, its kind of indicative of the antelope and they wear the piece on top of their head and they have raffia coming down and, I was really taken back by that piece, and so I was inspired to create the monument based on the Chi Wara of the female version because she carried the baby on her back. And, so I brought that concept in and brought that model of the idea in. They immediately loved it and say, "This is it." And, but the, but the [art] commissioner [Henry Stern], he had problems with it. So he shopped the, the piece around to the Guggenheim [Museum, New York, New York], the Metropolitan [Museum of Art, New York, New York], and all the big museums asking for their endorsement. So, the mayor [Rudolph Giuliani] stepped in and say, "Hey, let it go." You know, the piece is worthy and you know. Then the art commissioner of the city of New York gave me a reward for Design of Excellence, for the concept of the piece. So, so the, so the struggle has been continuous and, but, it's right in line with our struggle here in this country. Story_ID: 11524 Speaker 1: After working on it ['Triumph of the Human Spirit'] for almost nine years I had to wait nine months, to, for them to set a date for the unveiling. And then, there was another controversy that came into that aspect because after waiting for nine months the commissioner, the art commissioner Henry Stern kept saying that, "We're waiting to get Mayor [Rudolph] Giuliani and Senator [Daniel Patrick] Moynihan on the same page on the same date for the unveiling." So, and I got pissed off and say, "Hey, you know, you're waiting nine--I mean, come on." You--I expected when they finished the piece to be unveiled the next month or the two months, not nine months! And, so, and after waiting nine months they gave me October 12th date as a unveiling. And I said, "Fine, great, I got a date." But four o'clock in the morning hit me like a ton of bricks, October 12th is traditionally [Christopher] Columbus' birthday, Columbus, they celebrate Columbus Day. And I woke up, came downstairs and said, "I can't unveil this monument on Columbus Day, it's no way!" So, I called the executive director Peggy King-Jorde, at the, the executive director of the African burial ground who oversees the overall project. Said, "Peggy I can't--" And she say, "Lorenzo, well, they gave you a date, so what?" I mean, you know, I said, "They gonna celebrate, celebrate on a Monday!" I say, "But traditionally Columbus Day has been October 12th, until maybe five or six years ago. And, I can't, I don't want to be associated with that in any kind of way." And that's when the struggle start--the state senator from Harlem [New York], David Paterson wrote a letter, two page letter to the, to the mayor asking to change the date. The councilman [sic, Kathryn] Freed in that area wrote a letter asking to change the date. Mayor [David] Dinkins, former Mayor Dinkins called him up and ask him to change the date. Giuliani said, "Hey, Columbus Day is a day that we consider honorable." And being, him being an Italian, I guess it is! And so, and I agreed to disagree. And so they had the unveiling on October 12th against my wishes with no black city officials there. And I had the unveiling the following week with a number of the black city officials and politicians. Amiri Baraka was the premier poet, Reverend Calvin Butts, from the Abyssinian Baptist Church [Harlem, New York], Reverend Herbert Daughtry from, you know, Peoples Church [House of the Lord Church] in Brooklyn, the city council member, Councilman [Bill] Perkins, Councilmember Freed, and, a number of council members came to the unveiling on my date and gave me a proclamation for 'Triumph of the Human Spirit' day. Also the City Council of Montclair [New Jersey] which I teach at Montclair State University came, the city of Montclair came and gave me a proclamation for 'Triumph of the Human Spirit' day. And, it's been a very long and difficult process from the time that I got the commission, to the time of the unveiling and the different--the 'New York Times' ran an article about the controversy. The 'New York Post' wrote an article about the controversy. The '[New York] Daily News' wrote an article about the controversy to this. The 'Bergen Record' of New Jersey wrote a three or four big articles about the controversy of the, the slave memorial. So it's been exhilarating and rewarding experience. I wouldn't change anything, I wouldn't, I don't regret anything because I feel that it's important to acknowledge those Africans and my ancestors and it's important to give it the highest praise and the highest respect that you can give. Because these people were disrespected while they were on the planet. And for them to unveil the monument on a day that I didn't agree with was another sign of disrespect and dishonoring. So, it just a part of the tragedy of American story, the tragedy of, of these individuals not being respected and not being appreciated, not being paid for their, for their labor, for their work. but this monument will let the world know this is the world's largest outdoor site specific monument devoted to African and African American enslavement. Also to Native Americans, to the, to the--the Chi Wara sits on top of a boat and the boat represents the first Native American canoes use in that area because that was Collect Pond [New York, New York], in that area. There is, was also, there was a gallow where they use to hang people in that, in that area. Also, in that, in, in that spot where the monument is, is a shot tower where they first built a shot tower to make the cannon balls to protect the fort into Manhattan. And the shot tower is the first architectural structure for the skyscrapers of New York. So that area is a very historic area and the most expensive land in the country, if not the world. But this monument sits in the heart of that district, right in front of the U.S. Supreme Court housed in New York. A half of block from the Mayor's office, City Hall and all the judicial, area and right across the street from the Immigration, U.S. Immigration [Office], yeah, sits right in front of that. So America will acknowledge this is five stories high, out of black granite, sits in a pool of water, and the, and the water have the, the boat, I was saying earlier, the boat represents the first Native American canoes, as well as the boat that brought all immigrants to this country, as well as the boat that brought the Africans from the Americas to this country. And, so the water shoots up and it gives you the impression that the boat is moving through the seas, the high seas. so I just feel that this country has to acknowledge her bad deeds. President [Bill] Clinton was the first President to acknowledge and tried to deal with the whole issue of race here in this country, and we gonna have to talk about it. We're going to have to discuss it, we're going to have to begin openly acknowledge that we have a skeleton in our closet and we going to have to open those wounds up because until we don't, until we really deal with this issue, it's going to be a festering wound, a festering sore and just right at the surface, that when you scratch it, it's going to bleed. And, 'til we get, like the--the, the discussion they had in South Africa about the whole issue of apartheid, the reconstruction committee to, to deal with that topic. America gonna have to do the same eventually, we are going to have to talk about that. And, I just feel that, this monument, is, is, is a, is a, testament and you can't ignore it. When you walk down there it's so imposing and so empowering that, you have to acknowledge it. And that's the essence of what I was trying to say, America you have to acknowledge the horrors, our, horror here in this country. And, and if nothing else is said, nothing else is done, that monument will be a reminder and the inscriptions is written at the base of it talking about the very essence. And, I created a print and I went back to the city council to give them a print of the monument. Each city council member a print of this monument. And I went back to the, Montclair City Council to give them a print of this monument with the inscription. And I will be going to Newark [New Jersey] City Council to give them a print of the monument. And eventually I am going to go to each of the states of this country and I want to go to Chicago to give them a print of this monument, each city council member. And I'll be going to Birmingham next week, Birmingham, Alabama to give them a print of this monument. So this country will know that we gonna have to deal with this issue one way or the other. And while I'm on this planet that's going to be my mission, is to bring this to fruition of this issue of our horror here in this country. And I think that it should be each person's mission to at least try and deal with this issue of, of the issue of slavery. Story_ID: 11525 Speaker 1: 'Triumph of the Spirit?' What was that, what was that, what are you saying is that? Speaker 2: 'Triumph for the Human Spirit' and, I got, as I say, what I'm, what I'm really saying with this is you go back and look at the horrors of our, of our history as human beings. You look at the horrors of what has happened in Rwanda. You look at the horrors of what have had happened to Jewish people. You look at the horrors of what happen, have happened to, in Bosnia and the horrors of what's happening in Palestine and Israel. You look at the horrors of all our injustices against humanity, to each other. And I just think saying to humanity we are going to triumph regardless of all these horrors. You look at the horrors of slavery. We have to triumph, we have to stop this madness of, of, of being inhumane to each other as human beings, you know. We are only here for a second, I mean, this planet is only a little small planet. We have to, we have to get along, we have to make this place, a better place and a peaceful environment for us all to live on! You look at what's happening in the, the current, current situation in Palestine over 300 people have been killed! Over this little small piece of land! We've got to figure out a way how to co-exist and we have to figure out a way how to co-exist. So 'Triumph of the Human Spirit' is a testament to our existence as human beings and to triumph over the adversity against the odds. And that's what I'm trying to say, you know, we have to get past this whole race thing. We have to get past this whole class thing. We got to get past this, "Oh, I'm doctor this, I'm professor this, or I'm millionaire here or I'm, you know, I'm poor here," you know, we have to come together as human beings, that is our mission. That is our essence, as humanity, we have to come together as human beings and devise a mechanism for us all to live in peace and harmony. Story_ID: 11526 Speaker 1: What do you want? Where do you want to go from here? Speaker 2: My, my next project, I would love to build the, the sister piece [of 'Triumph of the Human Spirit'] in Mali, in Bamako [Mali], West Africa. I would love to do that, this is the female version here in the lower Manhattan [New York]. I'd like to build the version, the male version in, in Mali, and connect, connects the two continents, that connects, us, and our roots. In being that Mali is one of the oldest kingdoms. Timbuktu, Songhai, you know, go back many, many years. So that's an old kingdom so, and, and to connect those two and connect my essence to that, to that land. And to have people going back and forth looking at those two, two monuments and making a, connection with those. That's my long range goals. But my short range goals is just to have some fun and have my next meal (laughing). Story_ID: 11527 Speaker 1: Your whole feelings about reparations? Speaker 2: Reparations? Like I think my--my essence is, we can never be paid for the horror of our existence. But I think that America can acknowledge that by deeds, money is not, could never solve or never deal with the essence--but deeds of her descendants would be a very noble, aspect through acknowledge the horror and try to, and, and, and in a sense rectify some of the horror by doing something for the descendants of those horror. Either through education, either through, housing, or through, land or something that acknowledge the horror and to at least say, hey, our ancestors were, were mean and dirty and, and, and treated your ancestors really horrible but we gone try and do this. At least let us show our, acknowledgment and try to do something that, but I don't see it in my lifetime. But I didn't see, the freeing of [Nelson] Mandela, in my lifetime, I didn't think I would see that in my lifetime either, so--it, but I really admired the Chicago [Illinois] City Council for making it a resolution to at least to deal with the issues of reparations--and bringing it and putting it on the table. Story_ID: 11528 Speaker 1: Your career as an artist--and it's now, what, about a forty year career? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And for--and I'd like you to sort of assess when you look back from where you are now, are there any revelations to you? And summation you would like to make about, you know, that process because it's not something that you would have thought you would ever do? Speaker 2: Right. Right. Yes, this monument ['Triumph of the Human Spirit'] has been a revelation for me, I mean, it really have, have broaden my scope as a human being, as a part of the human family. When I say that, I mean that--just having the fortitude and the patience and the diligence of carrying this project through to the fruition, fruition is been a growing process for me, individually. What I mean by that, when I say that is I've learned to be global in my perspective. I've learned to deal with the essence of understanding the human condition and I propose that day of my unveiling to be a world healing day. And that, and that monument be a rallying point for world healing day, which I proposed to the, city council to have a annual event around that monument, as a world healing day. And, it have just made me grown as an individual, so much, it have made me look at things that I just didn't, didn't see. It has broadened my scope, scope in terms of in, letting people be free, in terms of what their think or what I think. We may agree to disagree but you have to be patient enough to listen to people, you have to patient enough to, to work on a project and, and grow and learn because sometime you come into roadblocks that you feel that is insurmountable but they can be, conquered. Because I had to deal with so many different aspects to get this project done. So it is been really a, a rewarding and one of my most enlightening experience because I guess we all have our own prejudice, either homophobic or race or, you know, so many things that we grow up around and, and it is really kind of liberated my thinking. And as a artist I think it is very important to have a liberated thinking where you incorporate a number of different ideas, number of different--I think you'd really have to think global, either think the importance of the earth, the importance of living within harmony with your neighbor, the importance of trying to do the most, the most important things, the right things that's gonna be, enlightenment for everybody, not just for yourself. Story_ID: 11529 Speaker 1: Who have you admired most or act as a role model? Could be artistically or could be just generally--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (Laughing) I did, you know, you'd, let me, I have there are so many role, that they've been so many people in my life that who've been role models and so many, whom I admire, but I am quick, I can think of my uncle, my Uncle Bill, in, in Birmingham, Alabama--Willie Clark. My father [Eddie T. pace], who I really think, has been a role model for me and, you know. But if you want to go in the international, I mean, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was, was the very influence in my thinking as work, Malcolm X, and I think, you know, Tom Burrell in Chicago, has been a real strong role, role model for me and, and, and, and, and Abena Joan Brown is also another strong role model--from Gwendolyn Brooks, I mean, Margaret Burroughs, who was my high school teacher in, in Chicago, I mean, the list go on and on, I can't just name one person, who has been instrumental in my, development as, as an artist. Because I think that you're touched by so many different lives and so many different individuals and looking back in, on these almost forty years of making art and, and, and, and, and creating, it's been, it's been, I mean, I've just been touched by so many different individuals. And, I, I can't claim any of it, I, I have to give it over to humanity as well as supreme. I'm, I'm just a, a, a little pawn being moved along, along in, in this boat and wheel of time. And, if you look at my life, and you'd look, looking at, looking back over my life you can see I had nothing to do with it basically. I just been shuffled along here and there, you know, go over here, do this, do that, do this, do that, do this, you know, which has been beautiful because I never could have planned it. (Laughing) Never could have planned nothing like that, you know. How could I plan, build a monument ['Triumph of the Human Spirit'] here, in the most important city in the world [New York, New York]! How, you can't plan those kind of things, you know. How could I'd have plan to go into Paris [France] and hung out? You know, and, and, just had a ball, I just couldn't plan it! How could I have planned to, come to New York and, you know, and just live as a artist or, you know. How could plan to sit down and watch this elder brother carve this, last supper and inspired me to do my first piece? You know, how could I have planned that? You, you, those, those things you just can't plan and life kind of dictate what you suppose to do. Like life dictating you what you're suppose to doing right now. You know, I mean, you couldn't have planned this twenty years ago. And, and that's the beauty of life and that is the essence of life. If the, I think if you live true to your essence you tap into the very essence of your, your being, it'll tell, it will direct you! And so that's what I've been, it's been, it's been, directing, life has been directing me all these years and I'm so happy because if I had been directing it, I'm sure I would have fucked it up! (Laughter) You know, but, life has been, you know, been very, beautiful, and, have, four beautiful children and, Shawn, Ezra, Jalani, and my daughter, Esperanza, which, really beautiful, you know, and three, grands from my son, so, so I can't, you know, I really, I mean, I mean, I can sit and talk with you all day and get, and get into even more deeper philosophy about the essence of, of, life. So my, my little--my little beginning flute and ritual is to give homage to my ancestors. Story_ID: 11530 Speaker 1: My legacy (laughter)? My children and, my commitment to the arts and, and that's a real eclectic, a real varied kind of, a varied kind of process and I feel what you do here in your little moment in time, in your little moment here on the planet, that will be your legacy. What you do, what you leave behind and what people have to say about you. And what because when it's all said and done, when you take none of this stuff with you, you take no, material possessions, it's between you and your maker, when you leave this planet. (laughter) and what you have done then, in your little time and space will be what you, what be remembering you by. And if you can feel good by what you have done that's your legacy but you have to feel good about what you have done. I look at my mother and my father what they have done; they have left me behind and I'm to leave something. And hopefully you can leave something good and to make this place a better place when you left it and when you leave, you have contribute, you have given back something to this planet. You'd just haven't taken, taken, taken, taken and I agree, I always believe in giving back, I think that's one of the most important legacies is like, is you can give back something, in your little moment in time, your little, your little short time here because tomorrow I could be gone, tomorrow you could be gone, tomorrow we all could be gone...