 Story_ID: 11775 Speaker 1: I'm Muriel M. Petioni--Muriel Marjorie Petioni, M.D. I was born January-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I need you to spell it for us. Speaker 1: Oh. Muriel, M-U-R-I-E-L, M for M-A-J-O-R-I-E [sic, Marjorie] and Petioni, P-E-T-I-O-N-I. Speaker 2: Okay. And your birth date? Speaker 1: January 1, 1914. Speaker 2: And today's date? Speaker 1: Today is May--It's Friday, May 18th. Speaker 2: 2000? Speaker 1: 2001. Yeah. Speaker 2: And your profession? Speaker 1: (laughs) Physician. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: When I practiced I did general medicine. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Retired about eleven years now. Speaker 2: And location? Let's have the location. We're at you're at home and little--and the address? Speaker 1: Okay. My home where I live is 100 LaSalle Street in Manhattan, New York City [New York]. My office--and I still own the building was, when I practiced at 114 West 131st Street, in the middle of Harlem and four blocks from Harlem Hospital [Center]. My son [Charles M. Woolfolk] still lives there in the building. Story_ID: 11776 Speaker 1: I'd like to start off and find out what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: That's difficult (laughs). Maybe I should say rice. Because that's a staple and, of course, particularly among Caribbean people that's a staple. But as far as favorites, you know, I don't think I have any real favorites. I eat everything. I'm very open to food. My father [Charles Augustin Petioni] taught us that. You know, "Be open to everything. You may not like it. But at least accept it and try it one time." So I might say steak. But I don't eat much of it anymore. (laughs) Speaker 1: Okay. What about favorite color? Speaker 2: I would say red. Different shades of red--particularly--not the orange reds, the more--the darker reds. Speaker 1: The maroons like? Speaker 2: Not as deep as maroon. It's a more lively red. Maybe wine you would say. But there're many shades in that area that--and interesting enough I've been in my red phase since 1970. Before that I was in a green phase. And I think that in my green phase I needed the serenity of green. But now I feel more energized and I think red expresses that. And you see that I have a red rug and many of the accessories are red. So I would say red (laughs). Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Let's say the Caribbean. Speaker 1: And a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite? Speaker 1: Phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Go with the flow and ride with the tide." Story_ID: 11777 Speaker 1: I'd like to ask about your mother and what you know of her, you know, her family background and if you would give her name but talk about, you know, as far back as you know. Speaker 2: Okay. My na--my mother's was Rosa Alling Petioni and it was an Oriental name, A-L-L-I-N-G, but they changed it to Allen. Because it was Anglicized and it--in the days when my father [Charles Augustin Petioni] looked forward to coming here, Chinese were not accepted here. You know there was a--there was a--what do you call it? Anyway, they didn't take Chinese people in the country. And so of the family, anybody who so looked forward to coming, a Chinese name was not the thing to do. So we changed to Allen--the whole family adopted Allen as a derivative of sort of Alling, A-L-L-I-N-G. She was born in Guyana--Georgetown, Guyana to an Indian mother--American Indian mother and a Chinese father. Now I don't remember what age she moved over to Trinidad. I gather in her teens and she--the whole family moved over. She had four sisters and a couple of brothers. There were four girls and two brothers. Mama didn't talk much. She was not a talker. She didn't talk about her history. So I don't know why I never asked her how old she was when she moved to Trinidad, or how old even she was when she got married. But the girls and the mother were very close. The boys after they got up to some age sort of drifted away. Or at least lost touch. One of them went back to Venezuela. What--they call it dow--going down the main when they went back to Venezuela. I don't know whether job opportunities were better there than in Trinidad. Story_ID: 11778 Speaker 1: She [mother, Rosa Alling Petioni] married my father [Charles Augustin Petioni] who--whose name we feel came from Corsica [Spain]. And (pauses) interestingly enough, he never made the Haitian connection. I don't know why. It was many years after he died that a friend of mine who was Puerto Rican said, "You know, I went over to, to Haiti and I saw your name all over the place." And I said, "Yeah, but they are Petións, with the I off." And there's a Petion-Ville in Haiti and a Rue de Petion in Paris [France]. So there's a connection. And later I learned that the people who came from Corsica added a name--added the I to Petion--Petioni. Now I don't know whether they were kind of in between Italy and France. Corsica is in that area. But anyway, we--the name has kind of dying out a little bit, 'cause the Petionis--a lot of the Petionis were women and not many boys. But that's the--that as I said, the first Petioni stopped in Trinidad for whatever reason and settled there and married, and had two sons and a daughter with an African woman. And so there are three Petioni lines and many of us are--many representatives of those lines are living in the New York [New York] area. Most of us are living--still living in the New York area. A few have gone South. A few went West. But most of us are in--now how many generations have come out I'm not sure. I would suspect that my grandfather [Edgar Petioni] was maybe the third generation of Petionis. Story_ID: 11779 Speaker 1: She didn't talk much--Mama [Rosa Alling Petioni] didn't talk much about anything. And somehow or other my father [Charles Augustin Petioni] dominated the family so, that we didn't even think to ask her these specific points. And at that time I was not as conscious of history and genealogy and all that as I have--as I matured. But from what I can gather, they lived a very conservative life. And I get the impression that they were not--they didn't have a lot of money. But they had enough to live a reasonably comfortable life. Story_ID: 11780 Speaker 1: His father [Edgar Petioni] had several different families--he [father, Charles Augustin Petioni] was one of the illegitimate children. He had a wife with two daughters as I recall. But he had other offspring from--by several women and----Which seemed to be fairly common in those days. But he recognized the--the father recognized them. They all came together regularly and communicated with each other. Even though they had separate mothers and lived in separate locations. So they all knew each other. He--I think he lived mostly with his father. Although his mother was very much there and also hosted his, his mother, from what I can gather, hosted all the children from the various mothers. But I think most of the time he lived with his father, the boy. And he talks about the fact that they were--his father was a civil servant, which means that he was well paid. But he (laughs)--Papa said he would stop by the rum shop on his way home on Friday when he got paid. And they never knew how much money he was coming home with. 'Cause he'd treat everybody. Which is fairly common of people who drink (laughs). So Papa said, "Before the week was out, he would have to go borrowing two cents." At that time two cents was--you had penny, two cents and then--what was that--a quarter--shilling. 'Cause they had the British system. And then you had dollars. So Papa would have to go through the indignity of going to the neighbors or whoever to borrow two cents to see them through, I guess. Now the kids were in private school. The girls went to private school. They lived a solid middle-class life. But as it so happens even now, you know, you live a middle-class life. But the underpinning it isn't (laughs) always--so--and he said, "That he used to make friends with the tailor to help him patch his pants. And make friends with the shoemaker to help sole his shoes." So that was--so he felt that when he started working--got grown and started working, he was gonna save money. So he would have a reserve. And he said, "Whatever he made"--and in those days, of course, I think at the height of his career as a newspaperman he made thirty dollars a month. But that was in keeping--that was a good salary compared--'cause he was--so he said that he--when he started working he would pretend he made twenty-five dollars, and put that five dollars away so he could have a cushion. And that was his one big theme. "Save money, save money, save money. Have a cushion. No matter what you make, save money." So that was his, that was his background that--be your name. And, of course, really, his father did believe in education, so he had the best education. He was bright. And after he finished elementary school--in those days you--elementary school was free--sixth grade, up to sixth grade it was free--everybody. And in those days too, in Trinidad and many of the British countries from what I can gather, they got a good solid--those sixth grades--they got a good solid education--reading, writing and arithmetic. They were well-educated. And in order to continue, you either had to be bright and get a scholarship or you had to have money to pay for secondary school education. I don't remember which my father was. Because he was bright, but I suspect that his father contributed. So he went to secondary school, which they called college. And then if you went on then you went to university, which was usually in England or America. Usually in England because there was a connection there. So he was well-educated and became a newspaper--a journalist I guess--that's the name. The whole family's Catholic. And he was a devout Catholic until he got to be sixteen or seventeen. And felt that the Catholic Church put too many restrictions--wanted to tell you what to do, which they did. And he from that young age, maybe because he had to fend for himself a lot, became very independent--very conscious of the whole colonial thing and the restrictions of being in a colo--a country that was dominated by England. So he started being very articulate about the injustices and whatnot. So the--so he broke with the Catholic Church. He stopped going to Church. Although he said, "Now if you wanna join a church, the Catholic religion is the one to join, because they were very powerful and could help you." But he didn't believe in joining any church. But he believed in us going to Sunday school and getting a good religious education. So we went to Sunday school until I went to college [at New York University, New York, New York], yeah. So subsequently, he was quite globally-oriented. And a lot of his friends and friends older went to England and became involved in Pan-African movement. He--oh, yeah. So finally, he was told by the powers at be--now don't ask me who the powers that be--the government probably--that, "You know, you're writing a lot of crazy stuff." I'm using my words. But that's what it amounted to. "You're being very articulate in the things you like and you don't like. And I suggest you better leave the country 'cause if you don't leave the country, you'll be out of a job and your family will not be accepted." So that's when he decided to leave and come to America and to study medicine. Because as a physician, he said, "You would put your pot out in the morning and you'd have something to put in the pot by the evening." Because if people didn't have money--people always needed doctors--so if they didn't have money to pay you they would bring you food. Which was true in New York. Even after he became a physician that was true. People--you didn't--people didn't have insurance and he would treat them whether they had money or not. Most physicians in those years would do that. And--but they would--if they didn't have money they would bring him a chicken or a ham or something that they had access to. And so he said, "You'll always be able to eat." So he decided to come to this country, work--naturally. He went to City College [of New York, New York] at night and got his pre-med requirements and then went to Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 11781 Speaker 1: What year did he [father, Charles Augustin Petioni] come [to the U.S.]? What year are we talking about that--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 1918. During the war [World War I]--the war was still on. And many--those early jobs he got were war jobs. He got--you know, Papa I don't think ever lifted anything but a--heavier than a pencil. But he got a job in the shipyards when he first came. And he--now he talked, he talked about a lot of things. He said (pauses) they would have to climb well many, many flights up on the--on these--" what do you call that--the--whatever structure they used to build ships. What do you call that? Speaker 1: Scaffolding? Speaker 2: Yeah. And they would get up--they'd be elevated to these heights. And they caught these bolts in a cup. They'd hold the cup and somebody would shoot a bolt and then they would take the bolt and, you know--this kind of assembly line thing. And he said people were falling all the time. Ambulances running all the time. People falling off the scaffolding. And I don't even know how he got the courage to do that kind of thing--heights--working from such heights. But he--the money was good, and he had to find work to do to support himself and to send money home to us. So I don't know how long that lasted. But it probably--because the war ended in '18 [1918] so it must've been just a few months. When that ended he got the only kind of jobs he could get--a black person who was not--whose education was not accepted here in America, porter, elevator runner, stock person. And as I said, went to City College [of New York, New York] at night and got his--City College was free at that time. But you had to buy books and things. And continued for the first--oh yeah--when he went to--finally went to--finally went to Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] he--since he had been a newspaper reporter he used that hunt-and-peck system to type. And he would take notes and have them mimeographed. We used mimeographs in those days. And he would reproduce them and sell it to the students and even some of the professors. So that brought him some revenue. And then during the summer he would work. Early--the first couple years from what I can gather he would get summer jobs. Whatever he could. And then the last couple years he worked with [Marcus] Garvey as an advisor. And most of the jobs--most of the books written on Garvey mention his name as having been a consultant to Garvey--Avid Garveyite. Because he believed in the independence of black people, you know. Going back home and all that kind of thing. And as I said, whenever anybody came to New York or America--"You gotta see Dr. Petioni." Because he was a sort of a liaison between the people from the Caribbean particularly Trinidad and the people who had gone to England. So that he was one of the architects in the planning days of the independence of the West Indies. Was invited to some of the early meetings that they had in order to put that together. Speaker 1: Now he--did he ever talk about--now what? He came in 1918. You-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Came in '19. Speaker 1: 1919? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So just a year-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It--just a year. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It only took a year to get every--to make way for the family to come. Speaker 2: Well no. From what I can gather, Mama [Rosa Alling Petioni] said, "Okay, you said you'd send for us when you were ready. But I'm not gonna wait. I'm coming." (laughs) So he probably told her, "Look, if you come you gotta work 'cause I can't--." So after we got settled she got a job in the garment industry doing--she had learned to sew at home. At home the girls learned to sew. At home, once you finished elementary school you either went on to higher education or you apprenticed and learned some kind of skill or profession. So Mama had learned to sew. But as I said, all the women learned to sew in those countries, all over--Philippines, whatever. They all learned to sew. So she knew a little about sewing. However she--when she left there she was a clerk in a department store. So she had clerked. But, of course, she couldn't get no job clerking. So the garment industry was wide open for women and particularly women from other countries. And they had an assembly line. You had a specific little thing to do. And of--if you were able to work at a certain speed you could work. I think it was piece--what do you call it? Piecemeal. Not piecemeal. Speaker 1: Piecework. No. Speaker 2: Piecework, piecework. Speaker 1: Right, right. You would. You would all--you would be in charge of one part of the garment. Speaker 2: That's right. She was a finisher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My aunt was an operator. Finisher was where the garment is done and I guess you cut loose threads and be sure that the garment was ready for--so one aunt came-- I'm just telling--giving the idea of the garment industry at that time. Another aunt was an operator. But another aunt who was completely dependent on herself and her child, because her husband had died at home, she got a job cleaning Pullman [railroad] cars. That was good money. But it was heavy, rough work. But she did that and was able to sustain herself and her son. So Mama worked and provided childcare for us and Papa worked. Mama worked and really supported the apartment and us. And Papa worked to support himself in medical school. Story_ID: 11782 Speaker 1: Tell me your sibling's names and where you, you know, and their names and the--go from the oldest to the youngest and-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 1: Where you fit. Speaker 2: My sibling from my father [Charles Augustin Petioni] and mother [Rosa Alling Petioni] was my sister, Marguerite Alicia Petioni. She was three years younger than I. And the picture will show. I had two brothers who were brothers of--who were born before my father married my mother. And one was Charles Forgenie who stayed in Trinidad and who became, I think manager of roads or something. My other brother--And they were--they seemed to have been within a year of each other was Julio--Julio Petioni who took my father's name. And in those days, gentlemen who had outside children would offer to take the children and give them his name. So my father offered Miss Forgenie to take my brother and gave him his name, but she refused. So he stayed with her and he kept the name Forgenie. But my father recognized him as a--now my--Julio, whose mother I said was the center of activity for all the Petioni kids, he--she consented to let--give him the name. But they kept him--he was I guess half with his mother and half with his father. And incidentally, she was the--she was from Martinique--de Montbrun. Her name was de Montbrun. She was a daughter of a physician. I don't know how that happened. Because in those days, you know, if you had an illegitimate child--it was fairly common, but then you were kind of declasse [inferior]. But anyway, she was very much in the life of my father and us. I remember her. Having left at five [years old] I remember her very vaguely. But her--his sister thr--from his mother came to New York [New York] to visit several times. I remember her pretty well. Speaker 1: Now Forgu--How do you spell that? Speaker 2: F-O-R-G-E-N-I-E. There was this large French influence in Trinidad. Even though [Christopher] Columbus discovered Trinidad, and he was financed by the Spanish, some how or other, the Spanish really didn't populate the island to the extent that the French did. Now I'm not sure why that happened. So you had a--what they call a whole Creole population in Trinidad--French decent people who married African--married each other and also married African descents. Speaker 1: Was there a patois spoken in Trinidad? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, definitely. Story_ID: 11783 Speaker 1: His decision to go to medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] was just pragmatic. Or was there--was there--was this ex--you know, it just seems like he says well this is something, you know--. Speaker 2: Well he said, "First of all, if you're a physician you're independent. You don't have to ask anybody for a job. You are an independent person, and the only people you depend on are your patients. And you always have patients, because people always need doctors." And as a physician, as in an independent self-employed person, you could say what you wanted to say and do what you wanted to do, because you were not restricted by somebody you worked for. That was the idea. Story_ID: 11784 Speaker 1: He's a resourceful person [father, Charles Augustin Petioni] and it doesn't-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Exceedingly (with emphasis) resourceful--, Speaker 1: Take (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Exceeding--his growing up and having to go borrow money from people which was very embarrassing made him very res--he read a lot. And those guys who were educated in the Caribbean as I said, they read a lot. And many of them were very conscious, the educated ones, of the whole spectrum--the whole world spectrum and the difficulties and all. Exceeding--and he learned how to make two cents and save one. In order--and that enabled him to do many of these things. Speaker 1: So do you think that this--he decides on his own to go to medical school [at Howard University Medical College, Washington, D.C.]? Do you think that there's any discussion with your mother [Rosa Alling Petioni]? Or it's, "I'm going to medical school and this will be helpful to the family." and--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, no, no, no, no, no. He dominated the family. And Mom, Mom was very quiet and modest and self-effacing, she was. And he pulled the strings. He was a good kind person who encouraged us all. But I'm saying Mama didn't have too much of an opinion about anything. She went along. She went with the flow, (laughs) with the tide. And she cooperated with him. With whatever he believed in doing. She--I never felt there was any resistance about what Papa wanted to do. But he always wanted to do something good and right you know, and progressive. And to improve the family. Story_ID: 11785 Speaker 1: He [father, Charles Augustin Petioni] went off to Howard [University Medical College, Washington, D.C.]? And so he's in Washington for how many years? And the family's--I mean he may be coming back and forth but--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, he came home summers and holidays. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Washington is only a hop, skip and a jump away, and they had excursions in those days for little or nothing--you could come (laughs) to New York [New York]. So she [mother, Rosa Alling Petioni] held the family together. And another way we held the family together is that as relatives came we--they stayed with us. They rented rooms. We had a railroad apartment, and each room was a bedroom except for the--well we had the dining room and kitchen and bathroom, which was a common area. But we occupied a bedroom. And two other sibling--my mother's sisters came and occupied. So they helped to sustain the--until they got up and able to go on their own. Get their own apartments or marry or whatnot. So it wasn't that difficult. And in those days people shared apartments very easily. Even after I finished medical school [Howard University Medical College] I found that married people who were college-educated shared apartments. Somehow or other in those days it wasn't easy to get apartments I guess, and or buy property. So--and people--it's interesting how people lived very well together in crowded circumstance and everybody kept out of the way (laughs) of everybody else. So they lived harmoniously. Now, you know, what it takes even to rent an apartment in a building you own. You have to be very careful. Oh no. It was well-organized. And really that was not so different from other immigrants who came here. They came. Somebody had a home. They shared the home until they could go out. Story_ID: 11786 Speaker 1: Do you have early memories of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. I remember growing up. We lived on a hill called Leon (ph.) Hill [Laventille?] in Belmont, Port-of-Spain, Trinidad. I remembered we lived on this hill and there were very few homes on that hill. There was--I remember one at the foot of the hill. And I think were kind of in the middle of the hill. And then there was a neighbor who lived further up the hill. And we used to go particularly to the neighbor up the hill. Because he had a lot of fruit trees and all. The person at the foot of the hill, I only remember that they were there. I don't remember too much about--I guess they were okay. But--maybe they didn't have any children (laughs) so. I remembered we had this home with a bathroom. I don't remember anything about a toilet. But we had a bathroom kinda down behind the house. Maybe a few yards where we'd bathe. I think the kitchen was on the outside of the house under a shed. Don't remember where the toilet was. Maybe the toilet was in the bathroom. I don't know. Of course, in those days they had outhouses. But that's very vague in my mind. I remember that we lived with my grandmother, my mother's [Rosa Alling Petioni] mother. And I remember that one occasion we had a severe earthquake. And the house just rattled and things fell off. But it didn't hurt anything. I mean nothing was really damaged. I remember playing with kids and some of the children from the family. Other, you know, cousins and all would come up the hill to visit. Now it's funny--oh, my brother lived with my grandmother--that's what happened. My brother Julio, the one who's Petioni [formerly Julio Forgenie]. He lived with my grandmother [Alicia de Montbrun], my father's [Charles Augustin Petioni] mother. So he didn't live up the hill. Subsequently, after we came and my grandmother died, he went and lived with grandma up on the hill. I remember getting on the ship to come. And I remember walking up this very shaky ladder like--getting up to the--it-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Gangplank? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (unclear) or plank? Speaker 2: Well if not a plank, a stair that was shaky as we came up, with maybe ropes on the sides to hold on to. And I remember Mama carrying my sister [Marguerite Alicia Petioni] in her arms and holding me by the hand coming up this plank. Now the voyage I don't remember. I don't remember arriving at Ellis Island [immigration station in New York, New York]. Except that my father was there to meet us. Some people had to stay on the island--people didn't meet them right away. But he met us as the ship docked. So we didn't have to stay there. Those are the highlights of my memory of those early years. Story_ID: 11787 Speaker 1: When we came here I think we stayed with friends near St. Mark's Catholic Church. Which is on a-- Which is on a 138th Street between Lenox [Avenue] and Fifth [Avenue]. And I went to this St. Mark's Church school [St. Mark the Evangelist School, New York, New York] for a short time. Then how many months passed, I don't know. But we got an apartment not too long after. Well I get the impression maybe within a year on 131st Street. We got our own apartment at 26 West 131st Street, railroad apartment. Which most of the apartments were in those days. And in the meantime I had changed schools from sch--the Catholic school at 138th to PS [Public School] 89 [New York, New York] at 135th and then subsequently to PS [Public School] 68 [New York, New York] at 127th because that was in my district. Shall I go on as far as schools are concerned? (laughs) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So finished elementary school. Now Papa [Charles Augustin Petioni] finished in 1925, and that was when I finished elementary school. Which was sixth grade and went to junior high school. Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: 13--Junior High [School] 136 [New York, New York], which was--is 136th Street-- 135th or 136th on St. Nicholas Avenue. And I was sent to the rapid advance section. So instead of doing seven, eight, nine, I did--I was there two years instead of three. Rapid advance they called it. So my father finished in '25 [1925] from Howard [University Medical College, Washington, D.C.], went to (pauses) Raleigh, North Carolina to do an internship at St. Agnes Hospital. I think he stayed about six months and decided he wasn't learning anything there. And he needed to get and earn some money. Because I gather maybe they got room and board and a stipend, but very little. So he decided to come on back home and open his office. And we--he--we used--as I said with these railroad flats, you had a front entrance and a back entrance. When you went into the front entrance you went into the--what should have been a parlor. And then you passed through the--past the bedroom and then into the lower part which was the kitchen, bathroom and dining room. So he took the first two rooms as his office. The fist room was the waiting room and the second room was his examining room. And then we continued to live in the back in these--and that was true of many physicians who finished. They'd work out of their own apartments--couldn't rent an office. So he spent--this was '25 [1925]--father was an interesting person. You can see that, yeah. (laughs) He--we were in the block between Lenox and Fifth and there was a very well known, busy, wealthy, well-established physician who lived between Lenox and Seventh [Avenue]--had his office there. Dr. Savory, Dr. P. M. H. [Philip Maxwell Hugh] Savory, who was Caribbean originally. And went to Canada to study medicine but he had been in practice a long time. So Papa called Dr. Savory and other physicians in the area who were already established, introduced himself. Told them, he had recently opened in Manhattan [New York, New York]. And he would hope that they would help him if he needed any help. And also if they needed any calls or anything like that to make he would be glad to make them for them. So some of his earlier--when he was made--making calls for Dr. Savory--'Cause that's where he would rather stay. He didn't want to make any calls. But he--you know, you had to make calls in those days. When I say you had to, in order to accommodate your patients. So he--and by 1927 he had saved enough money to put money down on a brownstone at 114 West 135th [Street]. Right up--across from Dr. Savory as a matter of fact. So we moved into 114. Occupied--the office was on the first floor and then we occupied a limited part of the house. And we rented out the rest of it to friends and people were coming. And that helped him to pay for the house and to--so forth and so on. Story_ID: 11788 Speaker 1: Did your father [Charles Augustin Petioni]--did you have a special bond with him in some respects? Or was he nurtur--you know, you said he was always encouraging. Was he nurturing? Speaker 2: He was very nurturing to us--to the two of us. I being the oldest maybe somehow, the oldest always feels that they are half responsible for, you know, (laughs) taking care of the younger ones and also sort of--But he was very--he--of course, he believed in education. No question. The key. You know, the key to power. Speaker 1: And he believed in education for women? Speaker 2: Yes. Oh yeah. He didn't treat them any differently. He believed more for women. Because he said, "I want you to take a profession and be independent. Because I don't want any man mistreating you 'cause you can't support yourself." And he stressed profession. He didn't say teaching or nursing. He said, "Where you could be independent." So to him it was either law or medicine. Teaching was okay. Social work was okay. I mean that was better than nothing. But be independent so you didn't have to ask anybody for a job. And in those years women didn't have access to--even though they--even with education they didn't have a lot of access to jobs. Because the majority population had the jobs sewed up. A lot of my classmates finished Hunter College [of the City University of New York, New York], which was the women's college--free. You had to be very bright to get into Hunter and couldn't penetrate the teaching industry. The Jews had it all sewed up. They didn't even give exams anymore, so you couldn't get in. So they had to take jobs as clerks or whatever they could get. Nursing was the one you could get--always get a job as a nurse. But even then at that time, there were very few nursing schools who would take black people except those in the South who were attached to black-owned hospitals. One of my, one of my medical women colleagues, she was a year ahead of me, her father wanted her sister to take nursing. And there were no nursing schools in New York City [New York] who would accept black women. Bellevue [Hospital Center] would not accept them. And he agitated and said, "You gotta have a school for black people." And he agitated to the point where they said, "Okay. If you have what, six or seven women who wanna take nursing, we'll open up a school." And he found six or seven, including his daughter. He found six or seven girls who wanted to take nursing. And they had to open a school and they opened it at Harlem Hospital [Center]. So Harlem Hospital was the font of black medicine and the training of minority people in the country--I mean integrated. I mean there were quite a few black-owned hospitals who trained physicians and nurses and personnel. But they were small, scattered around the country and didn't have a lot of money. So they were struggling. Story_ID: 11789 Speaker 1: You come here [to the United States]. Do you find it a strange place? Or you're young enough that you just sort of settle in. You know, with your family and--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well we settled in. But at those--In those days the Americans called us "monkey chasers" (laughs). Yeah. The Caribbean--there was this antagonism towards Caribbean people. And they teased us and whatnot. Yeah. Speaker 1: Black Americans or just (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Black Americans. Speaker 1: Black Americans. Speaker 2: No, no. Black Americans. Speaker 1: Yeah, because this--that's what I wanna talk to you, you know, talk--because you know, there is--Caribbean people from the West Indies have always done better in some respects. There's been this--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: --schism, and-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, and some--and I've been asking people who would be conversant about it, you know. What their thoughts are and about the subject. But I didn't--So you're saying black Americans were calling you 'Monkey-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --Chasers'? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And part of that was as you say--you know, even now the students who are the most serious, who are more focused--I do a role model thing with City College [of the City University of New York, New York]--I say I do it--I do it through the coalition, 100 Black Women. And we have established a black society, the Susan Smith McKinney Steward Medical Society. So we've been doing a role model thing with City College for twenty-five years. And through the years the students who have come to me as mentees have been either Caribbean descent, newly-arrived or descent or African newly-arrived or descent. And I have a goddaughter who is a professor at City College who is of Caribbean parentage. And she has found that too--that the--those people are more focused. I'm not saying they're any brighter. But they're more focused. They see where they're going and they have on blinders. They don't come out and announce they gotta go home at 4:00 [P.M.] and see the soap operas, (laughs), you know. And I don't know what it is about Caribbean people in that--maybe when you have a limited oppor--first of all I think that black Americans have been terribly brainwashed because of this slavery thing. The Caribbean people were enslaved too, but in a different way. This is my theory. That they come from a black country where white people were superimposed on them. But they came with their own--surrounded by their own people. Whereas the people here, they not only went through slavery, but the post-slavery thing. And they're still being--they've been brainwashed, demeaned, made to feel less than a man. Of course, you know, the ruling was that you--black people were three-quarters a man or half a man. And then if you had one drop of black blood you were black. All of that is still having a terrible, terrible effect on our people. And not only did they separate families during slavery, but as they came to New York and I guess other places too--and the women and the men couldn't find work. Women can always find work--you can always take care of somebody's child or cook for them. But as women could not support their families and had to apply for welfare, the welfare people said, "If you're--if you say your husband can't support you, you can't live with a man." I mean they would come--I don't know whether you knew this. They would send out their social workers at night. And they'd look in closets and under beds to see whether any men's clothes or shoes were under there. And if you--if any man was living in your house with any kind of--well any proof, they would take them off. So the only way they could support themselves and their kids, would be to put their men out. And then poor guys, they didn't have the moral support of their men. They didn't even have the little that a man could bring in. Because by the time the man had to go and establish quarters elsewhere whatever he made had to go to that rather than--and, of course, I'm sure the men gave them something. So that through the years they have been separating the family and adding to the disintegration of the family. And as I said, women have--always able to find work because they do service work. The men have a much harder time to get work. And have through the years. And then on their jobs they've been demeaned and insulted. And I think that's why--my theory again, I'm sure a lot of people agree with me--that's why they drank so much. And they'd talk about putting up with 'The Man' all week. And by Friday they'd want to drink to forget. And then they'd sober up and go to work the next week. But that was the only way they could deal with 'Mr. Charlie', and face the feeling they were less than a man. So--and it's still going on. I've talked to people who are in high places, vice presidents of companies. And they still either get the glass ceiling or underlings who don't know who they are will insult them. I read this case of this guy, who was going to work on the weekend--Saturday. And some little white whippersnapper got on the elevator and whatnot and wanted to know, "Where are you going?" And felt that he was of no--even though, of course, he was dressed up in his three-piece suit now. You know, they told us we had to dress in a three-piece suit in order to look like somebody. But you're dressed up in your three-piece suit, and you got your briefcase and look like anybody else, and still you gotta be in a de--in a lower paying job. And that still happens, I understand. I guess you've talked to people. That still happens. Speaker 1: No, no, no. It still happens. So you're saying that--some people say also, "People of Caribbean descent that--" well one person said, "Well look at--it's the ones who came here who are more, you know, aggressive--" Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, that's true. Speaker 1: "--and together." Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: And that you should sort of look at that. But there is a direction. There's also a sense of place. You know, people know that they feel a place that they will be able to go back to. You know, if--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, they have a home to go back to. Speaker 1: They have a home, right. Speaker 2: And they have--they have family and some sense of stability--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)right, right, right. Speaker 2: --or some--. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They belong somewhere. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I suppose that helped the Europeans. They were Germans or Czechs or whatever, and even though they became American and Americanized, they still had a base. Speaker 1: Right. But here you are coming in through Ellis Island [immigration station in New York, New York] like all the other immigrants. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: So that's a difference. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously). Speaker 1: Now do you--So you said people were call--I was asking you, you know, how it was for you at the beginning and you said-- (Simultaneously) Well we settled in and, you know, what happens again with all immigrants. We had our own society. The West Indians--we knew who the other West Indians were and those who came to better themselves, and who came to study and better. So we knew. We knew most of the West Indians who were here. At that time there were not that many of us. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they surfaced. We ran into each--when my father [Charles Augustin Petioni] came he organized the Trinidad Benevolent Society. And this--all the islands I think established those societies. And it was a place where they got together, where they helped each other. Where they established a little fund. Everybody paid, I don't know, a dollar a month or something. And if you were sick you got seven dollars a week. And if you died, you got $100 towards the burial. But that too, kept the Trinidadians together. And then the Trinidadians met the Barbadians and the Jamaicans and all and those who were forwardly ambitious either in the movement--in the Pan-African Movement or in professions--they got to know each other. They went to City College. They met each other at the City College, wherever. So you got to know other--so we had our own society. So, "So they didn't like us, okay." In the meantime we met Americans who were hospitable and who befriended us. And we got to know them. But we retained our own little customs and the food and the society and the little clubs and the little--and I know we kept our accents. I know people would say they'd call the house and they never knew whether they were speaking to my mother [Rosa Alling Petioni], my sister [Marguerite Alicia Petioni] or me. 'Cause we kept that little Caribbean--it wasn't--'cause Trinidadians don't have a real strong accent, the Jamaicans do. But we kept our little--and if you--if I get around West Indians now, I lapse into that more Trinidadian. But most people know that I'm not Southern from the way I speak or not western or whatever. But they get that little different in speech. And we're less--even though we have our own little colloquial patois it isn't the "I be's" and--that comes out of the Southern tradition and whatnot. So it didn't matter. We lived a society within a society. And here again that's typical of the other Carri--the other immigrants who come. They live in their own little--the Haitians have come and formed and their own little society, and they don't mix much with us. The Haitians or the Puerto Ricans. We've tried to bond with the Puerto Ricans--I say as black educated people, we've tried to bond with the Puerto Ricans. Because we have. But we don't bond closely. We've tried to include them but they stay in their own little culture. And we stay in our lit--the Haitians stay in their own little culture. So--and we carried on the traditions of the culture. I remember I was on 125th Street with my sister one day. And we were little, maybe eleven, twelve, thirteen. And a woman stopped me and said, "Aren't you the Petioni girls?" I said. "Yes, ma'am." She said, "Well, you know, the eyes of the world are upon you now." So we expected to succeed. You were expected--you didn't come here to play--serious. Story_ID: 11790 Speaker 1: At what time are you thinking about going to medical school? You said you-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Twelve. At age twelve I decided I wanted to go into medicine. Speaker 1: And that's--you were saying, you were saying it off-camera that you were working in your father's [Charles Augustin Petioni] office, then. Speaker 2: Well not working. Just being a part of the family and--'cause Mama [Rosa Alling Petioni] stayed home after he finished medicine [at Howard University Medical College, Washington, D.C.]. Mama stayed home and did the reception role. Took the reception role. The--answering the telephone, taking messages, letting people come and wait while Papa was out making calls or whatever. So we took on that role too. Answered doorbell, answered telephone, whatever. So we had kind of a idea of what it was. And my father also went into--I mean my brother [Julio Petioni, formerly Julio Forgenie] also went into medicine. He came here in high school and finished Dewitt Clinton High School [New York, New York] and went onto--as you said, "We didn't have a lot of money." But Papa knew how to manipulate the money. So when my father interned at St. Agnes Hospital in Raleigh, North Carolina, he found there was Saint Augustine['s] College [Raleigh, North Carolina]--small college. So he sent my brother down there to college to get his pre-med. I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. Because Papa finished--Well probably the fact that Papa finished from Howard. And I have a cousin [Cecil Marquez] who finished from Howard ahead of me. And Papa felt that I needed to get out and away from home at a place like Howard where I would sort of become less introverted and be myself. My--be my own-- And have a chance to express my own personality. And be exposed to a larger--now my sister [Marguerite Alicia Petioni], who was already that way, went to Hunter [College of the City University of New York, New York City]. Now Hunter was free. So he was able to manipulate. See, Hunter was free and she didn't need that kind of social--whatever that is (laughs)--the socialization is what I'm trying to think of. I went to Howard ahead of my brother. Even though he was older than me, he was behind me as far as schooling was concerned. So I needed Howard. So he sent me to Howard. And then my brother, who he couldn't have afforded to send to Howard, went to Saint Augustine['s], which was a small black college in the South. Attached just--the same guy who was president of the hospital was also, I think, principal of the school. That Southern black, you know, those upper-middle-class blacks in those days, they did a lot of things and owned a lot of--like the [Garlington Jerome] Sutton family, you know. They had a funeral home and they taught. They--it was a whole dynasty where they controlled a lot of the businesses in that town. Story_ID: 11791 Speaker 1: So when you get to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], that's a different experience for you also. Isn't it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (unclear). Speaker 2: Now I went two years at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. I finished Wadleigh High School [later Wadleigh Arts High School, New York, New York], which was the academic girls' high school in New York City. And people came from all over the city to attend Wadleigh High School, which was at 114th Street & 7th Avenue. Now as the neighborhood changed, and that became all black--because Harlem was integrated for a long time. Even though we were in Central Harlem, the periphery of Harlem was still white. So at that time, now we're talking about around 1930 when I went to--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Hold on a second. So you were saying that, you know, the periphery was out--but I was asking--you were saying--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We were talking about education. Speaker 1: Yeah, Wadleigh. Speaker 2: Wadleigh High School, which was the academic high school. And so we had a--the whole course there was an academic pre-college course. Regents and all that. And so I went to NYU for two years--NYU for two years, pre-med. And Papa [Charles Augustin Petioni] decided that if I switched to Howard for my third year, it would be easier for me to get in medical school. 'Cause it wasn't easy to get in medical school in those days. The classes were much smaller, but still it was not easy. So for my junior year I applied to Howard for my third year--to the college. I was accepted and continued my pre-med. And at that time you could--entered medical school after three years of pre-med as long as you had all the requirements. So at the end of the third year, the year there, which was my third year of college, I applied to medical school [Howard University Medical College, Washington, D.C.] and was accepted. So I got my Bachelor's and M.D. in seven years. I got my Bachelor's at the end of my first year in medical school and then my M.D. (laughs) Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughs) Busy. Speaker 1: (Pauses) So how many--okay. So you go to Howard for one year after two years at NYU and then you're on to medical school. Speaker 2: You apply and you get into medical school. Do you think your father having gone there had any influence? Or you just think you were on a fast track? Speaker 1: No, no. I think-- I'm sure it had an influence. I don't know to what extent. Because they were taking girls. They were taking one to three girls in each class at the time. And I was the only girl in my class. So that--and I don't--I think they might have taken other girls of simi--if they had qualified. So it may have been a combination. But as I said, by that time I had two--not only my father but my cousin [Cecil Marquez] who went there and finished medicine. So--and my father had made a reputation when he was there as an activist. Both of them were activists. So they were not some mousy people who went and disappeared and nobody knew about them. As I said--as I told you, he took notes and sold them. And being a mature person--see he was older than most of the other--most people go to medical school right out of college. But he had stayed out and worked. You know. So I think he was in his late twenties when he went. So he was already a mature man who didn't mind expressing his opinions, you know. Speaker 2: So now--so you get there and you're the only woman. Is that of influence or does it matter? You're just on this track? Does it-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I was on a track. I--as I said I spent a year on the hill, which was-- And all the girls stayed in the dormitory at that time. Because there were not many women in the professional schools. So unless they had relatives in the city or access to homes in the city, they stayed in the women's dormitory. So I stayed in the dormitory the--my junior year. And then continued to stay in the dormitory during my medical school years. And I was very quiet in those days. So I just went on and did my work and being the only girl in the class they sort of treated me like a sister, you know. I studied with the guys--the guys studied in the boys' dormitory and I'd go--at that time you had to sign in and out of the dormitory. If you were out--if you were going any place after hours, you had to sign in and sign out. So since I didn't have any girl classmates, I'd go to the boys' dormitory to study in the evenings. And there was a young Dean of Men, he was just maybe two years out of college. So he was the Dean of Men. And he said, "Lady Muriel, you know, I kept a good eye on you, you know. I wouldn't have let any of those guys (laughs) bother you." So I was perfectly safe. And then it was just like across the campus to go from the boys' dormitory to the girls' dormitory. So as I said, it was--people asked me, "Oh you must've had a hard time. You went to medical school when there weren't many women and all that." I didn't have a hard time. No, I didn't have a hard time. I just followed the course, you know. I went from high school, college, medical school. Was accepted as one of the--and, of course, as I said, there were one to three girls in every class. So the class above me had, I think two and the class below me had three. Something like that. And it was a small school. We didn't have more than five hundred in the whole school. My class, I think, maybe started out around forty. Only forty. Story_ID: 11792 Speaker 1: At that time as I said, they were accepting people at Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York] as interns. And we knew they would take a certain number of us. So I applied to--I don't think I applied at anywhere else. I just applied at Harlem. And, of course, by that time, my father's [Charles Augustin Petioni] practicing. And we had--he had colleagues, you know, who were on staff at Harlem, and who had a lot of influence at Harlem. And really most of the people who they accepted--the blacks that they accepted in those days were people who had connections. They were daughters or relatives of people. In fact, one of my classmates came from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. His father was a OB/G--Ear, Nose, and Throat. So he had, you know--might as well confess it--you know, it's not always what you know, but who you know. So they had at that time--they had about two hundred people applying for twelve places every six months. And I remember that year--there may have been maybe four or five guys--four or five blacks, guys and girls, and about four women. So Harlem not only believed in blacks. But they took--always took women in every class. So they were really very open about that. Speaker 2: Now describe Harlem Hospital. Because this is 1930--what are we at now? Speaker 1: This is '37 [1937]. Speaker 2: '37 [1937]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, when you come. Speaker 1: And so Harlem--we're after the depression, you know. But we're after the depression. What is, what is this hospital like? What is the administration like at the time? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 1: You know, is it a white--you know is it a servicing a heavily black community? But it's still--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Serving in a poor community. Speaker 1: In a poor--okay. Speaker 2: Poor community. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because just prior to that--well that--this may not have nothing, but prior to that Harlem, New York was a downtown community. And this area was country and farms and country houses. The brownstones were country houses. But it moved up and then when blacks came they really--most of the blacks settled in Harlem, Central Harlem. Although some of them who came very early--some of the liberated slaves and all that set--were down--and they had burial grounds. I don't know whether you're paying attention. But they have unearthed burial ground of blacks who were buried down there. So you--I've forgotten the question. I'm--. Speaker 1: The question was in 1937--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) At the hospital. Speaker 1: What was the hospital like? Was it--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. The hospital was started as a very small frame house. And the-- friends have pictures of that. Down--further down but essentially in the Lower Harlem area. And then the business got so good that they built a building at 136th Street, between Lenox [Avenue] and Fifth [Avenue]. And at that time it was the--well it certainly serviced the people in the general Harlem area. I think Lincoln and the Bronx was established. I'm not sure which one was open earlier. But they serviced all the people in the area. And even if they had private physicians--there weren't that many hospital facilities for the private physicians. Certainly not for the blacks, but even for the whites. They--there weren't this business of hospital where you could take your patients to a hospital and treat them yourself. So it was--so they had a very integrated clientele at that time. Because I'm saying Central Harlem. The black community was very small and the periphery was. In fact, when I went to junior high school [Junior High School 136, New York, New York], half my class was white. Because they still lived up on a hill, Sugar Hill, and the east of us and south of us and north of us. They were, I think, typical of the hospitals of that day, where they had two wings--you had a long corridor and two wings, west wings and east wings. And there were beds lined up against the walls of patients. And the only privacy you had was a curtain that you could draw between patients. So you could stand at the entrance of the wing where the nurse's desk was and look down and see everybody. And if anybody was sick you knew it. Because it was very obvious then. When I say sick, I mean in an emergency sick or whatnot. They had--as I said Dr. Louis Wright was the first black to integrate Harlem Hospital in 1920 [sic, 1919]. And even though he finished from Harvard Medical School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]--which was, of course, unusual in those days. And I think he interned at Bellevue [Hospital]--and Bellevue was only taking one or two at a time--he probably got the internship because he went to Harvard and the Harvard connection. But even then he worked in a clinic rather than on the wards, and then he finally worked himself up. So--however, by the time I got there, he was already Director of Surgery. And we had a black Director of OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology], Peter Marshall Murray, who was very well-known, who had finished from Howard and I think interned at Howard University Hos-, it was, it was Freedmen's Hospital [Washington, D.C.] at the time and then came here. And another thing was, there wasn't a lot of post-graduate work for black physicians. So that we learned by apprenticeship. The guys who wanted to do surgery would go and volunteer their time, several hours every day and work with the surgery--surgeons. And learn to operate and take care of surgical patients. If you're a pediatrician, you did the same thing. If you were OB/GYN, you did the same thing. And were able to practice--tey operated there. Now the problem was they didn't have a chance to--they didn't have many opportunities to do surgery on their own, independently. So they established small hospitals that a doctor bought, and these--they were mostly brownstone type houses that were available. Because you only had two kinds. You had the apartment--tenement houses, and you had brownstones or whitestones were the limestones. So many of them bought large brownstones and established a--made a hospital setting. One of them did build a hospital, the Vincent Sanitarium that is--went from a hospital to a clinic, and now it's owned by a private person. But that's on 100 and--I think it's about 138th, 139th and Seventh Avenue. So the surgeon--he could treat your patients, your medical patients at home. But if you had surgery to do or severely ill patents, you took them to one of these little private hospitals and took care of them where you could do the IV [intravenous]. Story_ID: 11793 Speaker 1: Was there any thought that you would go into practice with your father [Charles Augustin Petioni] at the beginning? Or was it just--that's what I'm a little--you know. Because--he had a practice. Was his practice not large enough? Or was it just assumed this was a better move sort of, "My daughter, the doctor," you know. And--. Speaker 2: No. "My daughter the doctor, my daughter the doctor." We hadn't thought that far. And as a matter of fact, when I finished--'cause my father didn't die until 1950. His--he had a small office. There wouldn't have been any room for him-- for me. It was one examining room--well actually, he had a waiting room and he had a room that was a combination office and examining room. But in the meantime, my cousin who I told you finished in '30 [1930], I think, he had bought a building. Had offices for himself and established offices for other physicians that he rented out to. So by that time his brother had finished his dentistry and he had an office. And he had a radiologist who had an office. And he had an internist who had specialized in pulmonary medicine who had an office. And that guy moved out about the same time that I finished my internship and came back to New York, so I occupied his office. 'Cause that was a set up--an office set up with a waiting room, examining room and whatnot. So I was able to fall right in since that office was vacant. See he had--my cousin, Cecil Marquez (ph.), he had the down floor--the street level floor for his office--he had that whole suite. And he had three offices on the second floor. One that the dentist took, one that the radiologist took and this other one that the--which was a small one, which the pulmonary guy took. So I was able to establish my--and then I was only there--I came in '50 [1950], and then my father died in '51 [1951], so then I moved into his office. But there wasn't an idea that I would particularly work with him. It was just that I should be a physician and I would find my way. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you--are you starting to enjoy practice at that--? I mean, you know, when you-- have you--do you feel now that you've made the right career choice? Speaker 2: Oh yes. I mean I've never regretted going into medicine. Speaker 1: But I'm saying even at that point? You know--. Speaker 2: Even at that point I just never regretted it. It just seemed to be a natural thing to do. Now, now that you think of it, I had colleagues--my father had a physician friend who came--was a teacher in Guyana and came and studied medicine, and he had two daughters. One decided to go into medicine and one decided to go into dentistry. Now the dentist said that she regretted not going into medicine. Even though she continued to practice dentistry until she was not able, the whole time she regretted that she didn't go into medicine. Maybe she felt that dentistry was to constricting and just the mouth rather than the whole thing. But no, I never regretted it. I enjoyed it. It was fun until Uncle [Sam] started to look over your shoulder. You know. There was a time when you were an entity and you treated your patients, nobody interfered with you. And then when insurance starting coming in, there were more and more restrictions. You had to do this. You had to do that. You had to make out forms. You had to whatever. And then there were many restrictions and so on. So I had not been used to that. None of us who practiced early had not been used to that. And then it became more tedious, more paperwork, more responsible to other people. And then too, I was--as an older physician I was losing my skills. I wasn't able to keep up with all the new things, 'cause the body of medicine has just grown tremendously. It was almost like horse-and-buggy medicine when I took medicine. And you can imagine how it was many years before that. But you don't keep up with those skills unless you're at the hospital all the time. Well I didn't have a hospital practice, I practiced essentially in the office. And I started putting my patients in the hospital and treating them. But it came to--to go to the hospital to take care of one patient, with the time it took, it wasn't worthwhile. Story_ID: 11794 Speaker 1: I imagine it was maybe 400 or 500 [hospital beds at Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. I--we could check it. But I know later on we went up to--in recent years we went up to 700. And now all hospitals are in decline, so we're down--back down. But I would say 400 or 500 beds then. Speaker 2: And what also--I wanna get back to you. But--also I wanna know what the importance of this hospital in the community? The community is changing a lot, you know. And Harlem Hospital has a very historic role to play, you know, in this community. And I was hoping if you could just spend a little time addressing, you know, the role the hospital has played in the community. And then I wanna, you know, really come back to you and--. Speaker 1: Okay. First of all, it was a hospital to which--the public hospitals have always been hospitals where you could go whether you had money or not. And during many, many years during the depression people didn't have--they barely had money to go to a private doctor. And as I said, many of them--when I first came back to New York to practice in 19--there was a gap there that I hadn't filled in between when I finished medicine and finished my internship and the time I started practicing. I didn't start practicing until 1950. Speaker 2: Oh you didn't? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. I thought you--okay. But you went--you said in 1937 you went to Harlem Hospital. Speaker 1: And interned. Speaker 2: But intern not that long in--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Two years. Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: We had a two-year rotating internship. Story_ID: 11795 Speaker 1: I decided I wanted to specialize in OB/GYN [obstretics and gynecology]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I went to Homer G. Phillips [Hospital] in St. Louis [Missouri] to do a residency. In the meantime--and you didn't make much money as a resident in those days. I got twenty dollars as an internship and the residents had fifty dollars a month. But we had a room and board and uniforms. So I got there and spent a couple months. And my father [Charles Augustin Petioni] said, "I've heard of a job at Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio] as a school physician and I think you better take it, because I've got two more children to educate." So I said, "Okay." And I went to Wilberforce as college physician. I went to work for the--it was a combination. Even though I went to work for the church side, I serviced the school side too, because the campus is little. I don't know whether you know Wilberforce. But anyway it's (claps hands) right--the state bought the land right--so I stayed there for one year. Then moved down to Alabama State Teachers College [later Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] and spent two years there. Moved up to Bennett College [Greenboro, North Carolina] and spent three years there. And then I--and did some summer work at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. And then when my husband [Mallalieu Spellmeyer Woolfolk] came home from--in the meantime I got married. (laughs) Oh yeah. At Alabama State I met my husband. Okay. He had come down from--he had gone to--he was in Chicago [Illinois]. He had gone--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Was he from Chicago? Speaker 1: He was fr--originally from Mississippi--(pauses) family, Yazoo, Mississippi, moved to Green--wood? I get Greenberg and Greenwood mixed up. Grew up in Greenwood [Mississippi] with his grandparents--went to Rush University [unable to locate]. In those days those schools had the elementary, high school and college. So he went to Rush, I think, elementary and high school. And ended up in St. Louis, because he was a bad boy. I say bad boy--he was, you know--wouldn't conform. So he left Rush and his relatives took him in St. Louis. He was a big boy as a high school boy. So I don't--I get the impression maybe fourteen, fifteen he moved to St. Louis with relatives there. And went to work and went to school. And went to Lincoln [University of], Missouri [Jefferson City, Missouri] and then University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota--Masters]. And then went down to Alabama State Teachers College to teach before doing his Ph.D. So we met there and we married. And he went off to war. This was 1942. We married just before he went to--we'd known each other for two years. And he was part of the Tuskegee Airmen--He wasn't an airman, but he was that backup group that serviced the airmen. So he came back, he came back home. What year was that? (laughs) Speaker 2: Dr. Petioni, let me ask you this about--because I was just getting ready to say, I remember that part where you had gone to all these places, and I was--that was sort of confusing. Speaker 1: As college physician. Speaker 2: Right. So was that typical though the, you know, the transfer? You know, like you're going from Wilberforce for a year and then Bennett. Was that--or were these openings as one would--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) These were openings. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Wilberforce--at the end of the year I wasn't happy at Wilberforce. So there was an opening at Alabama State. You know, word gets around. And I went--I stayed there for two years. And as I said, met my husband there. And I decided that I wanted to--now why did I leave? Maybe because he was leaving. And I felt that I was kind of in a--where there was no place to go, you know, after a while. Speaker 2: But let me ask you about--now why weren't you happy at Wilberforce? Speaker 1: Why wasn't I happy at Wilberforce? (pauses) You know, I don't really remember. Speaker 2: Well do you think it was because (unclear)--was it--it wasn't because you were--was it the administration or was it lonely for you or--? Speaker 1: (Pauses) I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I'm not sure. Speaker 2: But then do--are any of those places that you liked, was it Bennett? I mean Alabama State you definitely met your husband. That should--. Speaker 1: Yeah. (laughs) That was an interesting experience, because I was really, you know, in the Deep South, cradle of Confederacy. And, of course, we--that was long before [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and Rosa Parks, so you sat in the back of the bus. But they respected you if you were a teacher or a doctor or-- so they would call you "Professor" or "Doctor," but they wouldn't call you "Miss" or "Mrs." or "Mr." And as a professional pers--as a teacher, oh yeah. Because Alabama State was the only college and they had a, you know--they were sort of good salaries so that, so that the (unclear) catered to you. And even in those days, I remember I had a--I went to the--I had a Pontiac in those days. Drove down with a Pontiac. I got the car in Ohio. Story_ID: 11796 Speaker 1: ...We knew the Caribbean culture. We didn't know too much about the American culture. (laughs) So yeah. So--And then when we went to parties, I remember distinctly when we went to parties, Papa [Charles Augustin Petioni] said, "You gotta be home at 12:00 [A.M.]." I said, "Pa, they don't start food until 12:00! How can you let us--!" (laughs) So and we all went together. My sister [Marguerite Alicia Petioni] and me and my brother [Julio Petioni, formerly Julio Forgenie] went to the parties. I didn't go by myself. So--and I remember we would come in and sneak up the stairs--and those stairs creaked. And we called ourselves getting in--sneaking in, and they knew we were coming in at 12:30 [A.M.] instead of 12. (laughs) But yeah. But she had the party. She had a brother, the American girlfriend. She had just her mother, a widow, and her and her brother. My Caribbean--they lived some twenty blocks up--my Caribbean girlfriend lived just two or three blocks from us. And they didn't have--I don't think they ever had any parties. It was more of a family. She had a brother too and a family base. So there were places we couldn't go. And friends we couldn't have--not that we wanted them. But oh yeah. Our friends--and many of our friends were Caribbean. Other families, you know, children of Caribbean friends. So I was very carefully brought up. And then with my in--what did you call it? Speaker 2: In--being introverted. Speaker 1: Being introverted. I didn't spread out like my sisters, so I didn't make friends as easily. So that's why he thought I needed Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. But I was--so that I was--I was not privy to the ways of the world so to speak. And, of course, we didn't smoke. My father said, "I don't smoke. I don't believe in smoking. You're just burning up good money." And you didn't drink. Papa always kept a little whiskey around the house that he would invite friends to have. 'Cause that was what you did when you had company. And wine--and we could have a taste of wine. Particularly on holidays, we could have a taste of wine. We could have a taste of all the holiday things. But you didn't drink. Because his father [Edgar Petioni] you remember, would stop at the rum shop on his way home on Friday. So you drank like a European--you drank because it was the thing to do as a, you know, person who is well-educated and all. So forth and so on--so I'm saying that--oh I--and I married this guy [Mallalieu Spellmeyer Woolfolk] who was kind of like my father, in that he'd been around and done everything, gone everywhere and had wide tast--had acquired wide tastes. He'd worked in homes and for people who, who educated him socially and, you know. Governor's house and all that kind of thing in his jobs as--whatever kind of work he could do. Just like my father had grown up doing--getting any kind of work that he could do. Story_ID: 11797 Speaker 1: So your husband's name? Speaker 2: Woolfolk. Mallalieu Spellmeyer Woolfolk. Speaker 1: Which is such an unusual name. Speaker 2: Because his father-- His grandfather was a Methodist minister and he was named after two of the Methodist bishops, I think, of that time who his father respected. So one was Bishop [Willard Francis] Mallalieu, one was Bishop [Henry] Spellmeyer. And that was added on to the Woolfolk. And he--okay. Why--okay. Can you spell it? I have it but can you--. Speaker 1: Mallalieu? Speaker 2: No, Woolfolk. Speaker 1: W-O-O-L-F-O-L-K. Speaker 2: F-O-L-K. 'Cause I thought it was a very unusual name--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It's unusual but there--I don't know where that original plantation was established. I think it was, maybe Georgia. Because we have branches. I've run into Woolfolks in New Orleans. I was--there was a few in Chicago [Illinois]. There are quite a few in [New] Jersey now. In fact, the Woolfolks have spread. And that group that--I understand that whole town in Yazoo, Mississippi were Woolfolks. And then they started spreading, because there were opportunities. So recently I had an interesting experience. I--they wrote me a letter to Muriel Woolfolk, that I owed money--thousands for educational loans. And I'm only--I'm Muriel Petioni Woolfolk. That was a Muriel Woolfolk and they checked that--I guess they'd lost track of this woman in telephone books and whatnot. Well I was not that Woolfolk, but I--but that comes close, Muriel Woolfolk, yeah. So I sent them my social security number and told them how old I was and so on and so on. Never borrowed money from anybody for any educational grants. In those days, you couldn't borrow--there was no money to borrow. Your family had to have money or you took out--were not even loans available for education in those days, you know. So--but it was quite a coincidence that there's a Muriel Woolfolk somewhere around, probably in this area, who borrowed money to go to school. Speaker 2: Now do you--that's the other thing. Did you take your husband's name? That's the--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No. Speaker 2: But see, I find all of this--I find--you know, as someone, you know, we're into 2000 or even, you know, I'd say twenty years ago, and the women's movement. I--you know, here you are, very--obviously very bright. And your father [Charles Augustin Petioni] has raised you very independent. And yet you marry, you marry a very, you know, intelligent man and then--that's what struck me. I said, "They don't have the same last name. This is not, this is not even--." (laughs) Speaker 1: Well when I took my--well I took my husband's name socially. But I kept--I finished medicine before I married him now, you know, Petioni. Not only that, my father--the Petioni name is a very well-known name. My father had made the name and we were known. Woolfolk would be--If I had said, "Muriel--Dr. Muriel Woolfolk," nobody would know who I was. Speaker 2: I know, but I'm just saying that that's pretty ahead of its time. You know, I mean now you see couples--I mean you know. But I'm just saying that--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It was not unusual for that time among our women who--no, no, no. We kept--if we finished medicine before we met, we kept--we used our name socially. Property, you know, Muriel Petioni Woolfolk. But I used it, but professionally I kept the Petioni as I said because, "Why not take advantage of a name that's well-known already." Right? Yeah. It would have been, well, almost suicide to say, "Muriel Woolfolk." So and I think he kind of resented it a little bit, but he got used to it. But it was not uncom-, of course, it's more and more common. In fact, I have a friend who married--who's a lawyer who married a cousin of mine, a young cousin of mine. And she won't even write the name on social--she just refused to use his name. And the family was shocked. Because when she writes her name instead of Gray--what's the name, Burns. His name is Burns. If she writes a note to you or writes--sends an invitation, she doesn't put Burns on the envelope, she puts her name. And I think that's the height of--I don't know how he puts up with it. But he's--he told me once he was very much in love with her. So he lets--she dominates that whole household. But anyway, that's enough of that. Speaker 2: (Unclear) someone (laughs) his mother may have felt the same way--well what did your mother-in-law think? Speaker 1: Of course. Huh? Speaker 2: What did she think of--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) She did--she wasn't in the picture when-she had already died. Speaker 2: Now let me ask you this though. So you marry, but you're still--you're married at Alabama State [Teachers College, later Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama]. But you still go to Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina] and you go to these other places. Is your husband--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Because he went off to the war [World War II]. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: See, he went off to the war right after we married. And then when he came back we went to Chicago, that was his home. And he had--he--oh yeah. He--that was his base. His father was there. His stepmother was there. And he wanted me to go there. And then he decided to pursue--he had a Master's and he decided rather than pursue education, he would go into law. Here again, law being a more--a profession where you had more freedom. So he went to law school and I stopped working, I became a housewife. And my son [Charles M. Woolfolk] was born then in 1947. So I was just a housewife. Speaker 2: 'Til 1950, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. And it--I couldn't get reciprocity. In order for me to get reciprocity--the only state that New York-- Well the only convenient state that New York had reciprocity with (pauses) The only way that I could've gotten a license to practice, let's put it that way, was either pass the Chicago [medical examination] board or go down to Tennessee and do a year's apprenticeship with a physician. And then take the board there and then get reciprocity, and I wasn't prepared to do that. So I couldn't practice medicine. So I just stayed as a housewife, and my circle was very small because it was his father and stepmother. We didn't have many--we didn't have a lot of money. So we just lived a very close life there. Speaker 2: Did you like Chicago? Or you weren't there enough to really--you--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I didn't dislike it. It wasn't like home. It wasn't like New York where I knew everybody--grew up here and knew everybody and had relatives. But I didn't dislike it. It was just a very confined, constricted life. Speaker 2: We didn't have much social life except with my in-laws. Because as I said, we had little money. We did buy a couple buildings there. I have--my father--oh, when I started working at Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] I would send money home to Papa to--well, to help. But also to put away for me. So when we went to Chicago I asked him to send me some of that money--we put money down on a house. So we had a house in Englewood, which is a suburb--I don't know what it's like now. And then--I don't remember why we sold that and bought a house in the heart of Chicago. I don't remember the address, but I know it was near one of those el [elevated train] lines, those off lines that--and which--and also which was rental. We rented out rooms and then in 1950 my father sent my cousin [Cecil Marquez]--he was coming through Chicago. And he said to me, "You know, you--time for you to come back to New York now. This fooling around being a housewife, you just don't get it. Now you just--" So--and other people had kept saying, "You know, that's why it isn't good to send--spend money on women in medicine. They'd marry and have children and then they don't practice. And it's a waste of money and time." So, well I knew it was time for me to become active. And the only way I could have would be to come back to New York. So I decided to come back to New York and brought my son with me, left my husband in Chicago. And then after a couple of years he joined me. Speaker 1: So was he okay with that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Didn't like it but--. (laughs) He was--he finished his law. He had a Doctor of Law degree from DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois] and started working--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh that's--you know, that's--'cause there weren't many blacks going to DePaul at that time. Speaker 2: Probably not, but he didn't have any trouble getting in. He was very bright. He did well. And he got a job with Human Resources. What did he do? Hey, I think he worked in one of these where they--rehabilitation and affirmative action and all that kind of thing. Even though affirmative action hadn't really started then. And after I got established in practice and all, he came. And we had the brownstone, so we had plenty of room. I stayed with my father and mother [Rosa Alling Petioni] until we saved enough money to buy a house in Teaneck [New Jersey]. And I lived in Teaneck from '55 [1955] to '70 [1970]. And then I moved back to New York, although my practice was in New York. It was really more of a bedroom community for me living in Jersey. Story_ID: 11798 Speaker 1: When you came back then, are you taking over your father's [Charles Augustin Petioni] practice at that-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He died one year after I came back [1951], so I moved right into his office. Speaker 1: So how was that when he died? That must have been, you know, hard for you as--you know, he had been such a dominant force in your life. No? Speaker 2: Well it was hard. But by that time I was a grown girl, and then, you know, established and had a sense of things. In the meantime, my--both by brother [Julio Petioni, formerly Julio Forgenie] and sister [Marguerite Alicia Petioni] died. So I was the head of the family. And I, you know--my father left money for my mother [Rosa Alling Petioni] and left the house. So in a way, she sustained herself by the money that I would contribute in rental. Speaker 1: So how did they die? Because they were young--way--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. My sister was the first to die. She died in--no, my brother was the first to die. My brother was a hemophiliac. Do you know about hemophilia? Transmitted from mother to son. And he struggled through high school and college [Saint Augustine's College, Raleigh, North Carolina] and medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] with it and would be in the hospital. I remember when he came to high school, Dewitt Clinton High School, was one of the big high schools--boys' high schools in Manhattan [New York, New York]. At--most of the trouble at that time--he would bleed into a joint. You know, they bleed internally--they bleed into a joint. So if it was his leg or his knee, Papa would say, "Well nothing wrong with your arms, you get on crutches and go on to school." So he'd get on crutches and go to school. So he was out very little during his high school years. And I don't think he was out that much--but he was out--he'd be out for three days a week. Maybe have to go to the hospital and come home. In medical school it continued. Sometimes he'd be out a week, but the guys would take his books and his homework so he would study while he was there, because it--there was a lot of pain, there was pain and discomfort. But anyway, he graduated from medical school in '39 [1939] from Meharry two years after I did, and got an internship at Provident Hospital in Baltimore [Maryland]. And during that year he would--maybe he was there nine months and he developed internal bleeding. And at that time--even at that time medicine wasn't anything near like it was now. And I don't know whether they even tried to operate. They weren't quite sure and he died from the bleeding. So he died in '39 [1939]. Thirty--he finished in '39 [1930] and died in '40 [1940]. And then my sister who had finished--got a Masters in psychiatric social work from Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts]--she was on her first job for the--it was Children's Aid Society. And she went out in the field one day and got wet and continued to work in those wet clothes. And came home with flu. And even after the flu was healed, she continued to be sick. And she was sick--we didn't know what was wrong with her, she was just sick. And (pauses) she was home at least a year, and she got--she went to visit friends in St. Louis [Missouri]. She had a good girlfriend who had moved to--married and moved to St. Louis. And she went on a vacation and got a job there and went. And I think she had been there maybe a year, maybe less than a year and she got sick. And her girlfriend was out of town--somehow she had to go to the hospital--couldn't move her--had stiffness in her arms and hands. She went to the hospital and the doctors attributed it to arthritis. Put her in the hospital and she wrote Mama and said--or wrote Papa--she wrote home and said that she was in the hospital, found stiffness in her arms and shoulders. And they would bring and put the food at the bedside--and she couldn't feed herself, so they would come and take the food away. So she says, "Please come get me because I'm not--doctor doesn't seem to know what to do for me. I'm not being taken care of." Her girlfriend was out of town. I don't remember how long she was in the hospital. I guess she went on an extended vacation, so she had no support system. And she said, "So come get me." In the meantime, my father had dreamed--when he got the letter he had dreamed he said, two nights before, "Babe was coming home in a hearse." So when he got the letter or the call, he wasn't surprised, he says. So he sent Mama to get her. And Mama said, "Well, what do you mean you don't know. I mean, would arthritis do this? And have you taken x-ray?" You know, lay people are beautiful. He said, "No." He took an x-ray of her neck. Because this was a kind of a thing that was coming from the shoulders down to the hands. Took an x-ray of the neck and she had developed tuberculosis of the cervical spine with two vertebrae on the--. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Sorry. She had developed tuberculosis of the cervical spine with two vertebrae about to collapse. If she had turned her head quickly, it would have collapsed. So they put her in a brace, a neck brace. And she had to take a Pullman. Papa--Mama had to hire a, you know, Pullman car and put her through--the stretcher through the window and brought her home. And she went straight to Harlem Hospital [Center]. Now the illness--at that time nobody thought to take an x-ray of the neck. There didn't seem to be a connection between the neck and the--they took X-rays of the chest. The chest was clear. So by the time she got to Harlem Hospital, she was paralyzed from the neck down. The only thing she could move--well she couldn't move her head that much 'cause she had a brace on. So she developed--it was determined that she developed a large abscess around this--these disintegrated vertebrae that was pressing. So I think she lived a matter of a week or ten days. And then the abscess broke and just (pause) flooded her lungs and she became asphyxiated, yeah. So this was '45 [1945]? Speaker 1: So in a ten-year period you lost your brother, your father and your sister? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so it was you and your mother left? Speaker 2: Me and my mother left, right. Story_ID: 11799 Speaker 1: You're taking over your father's [Charles Augustin Petioni] practice is that--I mean because he's established himself--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --at Harlem [Hospital Center, New York, New York]--, Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and at--that's when you stepped in to take the practice over. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. And some people that I brought from my cousin's [Cecil Marquez]--where I'd been at my cousin. And then I devel--I mean I add to that, of course, but a lot of his patients stayed with me. And many of the women particularly were pleased to have a woman physician. Because there weren't that many women physicians--there were quite a few in New York, but many women felt that they were more comfortable with another woman. So most of my practice--I had--I guess I had two-thirds women and maybe one-third men, because they would bring their husbands and sons and brothers. And there's one guy--I remember one guy who was teased. He told me one day that he was being teased a lot by his colleagues. He said, "I don't care. A doctor is a doctor. As long as they're a good doctor, I don't care whether it's woman or a man." But then I think that's the way a lot of them felt. That I--we bonded with each other and we--they were happy with the kind of care they got from me. And if it was a purely--condition that it was--where they were embarrassed, I would refer them to other people. In fact, I was very--I referred people at a drop of a hat if I felt like I couldn't handle what I was doing, I would refer them to specialists. Yeah. You know. So I developed a fairy large mixed practice in Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: When you say mix--mixed in--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, no, no. Just mixed as far as men and women are concerned. Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear). Speaker 2: It was--we had a black--there were a few Spanish people living in some of the projects, but they--not speaking the language, they tended to go to their own physicians who spoke the language. Yeah. And did you find that in--now wait. Didn't you study to be OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] too? So was that-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The two-year rotating internship required a sort of specialty at the end. The last six months. So we had to select a specialty. Or really, there were spots. And my--when I got my internship it was OB/GYN. So we had a general training for the first eighteen months, and then the last six months we spent--so I spent that. So I had a feeling since I spent those six months that I wanted to go on in that field. But as I said, that was thwarted because of the financial situation. Yeah. Speaker 2: So you didn't--you didn't--you weren't really delivering babies? You were practicing--your practice--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) General medicine. At first I delivered a few babies. In fact, I delivered a couple babies in the home--we were still doing that. And people--actually I hadn't planned to, but she called me at the last minute and I delivered the baby. But it was a risk to deliver the babies in the home even then. And particularly since I wasn't particularly trained. So I think after the first few I decided that I wouldn't do that. They'd have to go to the hospital. And I would say, "Call the ambulance," if they--if it was the last minute. Where we would go get them and, you know, take them in and keep them for a while. And be sure the baby was al--they were--would be alright and send them home. But in those days you made a lot of house calls. In fact, house calls were what you did. And I made house calls too. And, you know as a woman you always felt you had to keep up with the guys, because if you didn't, "Oh that's the trouble with women in medicine. You don't do this, you don't do that." So I remember two o'clock one morning I went--I don't remember where it was. It was two o'clock in the morning--I took a cab. The taxi said, "What are you doing going out at this time?" I said, "Well I'm a physician and I have a house call." And he said, "Well you know, I don't think you ought to do that. A lot of men don't do it at night. So I don't think you ought to do that." (laughs) So I think after that I stopped doing it at night. I'd do house calls during the day. But yeah, but definitely you made house calls. Half of your practice was house calls. And some of those early days, you made a lot of money, And in private house calls, it added to your income. But at that time, the Welfare Department, in order to accommodate the people who were on welfare, who needed--who would get caught up in being sick at home, they had a panel of physicians who volunteered to make house calls to people on public assistance. So if they were too sick to go to the clinic, they would call in the morning and they would assign us to go to people in our neighborhood. So I made a lot of money in those early days. But at first--particularly before I stepped into my father's office--in fact, that helped pay the rent many a month. However--and in spite of the fact that you only got three dollars per house call. And sometimes you treated--and frequently it was children--you treated not only--you may treat three, or four, or five people in the family. You might treat the mother and all the kids or several of the kids or whatever. But you still got that same three dollars. But even in spite of that, because of the economy, it was a lot of money. In fact, when I first started practicing in '50 [1950], we got two dollars for an office visit and three dollars for a house call. So it seemed very little, but it was part of the economy. It--you didn't make a lot of money, but you made a better living than most people. Speaker 2: You were solidly middle-class at this--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 2: Right. Or even upper middle-class. Speaker 1: My patients weren't. Speaker 2: No, but you as a doctor. Speaker 1: I was. Yes. Oh definitely. Yeah. Speaker 2: So but then, let me ask you, during this period from '55 [1955] to '70 [1970], you are--are you now working at Harlem Hospital at all? Are you--if people are sick and they have to be put in the hospital--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: --that's where they went--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No, no, no. What I was doing when I first came back (pauses) most of us had a job in the morning and then we'd practice in the afternoon and evenings. We had to have a job, 'cause practice wasn't that--except for those people who were well-established. And even those, if they didn't get paid, they spent time in the hospital to keep their craft up-to-date. But I got a job with the [New York] Department of Health and School Health. They hired physicians in their, in their school--to work in the schools and also to work in the pre-school clinic--the babies up to school age. So I got a job in school health, which, at that time you, didn't have to be a pediatrician. You could--they preferred pediatricians. But you--just as long as you were a physician, you could get a job in the schools. And you could work two days a week, three days a week part time. So it was very flexible. So I worked, I think three days a week in the school and I got a job working in the clinic two days a week. Now I'm not sure they were paying me for working at a clinic. But I needed that to--for my experience and being in a hospital and being--keeping up on new things and requirements and all. I don't think--in fact, that was volunteer. And we were happy to do that. Because, as I said, "You can't spend all day in your office." Well you can, but you don't learn anything. It becomes incestuous, kind of. (laughs) So most of us volunteered some time in the clinic and then other--so I had--so I was paid for three days a week in the Department of Health. And this was during [New York Mayor Fiorello] LaGuardia's time. And I think we got--I think we got five dollars a session. Five dollars sticks out in my mind. I think it was just five dollars for--we spent two and a half hours in the morning. Like 9 [o'clock, A.M.] to 11:30 [A.M.]. And--but as I said it wasn't much. But it was enough to sustain us and keep us going. Story_ID: 11800 Speaker 1: I worked three days a week--three half days a week in the schools and two half days a week in the clinic. In my working in the schools, I became maybe more than other physicians, or more than most of the other physicians, I became involved with the total care of the child. I just didn't do the routine things. Like physical exams, immunizations and whatnot. But if a kid's--I sometimes might call. And many of the kids were on public assistance at that time. I might call in the caseworker with the parent and have conferences as to why the kid wasn't doing well. Or why he wasn't getting what he should've been getting. I delved further than just the physical aspects of the child. Or I engaged the teachers in why the kid wasn't doing well. For example, if they had asthma or epilepsy, I would engage the teacher as far as how to treat the attack. Or the mother and the teacher, as far as how to handle the illness at home, as he gets to school, and the cooperation. So I got the reputation, I guess, for going a little more--above and beyond just doing my job. The (unclear)--you know, we were talking about job description? I went beyond my job description. In addition to that, being one of the early physicians, people would ask me out to speak in the community. "Come speak to my group here. Come speak to my kids there." So I--and I got to know the whole school--the teachers, the principals, the social workers, the assistant principals. And being a woman, I was the only woman in my team. So being a woman made you a little unusual and distinctive,because there were not that many of us around--they were around, but not that many. So you had a chance really to shine, because you were different. And I became involved in my sorority for a while. And then became involved in some of the life of Harlem [New York, New York], having grown up in Harlem. And I knew a lot of people and went to school in Harlem and all. So it--and following my father's [Charles Augustin Petioni] footsteps who was very much all over the place, as I said. He worked with Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] in breaking the thing on 120--that boycott on 125th Street, when we say, you know, "We can't work here. We're not gonna buy your materials." He was already involved--he was, in addition to being involved in the independence of the West Indies and the Pan-African Movement. He was also involved in the civil life of Harlem. In fact, among the things he did--and I have to tell you this to give me my background--he helped establish--he was one of the early group that establish Carver Federal Savings Bank, which was the first black-owned bank in New York. He was one of the people who were called to kind of work it out, because he had organized a bank in Trinidad, the "Penny Bank", which later became known as the Trinidad Co-operative Bank [Limited]. And it was the first indigenous bank in the West Indies. And he did that because Barclay's Bank, which was a big British bank, was the only bank there. People who made--the average black person couldn't save. I don't know how much you had to put in to save money. But it was probably maybe five dollars or ten dollars. And they made five dollars, ten dollars, fifteen dollars, thirty dollars a month. So he ordered a bank where you could save a penny at a time. A penny was two cents in those days. So out of what you made, you could save a penny at a time. And, of course, if you save a penny every week or every month, it added up--which you couldn't do in the Barclay's British bank. So he got some--he conceived the idea and got some of his friends to go with him. And then they established the "Penny Bank". So it was known that he established a bank in Trinidad, and when some of the people in the community decided we needed our own bank, they knew Papa had. So they invited him for--the first three or four people to talk about it and all. So, of course, you know, Carver Bank is still the only surviving black bank in New York. Well they had established a commercial bank, but that failed, so that--we haven't had anything. So--and then he also--we didn't have a hospital to which to take our private patients. So we found a hospital building on 122nd Street, and the doctors in Harlem banded together and bought that building as a--the [Mount] Morris Park Hospital. So he was one of that group who banded together to establish that. So he was really very active in the Harlem community, so the name was well known. I was "Petioni's daughter." (laughs) So the people would call on me. And I--they'd ask me to speak and I'd speak. There was no--I learned how to speak early. It was difficult. But as you speak, you get, you know, practice. So I became involved too in the life of the community. And being one of the early women doctors--And one of the--one of the--what I'm saying is that I worked in my community. None of the others practiced medicine and they didn't mix much with the population. So I started that by speaking to groups, and being a role model. Story_ID: 11801 Speaker 1: I became involved in the local medical society, the New York component of the NMA [National Medical Association], which was Manhattan Central Medical Society. My father [Charles Augustin Petioni] had been--my father and mother [Rosa Alling Petioni] had been involved with the society of the earlier time. And there were two societies that were melded together. One was the Manhattan Society of and one was the--Anyway the two societies finally were called the Manhattan Central. Which sounds odd. But that's why it's called Manhattan Central. So I became involved in the--for many years I was treasurer. For many, many, many years I was treasurer. It looked like I was gonna be treasurer forever. So that I became involved in the life of the medical group. And in 1974, most of the women--most of the physicians--most of the black physicians (pauses) up until what--the '50s [1950s] finished at either Howard [University Medical College, Washington, D.C.] or Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]--I would guess 95 percent. Because they were taking them at Harvard [Medical School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and at Yale [University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut] and some of these other places. But essentially, most of us finished there. But then you had this whole new crop of women with affirmative action of the '60s [1960s] that were finishing from other schools. Now--and we were having--some of us who were working in the clinic got together, and we were talking about the fact that there were a lot of women who were coming out of medical school that we didn't know, and they didn't know us. And we said, "You know, it's a shame that we don't know us." Because we had always been--those of who were around were very nurturing about new people who were coming into profession. In fact, there was a time when I would make a point of calling them if I knew they were in the neighborhood. And saying, "Hello." And saying, "You need any help?" or whatever. And if they opened in the neighborhood, I would visit them. So the idea was that we should--"Well we oughta do something about that. We ought to find some way to meet these young--." And some of these young women were coming in cold. They were one from here and two from there, and they were really isolated. And they'd gotten through medical school really feeling very alienated, and finishing residencies with great difficulty. So we felt that they were coming out now in private practice. And in that time, there still weren't a whole lot of jobs, except like the little jobs I was telling you about. So we talked, "It would sure be nice if we could--." So a couple months later, one of the women who was involved, who had just come out of a residency said, "Dr. Petioni, what happened to that idea of yours that we should try to get the women together?" See here I'm thrusted in a leadership role. Okay. Now her boss who was in dermatology was--well she finished a few years behind me [at Howard University Medical College], but she was a senior--but she was not an outgoing person--very close. So I said, "Well okay. Well, let's do it." So I said, "Why don't you and all the girls you know who are in medicine get a list of the names of the people you know. We all have friends who we know are physicians. You get your list and your friends to get their list." And we accumulated a list of 100 black women physicians in the area. That's New York, New Jersey--Greater New York and New Jersey--maybe one from Connecticut. And we called a meeting--this woman who was right out of a residency, she had married a guy who had a very lovely brownstone and a nice home and room. So she agreed to have the first meeting there at her house. And I think we--forty people showed up, which we thought was terrific, and a lot of young ones that we didn't know. And I tell the people jokingly--and I guess when we went to medical school--we couldn't look too feminine. You know, we had to be kind of plain. Whereas these girls came out with open-toed sandals with painted toenails, hair hanging down their backs. Really very feminine--didn't look like doctors at all. And we were delighted, (laughs) you know. We'd come into our own. We could look like (laughs) us rather than the men. (laughs) And they were delighted to meet us and we were delighted to meet them. So we decided to form an organization, and there was a question as to what to name it. And one of the original members who is still living, and was a close girlfriend of mine did some research. And found that the first woman who finished from a qualified medical school and who practiced in the New York area was a doctor by the name of Dr. Susan [Smith] McKinney [Steward] of Brooklyn [New York]. She finished in the New York Women's Infirmary. At that time, the New York Women's Infirmary had a whole staff of women, in spi--in those days when there weren't that many women, they had a whole staff of women--mostly white, but women. Had a practice in Brooklyn, opened up several clinics for working girls in the New York area. Was married to a minister, played the organ in his church every Sunday. And we decided we'd name the society after her. She finished in--around the 1870's. And we wanted to name it the Susan McKinney Medical Society. Well her grandchildren--oh she married Rev. McKinney. Rev. McKinney died, and she married a Rev. Steward and moved to Wilberforce, Ohio. And these grandchildren who had grown up under Rev. Steward said, "That we could not name it--." They got wind of it some how. Because the grandson grew up with them. "You can't--you gotta name it Steward. Because she spent half of her professional life under Steward. And if you do this--if you don't Steward will sue you." Felt very strong about it. So we decided to name it Susan Smith, which was her maiden name, McKinney Steward Medical Society--so nobody could get angry. So that's the name of the society we organized. And we've been in operation since 1974. We still meet. Some people think there isn't as much need. But we still have a core of people who enjoyed being, you know, being involved. And we've made friends and done a lot of that. The main purpose was to network and to get to know each other, to promote women in medicine, to encourage women to go into medicine. Anything that involved women in medicine we wanted to do. So as I said, from '74 [1974] to now we're in operation. Now some people give me credit--I was the president for the first ten years of the organization. And that was probably because I had a wide social contact. In fact, one of the doctors asked me, "Muriel, which generation do you belong to? You know everybody. You know your father's generation. You know your generation. You know the younger generation." So I said, "Well I was a daughter of a physician. I got to know all those people. And then my generation. And then, of course, the younger generation." So I span three or four generations of people. But okay--so in 1976, when affirmative action was really going full blast, I started getting letters from people across the country saying, "We are looking for a black woman physician to do this, that or the other, across the country." And, of course, the idea of a black woman was--you had a double affirmative. You got credit for a black and a woman. Well I didn't know women across--and we didn't wanna go way out West somewhere, so the only thing to do--oh, in the meantime, when we went to the National Medical Association conventions, there were so few of us, that we really didn't know each other. There was no really common place to meet. Because I would go into a family practice section, the pediatricians would go into the pediatric section, the psychiatrists--and never the twain would meet. So I decided that in order for us to get--in order to fill these jobs, we had to get to know each other and where everybody was and what their specialties were. But we had to figure some way to meet and to get to know each other. So I got my bunch of New York people who belonged to the society or just other people I knew. 'Cause we had--by that time, we had a lot of women physicians at Harlem. A lot. For a while, we had almost fifty percent. So here again, I said, "When you go back to your section, you get all the names of the women in your section. And bring me the list and we're gonna call a meeting." And as I said, we were so few that we got mixed up with the women--the wives--the women auxiliaries, 'cause they were walking around looking very important. So we didn't know who were wives and who were doctors. So we got the names of the women physicians. And before we left that year, we called a meeting of the names we gotten hold of. And then we got names of people from Texas, California, Chicago [Illinois], all of them. We had maybe thirty, forty, fifty girls at that first meeting. And they were delighted, they were really delighted. Just--some of those early women became presidents and delegates and House of Delegates and Chairman of the Board and Presidents. And they were women who felt the same way I did. You know, "Lets get together and do something." So the second year we planned a luncheon. And I did--oh I wrote and got somebody to get a place, and wrote and got a caterer, and tried to spread the word that we were getting together. And I think at that first luncheon we had about twenty-five. And at each year it got better and better. And I finally got the--and made them put us--our luncheon on the official--when they send the program out, and where you pay in advance. Like for this or that or the other, to put us on the thing. And the date we would have the luncheon. And then we started getting more people to know about us, and to participate. And then finally, and I don't know how many years. About four or five years later, the women who belonged--who were in the House of Delegates petitioned to have--and we had a President who was very open, to have--to establish a Department of Women's Concerns. Because they had various departments of various concerns. And they established Women's Concerns. Which made us an official part of the National Medical Association. And they gave us--they carry on the--after a while, I got tired and I couldn't do it any more. And I passed it on to one of--the girl who was a resident and who moved to Chicago at the time. She had it for a couple of years. And now the NMA handles that. The House of Delegates appoint people to serve on that council. And then they arrange the meeting. Now we have a half-day of meeting plus a luncheon, which is regularly scheduled. So that they--it comes from headquarters [in Washington, D.C.] rather than an individual President from doing it privately. So now we have overflow crowds at that luncheon, 30 and 40--300 and 400 women attending that luncheon from all over the country. It is a--so I got from organizing the women here to organizing women of the National Medical Association. And then I guess those are my big--that made me kind of nationally known in the medical profession. Story_ID: 11802 Speaker 1: You came along at a time--I mean when women weren't really--I mean it was, you know, just one or two. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: --And at the same time, you have played a role of nurturing other people and also being active in the community. You know, as you said, because there are plenty in the profession. And they just work, you know, alone--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously). Very quietly. Yeah. Speaker 1: --And I'd like to get your--and yet your husband [Mallalieu Spellmeyer Woolfolk] had to be supportive of all this. You had a father [Charles Augustin Petioni] who like pushed you. And in this process, the introvert became less introverted. Speaker 2: Yes. Less and less. And by the time I turned forty, I said, "You know, there's gotta be more to life than medicine. And I got to get out here and do something besides medicine." So then I thought that I needed to branch out. And one of the ways--big ways I branched out was joining the New York Coalition of 100 Black Women, which had just been established about two years--and a friend had invited me. And I wanted to get to know other people in other professions, because I didn't know them I didn't know there were vice presidents of companies--black women--and editors and authors and all that. I had no way of meeting people like that, 'cause that was not my circle. My circle was education and medicine. So that gave me an opportunity to really meet people, black women across the board from secretaries to--and the New York Coalition has not been bougie. You know, the other chapters have been kind of--you had to be voted in. But this way, if you had a friend and said, "Would you like to join?" You bring the friend to a meeting, and if that person would pay their dues, you just pay your dues and you're a member. Very open and very--and it's funny how water seeks its own level, you know. If you don't belong, you realize you don't belong, you don't continue to come. But we've had as many as 500 in a membership. We average maybe 200 or 300--it fluctuates, people come and people go. But it's been a wonderful opportunity for me to meet black women in all the professions. Not only law, teaching, medicine, but corporations of various kinds. And really up--vice presidents--and Toni Fay. And she's a person certainly you should--one of the people you should interview. Who has been national--she worked with Dorothy Height for many years, and went on to work for Time [Time Warner, Inc.] as a community--national community whatever (laughs) vice president. Just retired when they made that--with AOL [America On Line]--Warner. Well I think she may decide to take a buyout and came out all with a very good package. Story_ID: 11803 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life and what you've done, are you surprised at all? Speaker 2: I'm even surprised as to why people think so much of me. I mean people say, "All you've done Dr. Petioni. All you've done for the community, and all you've done--" I said, "What have--what have I done? You know, really! Will you tell me what I've done? I don't know what I've done." I don't know the extent to which whatever I've done has made an impact--the kind of impact that I made. I don't know my strength. And I don't use my--when I say I use my--I seldom use--ask people to do things, political favors or other favors. Really, I've never asked--thank God I've never had to ask for myself. But I don't even--and if somebody comes and asks me for help, I do the best that I can. But I don't--for instance, [U.S.] Congressman [Charles] Rangel [of New York] says, who's been a patient of mine and who--we've been very good friends--mother was a patient of mine originally. And he says, "You know, Muriel, you never ask me for anything. You know, what can I do for you?" I said, "Well really I don't need anything." So people keep telling me, you know. And I don't really, you know--an opportunity opens and I see a need--I didn't tell that to somebody and I thought it was a good way to say it. During my lifetime, a need seems to present itself and nobody's filling that need. And I've moved in and filled it. It was perfectly natural. It was as if I--it was an easy way to move in there and frequently it was organizing or sharing information, or helping to organize, or get other people interested in supplying that need. And it was not difficult. I didn't have to turn somersaults to do it. I had the background and the exposure. And I think that one of the things that makes me different is that I've had a varied background--grew up in New York, worked in the South all those years, where I got a feeling of Southern--the whole Southern thing--working in black colleges. And, you know, New Yorkers say, "Oh those black colleges. Oh, those Southern people, you know." And we came to realize those Southern people--we went to school poorer with one suitcase of clothes, and many of them--clothes that we'd had. Those Southern girls come up there with two trunks, and their families would drive them up in Rolls Royces [automobile]. The Southern girls really had it. Well that's what Howard [University Medical College, Washington, D.C.] taught me. That whole Southern culture, those professionals were wealthy. But black professors up here were poor compared to those Southern physicians where they had very few--no hospitals. And they--and those people owned dynasties like funeral homes. Or they owned a funeral home and a this and a that like the [Garlington Jerome] Sutton family from Texas. They were the undertakers, they were the teachers, they had other businesses. A whole Sutton dynasty. Percy Sutton [former Borough President of Manhattan] says he had--I think he was the youngest of eight or nine children. And his mother was his teacher and his father was the principal (laughs), you know what I mean. So the exposure to the Southern culture, the Caribbean culture and the American culture and my father's [Charles Augustin Petioni] activism gave me a different kind of background, which made me comfortable in doing some of these things. And getting more and more confidence. And I'm still getting more. So that as--I've closed my office now--it's twelve years now. And even in my board meetings, you know, I'll come out and say what I want. Now it doesn't matter what they think of me. You know, in earlier years you (laughs) had to be careful of your reputation--what people think of you and whether they'll accept you or not. Now if I have something to say, I say it. Even if I think it may be not popular, because that's the way I feel. And I think I have the right to say what I feel in light of my whole experience and background. So--and I guess maybe the example of my father's activism exposed me to a lot of people. Now when I was growing up, for example, the British Council would come to my house any old time. My father had meetings with these people involved in all these act--and so that we had all kinds of people. Black, white, Caribbeans, Americans, because of his activism. So I was a little bit more comfortable with a wide variety of people. And when I started practicing medicine, they would have meetings downtown--drug companies and various organizations meeting down--and when I say downtown, in the majority community. And one or two of us would be only people to go down there. The other black physicians wouldn't go because they felt so uncomfortable. Well I felt uncomfortable too, but I said, "I'm going down so they know that there are black physicians and black women physicians around." I felt that it was in a way my duty to promote and to show people downtown where they'd only met people in the service industry--it wasn't there fault. That's all--how do you come in contact with people? You come in contact with the people who are around you who serve you, or who whatever. So it was a conscious thing for me to--and sometimes, you know, a kind of nervousness to show people there were black people were doing things and black women who were doing things. Story_ID: 11804 Speaker 1: Remember I told you that my father [Charles Augustin Petioni] interned at St. Agnes Hospital in Raleigh, North Carolina. And he met the Delaneys [Henry Beard Delaney and Nanny Logan Delaney]--he met the senior Delaney who was President of the hospital in and also was very involved in Saint Augustine['s] College [Raleigh, North Carolina]. So when he came up here, he bonded, because the father had told him that he had children up here. So he went and met the Delaneys. There were two boys and two girls, as you recall. One girl became a teacher [Sarah Louise 'Sadie' Delaney]. (pauses) The girl became a dentist [Dr. Annie Elizabeth 'Bessie' Delaney], one of the boys became a dentist, and the other boy became a lawyer. And they had offices together on 7th Avenue between 135th and 136th Street, upstairs. So Papa took me one day to meet the Delaneys. Particularly the lady dentist. Because he wanted to expose me to other women in the professions, which I did. Later Dr. May [Edward] Chinn who was one of the early prominent women physicians in New York [New York]--there were other women physicians in New York, but she too was more open and participated in a the life--the medical life of the community. She was interning at Harlem Hospital [Center] when I was in college [New York University, New York, New York]. And he said, "I want you to meet Dr. May Chinn. She's a black woman interning at Harlem Hospital." So I don't think he made any appointment. He just went and--what do you call it? Paged her. (laughs)--took me there and paged her. And told her, "Dr. Chinn, I want you to meet my daughter who wants to be a physician." So he made it a point to expose us to women. We were already in the professional community, but they were mostly men--exposed to black women who were doing things. Okay. So that too. "If they can do it, you can do it. You don't have to be brilliant." He even said, "As long as you have a strong C average, you can do anything you wanna do, if you are focused." So he gave me the confidence. And another one of my colleagues who is now ill, said that her mother told her that--as a black woman she said, "You're a beautiful black woman." She was dark too. Very dark. "You're a beautiful black woman. And you can do anything you wanna do." And the mother was a--worked in service. Of course, a lot of our women who were very bright worked in service, 'cause that was the only thing--they couldn't go on higher educationally. But she told her, "Edith--." Her name's Edith Reed (ph.). And she became very, very active in the medical society--became a cardiologist and had a wonderful practice. And her mother told her that, "You can do anything you wanna be as a black woman. Don't let anybody tell you anything else." And it was funny, I ran into a woman who I worked with at the [New York] Department of Health [and School Health] who her mother worked for--it's funny how small. And, of course, a lot of our men and women have come from modest beginnings, but they had families who would encourage them and say, "You can do anything. Things are tough. But it--education's the key. And all you gotta do is--we'll find the money, or you'll find the money." Because in those days, money was the thing, you couldn't--all of these loans were just not known of. So I'm saying that with that whole--oh I wouldn't be the same. (pauses) I--and as I said, he believed in equal opportunity, so he pushed. And a lot of those early Caribbean people pushed their women. We have, we have several Caribbean--we have several women my age or close to my age--not my age--little younger than me who are second-generation physicians. One American and all the rest are Caribbean. Four or five that I could name you now. But those Caribbean men pushed their women. Story_ID: 11805 Speaker 1: Now do you consider yourself Caribbean-American or African-American, or African-American-Caribbea (laughs) or whatever? African-Caribbean-American. Speaker 2: (Laughs) Well I guess its African-Caribbean-American. I still belong to--I belong to a Trinidad organization called Gayap [community-based works projects; means "to lend hands"]. It was organized by some of the men who at the independence of Trinidad raised money for lights for the [Queen's Park] Savannah. The Savannah is a big park area. And they raised money to light the Savannah. And they had a women's auxiliary. (laughs) In those days, it was all men, including my father [Charles Augustin Petioni]. But it was organized by a guy who was an ophthalmologist. And we--they let us women be the--I was just a young girl at the time it was organized. But then they all died out and the women took over. So most--the organization is mostly women with a few men. But we are alive and well. There are only about average fifteen of us, but we meet once a month. We have a dinner meeting. Somebody--everybody takes something to the dinner. We've rented a place where we meet, and we talk Trinidad talk. And some of them go back and forth a lot--some of them still have deep roots in Trinidad. Some of them are like me, who were born there, or married or whatever. But we have--and we've kept together just to retain our Trinidadness. And I was telling you that my father when he came here organized the Trinidad Benevolent Association, which--that finally died out. Although they have a Trinidad and Tobago Alliance, which is an alliance of all the West Indian clubs. They're about eight or ten of--clubs all over the New York area. Tobago, Trinidad--Trinidad and Tobago and the ex-policemen, ex-firemen, ex--but we get together once a year and have a big dinner dance, and have a lot of fun. And play calypso, dance calypso. Story_ID: 11806 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the organization of the Friends [of Harlem Hospital, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Friends, okay. That's good. And I guess that's my main--That's the thing that's made me famous. (laughs) At the 100th anniversary of the hospital--see, I'd interned there. Oh yeah. When I--I finally dropped out of the--I stopped working in the medical clinic, because I was asked to be supervisor of my--of the Central Harlem physicians, and then East Harlem opened up. And I became supervisor of both Central Harlem and East Harlem. So in order to do that, I had to transfer my time. So I worked four half days with them. And at that time, most of the doctors took Wednesday off, so Wednesday was my day off. So even though I was no longer at the hospital per se, I referred a lot of my patients over there. I knew a lot of the guys there. And having belonged--active in the [Manhattan Central] Medical Society--most of the fellows of Harlem were active in the Medical Society, so I became known. Oh yeah. Okay. In 19--so I worked with the [New York] Department of Health [and School Health] until--I think I had to retire when I was seventy. So I was let go then. And the head of the Department of Pediatrics applied for a grant. Proposals were sent out as to--okay. The School Health Program was--had been a very well-known, well-recognized program. Not only in New York, but in the country and in the world. So many people came to study our program, to see what we did in school health. In the meantime, the city had already started cutting down funds for carrying out the School Health Program. They weren't doing what they had been doing--what they should've been doing. So they did and parents complained. So they sent out request for proposals to caregivers in the New York area who had special--who wanted to do pilot projects in school health. And they wanted to be involved. So Harlem Hospital, the Director of Pediatrics at Harlem Hospital [Dr. Margaret Heagarty] applied for the grant. Since she knew that I was in school health, she asked me if I would review the grant and work with her. In the meantime, she agreed to lend me some of her residents who didn't have work to do there in my school health program, because we'd already cut down. So after we got the grant, a couple people got it in the Bronx [New York], we got it in Manhattan--a Spanish clinic got it in Manhattan. She asked me if I would work with her as consultant to the program. I told her, "I only had Wednesday off. I don't see how I could find the time." She said, "Okay, I'll take your Wednesday." (laughs) So Wednesday--I gave Wednesday, every Wednesday, four Wednesdays a month to supervise the program kind of, and to be consultant and to--since I'd already been experienced as supervisor. So I was--I really hadn't--and I was paid through Columbia [University, New York, New York] to work at Harlem, because that's--we have an affiliation and many of the physicians are hired--paid by Columbia, but they work at Harlem. So with the 100th anniversary of the hospital, we wanted to have a big bang, and nobody quite knew how to do it or who would share the thing--who would tie it all together. And they would invite me to these meetings. "Come Dr. Petioni, we need you. Let's talk about this." And they had meeting and meetings and meetings, and they couldn't quite get anybody to bring it together. So one of the women who worked at Harlem who was secretary to the Medical [Examination] Board said, "I think that Dr. Petioni should do it." I looked at her (laughs) out of the corner of my eye. Out in the meeting--"I think Dr. Petioni should do it." Well I'd never done anything like that. This was a big project to tie together a 100th anniversary celebration. And at that time, Diane Lacey [Winley] was also attending the meeting. She had been on the Health and Hospitals [Corporation] board for years as an activist--she was there. So I said, "Well okay. I'll take it if Diane will be my Co-Chair." Diane said, "Yes." But I couldn't take a hold of Diane after that. I was the Chair--I was the whole Chair. I couldn't even get Diane to meet with me to talk about it--she just. So I was it, all by myself--scared, didn't know what I was gonna do. Didn't know how to do it. But it happened that the public relations person down at headquarters, at Health and Hospital Corporation was a black group. The whole--he's now with one of these big insurance--I mean publicity companies. He said, (whispers) "Don't bother Muriel. I'll help you--we'll help you. That's alright. We'll take it. Even though we have eleven hospitals to do, we'll see you through this. Don't worry about it. We'll help you." So we decided we wanted to have a big celebration--a dance, dinner dance. And we also wanted to have a conference on black health. Where we would invite people from across the country to talk about black health--and the guys helped me. They helped me organize, helped me get in touch with people, and it was really very successful. We had a thousand people at that first dinner dance. So, "Ain't no stoppin' us now." (laughs) We were going. Harlem Hospital had--which had always been the hub, just like Harlem [New York, New York] has been the capital of the world; Harlem Hospital was the hospital of the world, because we had trained people in all professions. Doctors, nurses, technicians and whatnot. So at that time, we decided--we had been talking for years. We'd been meeting for years in private groups that Harlem needed its own money. The city supplied money. They gave Columbia money to hire--to take care of the professional aspects of the hospital. But we didn't have any money in Harlem Hospital. We had to depend on them completely. And we were thinking we needed to be more independent. Because we didn't like the way things were going. And so we decided we needed our own money. And somebody came up with the idea that we should raise our own money. So we decided to establish an endowment fund for the hospital. Well the only way we could do it what is--would be established as an auxiliary. They have a regular auxiliary that takes care a lot of the stuff. They collect money from revenue and they take care of patient care. They got money from parking, the gift shop, various vendors, machines and all. And they had money. All they had to do was take it and disperse it. We had to raise money. And we wanted to raise money, put it in an endowment fund, let it accumulate. And by the year 2000, we would start using that money for projects that the hospital wanted to participate in, but didn't have the money to do it. So we had that big bang. And this was 1987 I think. I think it was 1987. Or in 1988. I know the 100th anniversary was one year. But we really got started that next year. And we started raising--having this annual dinner dance to which we asked money to contribute. You'd know that somebody would give $10,000, somebody would give $5,000. We put the proceeds in the--well by the year 2000, we didn't raise as much money as we'd hoped. But we accumulated over a million dollars in the endowment fund. And the year of 2000, we started giving out grants--this year is our second grants. So that, of course--and being well known in the community, I was a good front for this, because people responded not only to Harlem Hospital, but to me as a Harlem person. And that was the beginning of the thing. And, of course, Columbia has been very helpful. Harlem Hospital has been very helpful. The people in the community have been helpful. And we've gotten grants from--I mean contributions from Goya [Foods, Inc.], AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Co.], Chase Manhattan Bank [later J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.]. You know, we have gained some and lose some--the Japanese even. I was introduced to the Japanese Chamber of Commerce, the guys in charge of that. And they have been donors from the very beginning, and steady. They've given us $5,000 each year. And they were so taken up with us, that his wife who is a painter gave us a--she specializes in painting Japanese cherry blossoms scenes. And she gave us a wonderful painting that hangs in the medical room now, as a gift. To--as I said just as a gift. The painting is probably worth $10,000. Speaker 1: Dr. Petioni what do you--what is--so what is the mission for--is to have this very healthy--what do you wanna see? This is your sort of next phase in your career that you're at right now. And you--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) well it's a very well-established phase. Of course, I like the way you say phase. Because what do I do from now on. But, you know, being who I've been, it's just not only raising money. The raising money has been the primary focus of the friends of Harlem Hospital. But we do other things that are very subtle. People apply to us for help. All kinds of help. It could be a patient calling me and saying, "I'm not happy because I'm not getting the care at Harlem Hospital that I expect to get. I was mistreated, or this or that or the other." And they respect me. So I would go to the executive director, or go to the particular head of the department. And say, "Look, these people are saying this. You know, what can we do?" It's always constructive. I love Harlem Hospital. I think its been very good to me. So my role has been "How do we fix and make it better?" And they respect that. I don't have any axes to grind other than that. I'm not asking for anything. I want the hospital to be the best it can be, and when people talk bad about Harlem, I'm hurt. It hurts me to my core. And in spite of all the--all of the difficulties, the cuttings--we've been cut down to the bone. We're barely managing. And we're managing because one person is doing two or three other peoples' work. But I always feel, "Maybe we--why can't we make it better? Why can't we get people that are a little bit more sensitive to the needs of the patients in spite of the fact they're overworked?" So I do that a lot. And my opinions are sought after on many boards and committees, because I've been around. You know, sixty-four years of experience, you know, just shouldn't go to waste. So I evidently come up with the right things to say, or the opinions and whatnot. And it's respected and thought highly of. Story_ID: 11807 Speaker 1: My next phase is really cutting down on these community things and looking after Muriel. I've neglected myself. I've neglected my home. My social life. When I say neglected, I've been happy what I've been doing. But I think I need to do more things for me, and people tell me there ought to be a book. And what I'm doing is collecting--on everything, I'm collecting stuff. I'm just putting now--I'm just putting it in a box. Because I know in weaving the story, anything that I've been involved in impinges on other people. And they tell me that for example, people save Christmas cards, or notices of events, because it fits in a pattern--because at that time in 1980s these things happened. And people were intertwined with it. So. But that means I'm collecting a lot of stuff, you know--I'm being inundated. Boxes under the table. Boxes are at my office. My bedroom looks a wreck, because a lot of papers accumulated. And I'm trying to keep things that I think might help to maybe describe the '30s [1930s], '40 [1940s]s, '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s]. But I've decided to update the apartment and update the bedroom so its more user-friendly. (laughs) And I think maybe I wanna see plays. But, you know, I really don't wanna see plays. I really thoroughly enjoy what I'm doing. I really don't feel deprived, it's just that some or the other--but I know that I need to pay more attention to myself. Somebody told me that one of my male friends said, "He was going down to the Bahamas and he was going to a spa." And I said, "You know, I've never been to a spa. I don't even think of a spa. That is the new generation. Our people just took reasonable care of them selves. And going to a spa seemed so outrageously--What?--extravagant." 'Cause in those days--who knew what? It's your generation now. You guys who were in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] that go to spas. We were glad if we could go on a vacation to the [New] Jersey Shore (laughs) when I was coming up. But I really am being oversubscribed. And I'm going from one place to another. So I have a lot of things I need to do--I need to wrap up my life. I'm getting ready to renovate my brownstone into apartments. Because it's been a two family house. And I need--so that's my next--I call myself withdrawing from my public life and going more into a more private life. But the Friends [of Harlem Hospital Center] have done well. I'm at the point now where this has all been completely volunteer. And I nee--somebody needs to hold it together. And I don't see myself being replaced by another volunteer. It just doesn't--it isn't gonna work. So I have to re--kind of reorganize that phase, so when I can no longer continue, it will be safe. And even though we're an auxiliary, we're kind of independent. Nobody tells us what to do, 'cause we're heavily audited. But we're still--nobody tells us how to spend the money. Although we have gone through a very traditional way of doing it. I have a screening committee composed of people in the hospital. And so they screen the proposals. And when we add up scores, we find that several have gotten higher scores than the others. Although I can use some discretion. But that's the next phase. Story_ID: 11808 Speaker 1: What do you think would have happened with the Harlem [New York, New York] community had there not been a Harlem Hospital [Center]? Or can you even imagine that? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We would've been bad off, bad off. Because there are a lot, a lot of people in Harlem who still don't have money to pay. And don't have money to pay for medical care. For a while they were supplying you medicine. If you went there--if you had money, they'd scale it down. There was a time when if you had no insurance, and didn't have a good job, they would charge you seven dollars a visit. And that would include the visit, the x-rays, the tests and the medicine. Now they don't supply medicine any more. So we would've been--we are one of the sickest communities. We're the--pretty much the sickest in New York, with a close competition from the Bronx [New York]. But we're considered one of the sickest in--even in the country. And that's hard to believe. Because there are a lot of sick places who don't even have the medical care that we have. But we have more of anything you can name. We've got more low birth weight babies. We had more HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] then--because a lot of that started on the West co--East coast as you know. We had more hypertension, more diabetes, (claps hands) more asthma, more whatever. And even though other hospitals are supposed to take you, the voluntary hospital is supposed to take you regardless of your ability to pay, because the city pays them. Some of them are booted in and out very fast, but Harlem will take you. They may not do breast reduction (laughs) or anything like--but they will take you and take care of you and the culture. You know, this is our culture. And let's face it, people feel better, more comfortable in their own culture. And even though they may complain about at Harlem the treatment they get, it's like you're getting after your brother or sister. It isn't like being unhappy going downtown. What do you do when you go in town? You're in a completely different culture. They don't know you and you don't know them. And then if you complain, you may be in trouble, because you may be discriminated--in fact, you're discriminated against anyway, because I know you saw the business in the--on television where black patients have been treated differently from white people. Did you see that, where with the same--they had actors and actresses with the same symptoms and the same approach, the same script. But black people are treated differently? So we would have--I don't know what it would have been not only health-wise, but training-wise. We have trained more specialists in those early days than anybody else. Because we had access. So we would have--and even now a lot of our residencies have cut down--been cut down because of, of--the residencies, as they've cut down, you know they've cut down doctors--a doctor for each person, so the residencies have suffered. So we had many approved residencies where black physicians would be trained. We've lost some of those. So it means that we have more competition getting into like a Columbia [New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center] residency. Or under a Bellevue [Hospital Center] or New York-Cornell [New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center] residency. So we would have been far behind. Not only health-wise, but training-wise and specialists and all. We would have been--I can't imagine where we would've been, if they hadn't been. And, of course, they were able to learn about us, because we had a concentrated--our doctors, aside from Dr. Daniel Hale Williams who was the first physician to operate on a heart in Chicago [Illinois], we were next. Because our guys would get drunk on the weekend and start fighting--we didn't use many guns in those days, we used knives. And they would come in, in all kinds of traumatic--so we were known as a traumatic hospital. And we operated on hearts because we didn't have any choice. The knives would penetrate the pericardium and we had to sew them up--we had to try anyway. And a lot of those patients survived. So if you wanted--So if you were a trauma patient, this was the place to come. Because these guys would cut themselves open and have all kinds of injuries from fighting, and we had to do something for them. So--And people who say now, who finished in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], "If you--if you intern at Harlem Hospital, you could practice anywhere and do anything." I mean depending on your specialty, because of the--of its patients. The experience you have here, where you have so many sick people. And sickness that was allowed to develop, because they wouldn't go to the doctor in those early days, or didn't have the money to go, or didn't trust doctors. You know the Tuskegee [Syphilis] Experiment? And in many times in those early days when I interned, people didn't wanna come to hospitals because they'd give you the little black bottle. And one of the old doctors said, "What is the black bottle? What's that all about?" But it was felt that when you went to a white-dominated hospital, they might give you something to kill you. That was the paranoia we had. And I know in the South, many women who went into the hospital in those early days, when they didn't have facilities for black people, or women's facilities for black people, who had, say pelvic inflammatory infection, instead of treating them, they would just clean them out. They would do a pan-hysterectomy with ovaries--uterus, ovaries, tubes and everything. (pauses) So, we had all that behind us. And Harlem being here decided to--well, they didn't have no choice, 'cause the other hospitals who were here who didn't wanna take black patients died, 'cause this whole area became black. So we would've been in--I can't imagine what we would've done and what we--and what would've happened if they hadn't started taking in black interns in the early days, when nobody else did except one or two here and one or two there. But we could count--we could count on maybe six or seven or eight black-owned hospitals. And then the only other hospital I know of was Harlem Hospital where we could get an internship. Story_ID: 11809 Speaker 1: I was asking you about your legacy--what you would like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well I hope that I will be remembered as somebody who made a difference. But beyond that I know there should be a book, and there is some one who is working on a book now--well actually she is doing a book on four black women physicians, and I'm part of that. Vanessa [Northington] Gamble is somebody you should meet. She is--she's now with the American Association of Colleges [sic, Association of American Medical Colleges]--something like that. I have her title [Vice President of the Division of Community and Minority Programs] written down. She was at [University of] Wisconsin [School of Medicine, Madison, Wisconsin] for many years in M.D. Ph.D. In the history of blacks, particularly the history of black women. But I'm not sure. I hope--I agree there should be a book, but somebody has to come along who will do it as a project or I don't know. Something--I don't know beyond that. I have one son [Charles M. Woolfolk]. Hopefully unless I get chronically ill there'll be money left. And I'm not sure, maybe a foundation. But I don't even know how that would work out, or what I would do with the foundation. I do give a lot of money to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to the Medical School. And I was honored there a year--1999--as a distinguished alumnae for community work--medical and community work. But I haven't figured that out yet. That's still open for consideration. Story_ID: 11810 Speaker 1: Blacks in medicine. What is your view about that? You know, the importance of, you know. This is--you've had a long--there was a point where, you know, it was--Well you say your father [Charles Augustin Petioni] did it because, you know, it was a way of making a living and being independent. But at the same time, those doctors were critical to a community that didn't--couldn't go any place else. The world has changed a lot--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh very changed. Speaker 1: --but you would encourage still people to pursue the profession? Speaker 2: Yes. First of all it's good to know that our people black and white are in all the professions. And the women are all--including urology, cardiovascular surgery--they're doing everything now. They've had the opportunity and they're doing it. But there's still not many--compared to the population, the physician population is very small. I don't remember the figure, but it's not in proportion to our population. So even though we're out there in many of the majority of hospitals, it's nothing like going to your own people. And all of us have found that. And as you say, there's still this business of racial segregation and not treating us the same as other--as they treat other people. So we need them. It's a good living. I guess you can still be--get very rich. But you would still make a good living and you're serving. And I think anybody--if you go into medicine now, you don't go in as much for the prestige. Because we don't have as much prestige really as we used to. There was a time when we were unusual and people almost bowed down to us. When I interned at Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York] as a junior intern out of medical school, nurses would stand at attention at the desk when we approached it. And we were treated like--almost like gods. Now so you're a physician, so what, you know. They walk around in all kinds of attire, you know, sandals in the summer with shorts or, you know. Some of the girls would have long fingernails painted, particularly the psychiatrists that don't have to deal with their hands. But it's still--we have our own culture. And other people don't understand us--they try hard, but they don't understand us. They don't know all of the subtleties of being a black in a white society. Or maybe even a global society. We need more physicians. It's a good living if you like people and want to be of service, and see results right away. You see a patient today and they do some good. And you see the results tomorrow or next week or next year. You don't have to wait a lifetime. The physician [Dr. Benjamin Carson] who separated those Siamese twins at Johns Hopkins [Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland]. Well we have people like that who are doing things. It's still a good profession. I've never regretted it. The things that I have--well the thing that was not in my experience was the fact that so many people were--and now with the HMOs [health maintenance organizations] we're being more and more controlled. So we've lost a lot of our independence. But I think the pendulum is gonna swing back, because the HMOs aren't working. And everybody's complaining of the fact that they're telling us what to do. And we have to do what they tell us. And you can't--it's hard to exist now without belonging to one or more HMOs because our patients have insurance with these people. And that's the only way they're gonna be able to pay for their medical care. But I--the people who are coming out will get used to this culture of medicine. That's the thing. And as you come out, you have to get through the culture in any profession of that time. So what seems so difficult for us because we came along at a different time, will be just normal for them. And if they are not happy, they will fight to get the rights of the way they want to practice. So I feel good about medicine. However, I know it's been a deterrent. With this new control it has been a deterrent, and many of the men aren't going into it. Women are going into medicine. Many of the classes are half women--50 percent--almost 50 percent women. One year Howard [University Medical College, Washington, D.C.] was fifty-one percent women, because the women are more patient. They don't have to support families like men do. I mean they don't--they do, but not to the same extent. So they are more content to take--to not be interested in the money aspects of it as men are. And men have other professions where they don't have to spend all that time. Four years in medical school, three to five years in a hospital and then maybe a fellowship, which makes another year--that's a long stretch. And there's no way you can stop in between. Whereas if they go into business or law, they--at each stage, they can stop and do this or do that and go on to the next step. So we're captive. When you start going into medicine, you're really captive to the length of time and all the restrictions that you're exposed to. And if you feel you can do that and you're happy with that, it's still a wonderful profession. It stretches you...