 Story_ID: 19125 Speaker 1: We're going to slate it first just stating your name and spelling it for us and I'll take you through the rest of the questions. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm Beny, B-E-N-Y, first name, one N, Jene, J-E-N-E, Primm, P-R-I-M-M. And I'm seventy-two years old I was born May 28, 1928, in Williamson, West Virginia. That's in 'Bloody' Mingo County in West Virginia, well known for the feud between the families, the Hatfields and the McCoys. And--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And I want you to also to state your occupation. Speaker 2: Mh-hmm. I'm a physician I I've been a physician since 1959. I'm a trained anesthesiologist but my specialty is addiction medicine and of course now I've been during a considerable amount of work in HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] because of its relationship with addiction I am the executive director of the Addiction Research and Treatment Corporation based here in New York City [New York]. And president of the Urban Resource Institute which is a human service conglomerate that has under its umbrella, battered women's programs, developmentally disabled programs, alcoholic treatment programs, AIDS educational and certainly intervention and treatment for HIV and AIDS. We have a, a massive research program. One that entails looking at the addicted for all kinds of allied diseases that they may have including their significant others. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And I'd like you just to say today's date for us. It's Wednesday, right Wednesday, Wednesday, March 7th-- Speaker 2: Yeah--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) 2001. Speaker 2: --this is Wednesday March 7th , 2001. Story_ID: 19126 Speaker 1: I'd like to know your favorite food? Speaker 2: (pauses) My favorite food. Well, my favorite meal is breakfast. and I love sausage, ham, bacon and eggs. Country ham and grits and eggs and biscuits would be my favorite and I also love beef stew, for some reason and I love beans, dried beans. Speaker 1: My mother is very good at baking beans, I keep asking her to teach me the other all kinds of beans I, what's your favorite color? Speaker 2: I'd say blue, navy blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And favorite, favorite phrase or saying. Do you have one? Speaker 2: (pauses) Where there is a will, there is a way. Story_ID: 19127 Speaker 1: How we usually start these interviews is our talking about your parents, you know, and what you know about them. I, you know, one thing before we do that, I was curious your name is very unusual. But I saw that there wasn't much, you know, there hadn't been no genealogical stuff, but then, you know, the spelling is, is even unusual. Do you know how that came about? Speaker 2: I think my mother [Willie Henreitt Martin Primm] wanted to name me my grandfather, who was, who was a minister, a United Methodist minister his name was Benjamin J. Martin, and mother didn't want to name me Benjamin J., so she shorten the, the B-E-N-N-Y, which is a common I guess sort of name for people who are named Benjamin and just made it B-E-N-Y and she took the Jene, J-E-N-E, and because she wanted it to have B. J. as an initial so she named me Beny Jene the other thing is that I think my mother wanted a girl and it's very interesting that on my birth certificate it says, and I wish I had it to show you, it says female. And, I didn't know that until I was ready to go into the service. I was being commissioned second lieutenant in, in the [U.S.] Army and I had to send my birth certificate in, so to prove citizenship and so forth and it had female on it. But what happened was I then sent it back to Charleston, West Virginia to the bureau of records there and--to get it changed and what they did was just cross out the fe and sent it back to me. So even today, that name denotes, I guess, that it, it's a girl's name and even on my birth certificate they thought that I was a girl with that name. And of course well I'm not. And I'm here in the flesh. And I'm Beny Jene Primm. And so, I insist when people misspell it and say B-E-N-N-Y, I quickly change it and I rarely use Jene, J-E-N-E, I just use the J, as a middle initial and that has sufficed. Story_ID: 19128 Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Willie Henriett Martin Primm] and what--I know she was a teacher. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: And I know that she was from Oliver Springs, Tennessee. But can you tell me about her family and what you know about her background? Speaker 2: Sure. My mother was one of--(pauses), six children and she, her, her father [Benjamin J. Martin] of course was a minister and was a preacher there in Oliver Springs. And her, her mother and I remember very well was half Indian and was married to my grandfather. My grandmother was very fair and I always remember had this very long hair. And my mother looked more like my father [George Oliver Primm] than my grandmother. And I remember I used to always be sent to my grandmother and my grandfather's homes, wherever they were wherever their church was located. And you know, lived in the parsonage and so forth. And we used to comb my grandmother's hair because she had this long straight black hair. My mother was very bright, at very young and started to go to Morristown,Tennessee which was then a, a, a, I guess it had a high school and a junior college and it was a Methodist school. And all mother's brothers and sisters went there and mother went there and graduated from the two year normal school when she was sixteen. And she started teaching very early and was teaching in Roanoke, Virginia and and I would imagine this would be in the mid teens. Nineteen, oh sixteen, twelve to sixteen, somewhere in there. And that's where she met my father [George Oliver Primm] who was working on the railroad. And he emptied the honey buckets on the Norfolk and Western railroads. The honey buckets were at that time you know, you didn't have the kind of systems that we have today for toilets on the train. And they had these buckets that would contain the the fluid and whatever body waste. And they had people that would come and empty them because Roanoke was a hub and my father, who was from Pulaski, Virginia was one of these persons who did that. And he met my mother and they began to court and and later they got married that's about all I know of the early--she--I remember going back to Morristown and seeing my mother's picture. She was on the basketball team, she was quite athletic. She was the first in her class all the time and had quite a reputation at Morristown College [Morristown, Tennessee]. As a matter of fact, she became a trustee at Morristown. And I remember when I was at West Virginia State [College, Institute, West Virginia] I would in college, I would go and meet her at Morristown when she would go to board meetings. She and my aunt her sister almost went to Morristown and finished Morristown my mother then left Roanoke, Virginia and and married my father. And they got a job as maid and butler working for a white family in Wheeling, West Virginia mother got dad to--my dad was from Reed Island, Virginia which was real close to Pulaski, very close to Roanoke, not to far from Roanoke and got my father interested in mortuary science. And got my father admitted to the Cincinnati College of Embalming [Cincinnati, Ohio]. And she and Dad while working there in Wheeling got enough money to send daddy to Cincinnati College of Embalming. And he graduated as a--with the license in mortuary science. And we have all those degrees and things that my father got during that time at my brother's [Gerome Oliver Primm] funeral home, here in New York. As a matter of fact they worked there until they got enough money to open a business, a funeral business in Williamson, West Virginia where I was born and mother got a job teaching there. And she taught in the Mingo County [West Virginia] schools in Aflex, Kentucky which was right across the river from Williamson, West Virginia where we lived. She taught at Matewon [West Virginia]. She taught at, at Chattaroy [West Virginia]. She was the principal of the school at Chattaroy cause it was a two, two, two room or three room school she had been teaching be, prior to that in one room schools. And Daddy opened the funeral home and had contracts with the different mining communities where he would bury the coal miners when they were killed. Or when they died and so forth, who lived on these multiple coal camps because Williamson is in Mingo County which is in the heart of the Billion Dollar Coalfield. As a matter of fact Mingo County is--it is the only house built of coal, a building built of coal in the world is right there in Williamson. And so our lives revolved around the mining institutions and what went on there mother teaching in the schools and you know, being well known and my father being the funeral director. And I remember us being, you know, rather well off. Also each year mother only had a normal school certificate. And I would imagine that would be equivalent to our junior high, junior college certificates today. Which allowed people to teach at that time, would go back each summer to the colleges there in West Virginia in order to earn her bachelor of science degree. And she got permission to take my brother and I and me well, back to the colleges in the summer with her. As a matter of fact, I remember so well of going one summer to West Virginia State and then the next summer at Bluefield State [College, Bluefield, West Virginia]. Because they rotated the summer intercessions for people liked my mother, who had normal school certificates and who were going on to get a B.S. degree. And I actually saw my mother graduate from college in 1937, from Bluefield State Teachers College [formerly known as Bluefield State College] we were, my brother and I were allowed to stay in the room with my mother on campus, in the, in the women's dormitory. It was very interesting and, and I recall her feeding us and cooking on a hot plate in the room this doesn't exist anymore, this kind of thing and of course I saw my mother and my aunt, they graduate at the same time Bluefield State Teachers College, that's one summer. I guess I must have been nine year's old at that time mother continued to teach and became the principal of, of Liberty Elementary School in Williamson, West Virginia. Liberty High School was the, was the, was the, the, the, the town school in West Virginia and mother was the principal of the elementary school. And she taught the six grade. And I remember being in her class in the six grade and being--and she being very stern with me. Today, I, I, I, I, if you saw my handwriting you would think that I was a school teacher because I have this Pitman kind of handwriting that mother insisted that, that I do absolutely correctly. And and I remember her being stern yet kind loving and quite a provider and quite a, quite a strong, strong person. And point of fact if you turn that picture around right there on the thing you'll see mother's, mother's own--turn it around on the other side, I think mother is on one other side there. No? She's not? That's the other side? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What about the other side? Well, it must be over here, right her picture's over here so she she was quite a strong lady. And I, I have such fond memories. Story_ID: 19129 Speaker 1: At any rate we stayed there in West Virginia and, and, in Williamson [West Virginia]until 1941 and my brother [Gerome Oliver Primm] had become sixteen, at that time. And she [mother, Willie Henriett Martin Primm] wanted us educated in integrated schools, she did not want us to be continually educated in segregated schools. And, as a matter of fact, I was rather shocked in '41 [1941], because she had an aunt who lived here in New York. And, and my aunt said, "Well why don't you send Gerome when he become sixteen and ready to go to high school to me, here in New York. And, you know, he can start integrated schools here." And mother then was planning all this time to buy something in New York herself. So that when I became high school that she would, you know, move to New York lock, stock and barrel. And she had been insisting that my father [George Oliver Primm] do that and apparently he didn't want to because his business was flourishing but no matter what she was a very strong willed and she bought a site, bought a house sight unseen from the 'Amsterdam News' in New York and moved the family to New York in 1941. Now, I was shocked because I was liked all everything in the, in the, in the elementary school and getting ready to go into high school and was a nice high school at that time in the eighth grade. And I had won the prizes and all the awards and here I was suddenly being moved from where I was king of the hill, as a student and into a very strange place. And we had been coming to New York to visit my aunt from time to time and I had come here to the World's Fair in 1939, with mother and my aunt and I just felt it was overwhelming even as a kid. I remember very well how I would was in awe of all most everything in New York, as a kid, coming under the Hudson River through the tunnel, I remember that I said, "Well, how could you have this water over us?" And, and all those things were very very well very strange to me. And the buildings and, and the billboards. I remember coming up in the west side from the Harlem Tunnel because there was no Lincoln Tunnel at that time. And, how everything was so amazing to me. Anyway, we moved here and in '41 [1941]. And I started Dewitt Clinton High School [Bronx, New York]and my brother went to New York vocational school. Story_ID: 19130 Speaker 1: I want to go back and ask about your father [George Oliver Primm]. Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: And you know, what you know--you've alluded to some things but what do you know about his family? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sure. Speaker 1: And, and him growing in, you know, growing up and, you know, in Virginia? Speaker 2: Mh-hmm. Speaker 1: Has he shared any of that with you? Speaker 2: Yeah, sure. My father was born in Reed Island, Virginia the family had a, a large plot of land that we still own in Reed Island. Daddy--I remember my grandfather only have seen, I only saw him once. I don't remember my grandmother on my grandfather's side. My father had three brothers Alfred, Don and Frank, and he was George Oliver Primm they were well known in this small hamlet, you to, you had to almost forged a creek to get over to their property. I remember there was--and if there--if it rained you couldn't, you couldn't cross the creek because it was so full and became so deep and was a large gutter that butted, butted their property. And they had this very hilly oh maybe twenty, thirty acres of, of land that my grandfather farmed and my father's brothers farmed, you know. I remember going back to my uncle, who was the youngest brother of father, his funeral when I was oh, I guess I must have been in my teens and going to the very small church that just had benches. And it was it was a very moving experience there was outhouses and I recall. And I remember my grandmother's and grandfather's grave because they were buried right there on the property. They still, you know, of course they still are my father left there after high school and went to Roanoke [Virginia] where he started working on the railroad and I guess he must have been seventeen or so at the time when he met mother [Willie Henriett Martin Primm] and they must have gotten married when, oh I guess they were twenty and mother was about same age you know, that she was teaching in Roanoke. Because she taught there three or four years. Speaker 1: Did he ever share any stories with you about growing up? Speaker 2: Well, he like--he worked on the farm. It was, you know, quite arduous, I mean the work that they did, farming was. During that time before the first World War there was a plant there. In, in--near his home that was some kind of defense plant that made certain things. Munitions or, or, I, I, I, you know, I can't--I'm not too clear on, on what they did. And if you couldn't get a job there and if you couldn't get a job in Pulaski [Virginia], which was the closes town to Reed Island [Virginia], where he was from, you had to leave and go elsewhere and that's how he ended up in Roanoke. And it was like a Godsend to get a job working on the railroad, the Norfolk Western Railroad. Because you had a steady paycheck and he, each day he would drain, after he had empty the honey buckets very early in the morning his day he would dress up very nice and that's how he was able to woo my mother and his brothers. One was Alfred who went to West Virginia and began to working in the coal mines. The other brother was Frank who ended up being the black employee of the United States Post Office in Williamson [West Virginia]. We're talking about in the '30s [1930s] and my uncle cleaned up the post office. They all had meager educational backgrounds and finished whatever was the school there in Pulaski. I think my mother must have gotten my dad a GED [general education development]. or something of that nature, in, in order to get him admitted to the Cincinnati College of Embalming [Cincinnati, Ohio]. Uncle Frank worked there as a janitor at the post office and was one of the most respected black men in the town of Williamson. Because he had solid financial background because if you had a federal job at that time and he had been a veteran, he had been overseas in France at fought, you know, in the First World War. Daddy was also drafted in the First World War. Didn't go overseas, spent most of his time at Fort [George G.] Mead, [Fort Meade] Maryland and at some sort of Naval Army base in, in Virginia he was honorably discharged from the service during the first World War. My uncle had been wounded so that I guess made very eligible for government job which allowed he and my father to have The Primm Brothers Funeral Home. And later just only The Primm Funeral Home and not Primm Brothers Funeral Home I remember my dad having meetings with John L. Lewis, who was at that time the head of the CIO [Congress of Industrial Organizations]. I remember this sort of obese white man with these very bushy eye, eyebrows coming to the house and they would be drinking moonshine and, and talking about burial arrangements for the miners and negotiating a contract to, to do the, the burying of miners, who were CIO members and all of that Mingo County [West Virginia] area, and even some in McDowell County [West Virginia] and even some over in Kentucky. 'Cause my father had a funeral home in Logan, West Virginia, he had a funeral home in Harlan, Kentucky, H-A-R-L-A-N and Lynch, Kentucky. So he had, had these funeral homes in these places where there were coal mining camps where he had contracts to and they created a burial association to bury those people. And he would accept a certain amount of money to do so. My dad was a very interesting guy. He, he always carried a gun. Sometimes he carried two guns. One was a like a little double barrel two shot pistol that he kept in his in his sock all the time. And another one that he carried wherever he had it concealed on his body when he was dressed. He did that and it was almost acceptable in those days, I guess to protect himself and plus that the county was Republican and Daddy was a Democrat. And he on payday--on, on, on, on election days they would because Dad had three, two or three cars, they would give Dad these half pints of whiskey so that he would give these people, these half pints of whiskey and get them, transport them back and forth from all over the county to the polls to vote. And when the Republicans were in power in the county they would always find a reason to lock my father up, to arrest him during election time. And yet we would still allow the cars to be used to bring people back and forth to the polls. So he was quite active politically and would be shocked today and was shocked to know that the Republicans had reappointed me--appointed me to so many different things. He just could not believe that I could be associated with the Republican Party he was proud of what I had done, and, and he died in 1976. And, and during that time I had gone--'75 [1975]. And during that time I had been sent to Vietnam by [U.S.] President [Richard M.] Nixon and had, you know, a lot of pictures with President Nixon and so forth. And he was just mortified because of my relationship with Republican Party. But he was incredibly, incredibly supportive of me. and, and, and my brother [Gerome Oliver Primm], my brother always wanted to become a funeral director and I always wanted to be a doctor and they provided for us a room about as large as this one. Where we had lots of toys and, and lots of toys where we could make things jigsaws and lasses and things like that. And we made a miniature city and we would play, I would play the doctor and he would play the funeral director. And this was primarily to keep us from I guess getting into trouble. And we were pretty much stayed in that room most of the day when we were out of school doing something. And, and playing like that, you know, and of course Gerome went on and peeping at dad's--you know, when they were doing embalming or doing autopsies. They would do the autopsies right there at the funeral home in those days, they didn't do autopsies at the hospital and we, the medical examiner would come to the--to, to the funeral home and Gerome and I had a little crack in the door and we could peek at, at what was going on there. Story_ID: 19131 Speaker 1: He [father, George Oliver Primm] didn't want to move and didn't want her [mother, Willie Henriett Martin Primm] to move. And so he found a way to install an elevated chair that would take her up to the first landing and then, she'd get out of that chair, and and then take her up in another chair to the second landing. And had that installed at the house I thought it was a cockamamy idea. We had gotten them a penthouse in Mount Vernon where the other funeral home is, you know, today and, and, thought that they would be, you know, very happy there and. Had paid for it and ready to move in and that day he says, "No, we're deciding on something else." He was terribly insistent that he provided everything for mother and I mean, they, they had their rifts and but it didn't last very long, you know you know, we just took it for granted but that was Daddy and that was Mother. That was the way they were and, you know, so be it. Story_ID: 19132 Speaker 1: Were you born on a--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In Williamson, West Virginia, born at home. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, that's, okay. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) As was my brother [Gerome Oliver Primm]. Speaker 1: Okay, and--. Speaker 2: As was the way, at the, during that time. You didn't go the hospital. You know, there were two black doctors in the town. One of them was Dr. Whittico, which is a person that you ought to interview in St. Louis [Missouri]. You want to--Dr. Billy Whittico and he's very--he's very old now. He--his father was the doctor in Williamson and he later became an imminent surgeon and his, he's still alive. He must be at least ninety, if he's a day, eighty-something, very late eighty. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In St. Louis? Speaker 2: In St. Louis. And his father [James Whittico] delivered my brother and Dr. Thompson, who, E. B. Thompson was the other physician and he, and Dr. Thompson, of course, when I came along delivered me but I got to see Dr. Whittico son because there is interest they were very close to my father [George Oliver Primm]. Dr. Whittico and Dr. Thompson. And Dr. Whittico used to make house calls on horseback. And I remembered how people respected, even his dog. I mean, the people would throw rocks at a dog, or throw rocks at a cat, but they'd say, "Oh no. That's Dr. Whittico's dog." I mean you dared not do anything. He was such--so respected. So I always wanted to be a doctor from, from, from as long as I could remember. Anyway, Billy Whittico, who was Whittico's son had gone to med school and had become a doctor too. And I remember him coming back during the war, 1941, '42 [1942], in his uniform, I mean, how in awe I was of him. And of course he became president of the National Medical Association and I was in the NMA and, and, you know, he, he and I have become very close. He's much older, you know, but he's just,--he, he, you would, just, it, you gotta talk to Billy Whittico. I mean, he's just renown. And one of the most renowned early surgeons, who were trained and trained so many other African American physicians to be surgeons at Homer G. Phillips Hospital, in St. Louis, which trained a lot of medical people; black medical people. Story_ID: 19133 Speaker 1: You've shared some of them but some of your early memories of growing up in West Virginia. Now you were, you were, in, we, were you outside Wheeling [West Virginia]? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, Wheeling was where mother [Willie Henriett Martin Primm] and Daddy [George Oliver Primm] worked for this white family as maid and butler and saved their money and even, this was after her teaching and they felt that they wanted to be close to the Cincinnati College of Embalming [Cincinnati, Ohio] where daddy was going to school. And he would come home I guess, and then work on the weekends, whatever they did. But they were able to save enough money to open a funeral home in Williamson [West Virginia]; and mother started teaching again. But Williamson is where I was born in 1928. My bro--my brother [Gerome Oliver Primm] was born there in 1925, so they must have come there in 1921. So I recall them having been there maybe four years before my brother was born. Speaker 1: And, do, where are some of your early memories of, you know, of what we, of--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Williamson. Speaker 1: Williamson, what are some of your early memories? Speaker 2: You know, was I would go to, I mean, to, to parties kids, you know, my age, I can remember when I was three or four. I can remember back that far. And I had started--what happened was is interesting. I, I must have been rather bad at home not--not easy to manage and was difficult to manage. So mother had had each time she would get someone to take care of me they would quit. And so she began to take me to school with her, these one room schools. And I remember being in the one room schools and being kept in the back by the big kids, while she taught the lower grades and she taught from the first to the sixth grade in the one room school. And then she would teach the big kids and I would have to come up front with the big kids. The--they would keep me while she was teaching and I started to learn very early. I must have been three or so. And I remember when I like was four and I was already going to school. And I guess she began to integrate me into the class with the kindergarten and, and, first grade kids. So when she got moved from the one room school to be principal of the two room school in Chattaroy, West Virginia; I remember having gone there and being in the class, like in the first grade and I, I must have been only four or five then she through politics and Daddy, the Democrats became powerful in the county, and Mother then became principal of the elementary school in the town; Williamson, which was the county seat of Mingo County [West Virginia]. Then she had to bring me to school in Williamson where she was, you know, going to transferred and big time principal. And I remember my Aunt Sinclair was teaching the first grade. She was not really an aunt but in those days your mama's best friend, that was Aunt Sinclair, or aunt so and so. So I went into Aunt Sinclair's class, and I must only been four or most at five. I did so well that she didn't keep me very long, I, she had to put me in, this, the second grade class. And then I was there for a little while, I remember and I did extremely well and they put me in the third grade class with Mrs. Shrig. No, Mrs. Sawyer--Mrs. Sawyer. And I stayed there maybe for the rest of the year and I got promoted and went to the fourth grade class. So when I was like in the fourth grade, I was like nine, eight, something like that, you know, and led the class. And I think that's why my mother said, "Look this competition for this kid, I gonna get my kids out here and especially Beny." I got stable in the fifth grade and I remember another lady whose the lady now, I mean, she was a kid with me, her name was Martha Belle Corbit. She and I was always the leading, leading kids of the class. She became a, a Ph.D., professor at the University of Toledo, by the way and she's there, she still not, if she didn't die. And I later then went to mother's class in the sixth grade where she taught me and I must have been only ten, I guess something like that. And and what was so nice, I, I, I loved basketball, even at that age. And I was to small really to play but I really knew the game and the coach of, Mr. Dan Palmer, of the high school basketball team made me the manager of the team, even though I was in the sixth grade and I thought that was the greatest thing. I'd, I was all focus on basketball and I was the statistician. I kept the scores at the games and I would travel with, with the team and that was just so wonderful, wonderful, for, for me then in the seventh grade I left mother, you know, in the sixth, I got promoted to the seventh; I stayed there the whole year. I remember mother interesting you know, she would bake the bread for the whole week on the weekend. I mean, she'd make these loaves of bread she would also have either the chicken or turkey or whatever the case was. And we'd have sandwiches or she'd have a roast either beef roast or pork roast and we would have these sandwiches for lunch on the homemade bread that she would make. It would, it was incredible and I use to always wanted to have light bread that the other kids had but I had to eat this, this, you know, this bread then I got in the seventh grade and I began to be the kid that got to recite all the poems you know Rudyard Kippling's poems and Langston Hughes' poems and 'Abou Ben Adhem' and that stuff like that. And then I stayed there for awhile. Then in eighth grade a teacher--one of the teachers really fell in love with me. Her name was Miss Ida Jim Williams, Ida Jim Williams. She was a history teacher and--you know, a social science and history. And she taught West Virginia history. And if you were good in West Virginia history and you got the highest grades, you got to compete against people from all the county schools. And if you had the highest grade then, then you got to go and compete against the white kids for another test and for western history. And if you got the highest grade there; you got to go to Charleston [West Virginia] to meet the governor. Anyway, I won all of that and won what was called the golden horseshoe; I still have the golden horseshoe. And got a chance to go, I remember having to go to the white school to take the exam with all the white kids, who came in from the county's schools. And, you know, the result, I was the only black there and Martha Belle got to go, Martha Belle Corbit got to go with me. Because we had the two highest grades from the black school and, I won there! And and so, one white student and I would, would chosen to go to Charleston to meet the governor, who was Governor [Homer Adams] Holt; at the time I could not go and stay with the, where the white kid went so, my mother had to take me and the white kid went with other white kids and they stayed in the hotel. And, and I, then we had to stay in sort of an inn or something that mother knew some black family. I remember they also had places where you ate there and you had a room upstairs and it was like an inn, in Charleston. So--And my mother said, "Well, she had to take Gerome." my brother and I was angry because he didn't win. And he'll--why was he going, I mean, he shouldn't have gone but anyway she took him. And he was. I was pouting all the way to Charleston. 'Cause we drove in the car, and so forth. I got to meet the Governor. He didn't get to meet the Governor, while I got to meet the Governor and, and all that good stuff. And got my golden horseshoe and and you know, it, it was great. Story_ID: 19134 Speaker 1: I mean, so then after that, that summer mother [Willie Henriett Martin Primm] said, "We got to get out of this place." and so, she bought this house. And the next thing I know, I was in New York! My brother [Gerome Oliver Primm] has already been here for a year or two with--living with my aunt and he wanted me to go to Bronx [High School of] Science [Bronx, New York] or to Stuyvesant High School [New York, New York] and you had to take a test. And I got here too late to take the test. So my grades were good enough so they let me go into Dewitt Clinton High School [Bronx, New York]. So I went to Dewitt Clinton [High School, Bronx, New York] and I was mortified! I mean, there was 5,000 boys at Dewitt Clinton, in 1942, this was. And you can imagine in one school, five thousand boys. And this building was larger than any building I've ever been in. I mean, except for the Capitol of the State of West Virginia; and it wasn't even as large. The building took up two blocks, squared out like this, you know. And I really learned that I was not the cat's meow. I mean, we had kids there, who got one hundreds on the Regents and I mean, I was barely making 78 [percent], 82 [percent]. You know, and I then became pretty despondent about my performance. But these kids were, you know, really brilliant kids. A lot of them, I mean, some of them went on to become great things, I mean, I do great things, I mean, people like Burt Lancaster, people like that were in this high school. I mean, you know Dewitt Clinton had all these renowned persons, I mean, one became head of the American Stock Exchange. My daughter went to work there and he saw her name and, and Primm, and he says, "You know, I remember one person named Primm, he was manager of the basketball team at Dewitt Clinton, and, and then our yearbook, he said, that his goal was to be a doctor--and she, he says, "I've seen him on TV. Would you be related to him?" And she choke and said, "That's my father!" And of course she got all but it is necessary, she was the first black woman at the American Stock Exchange, on, ever to get a seat. But, the, the, the point, I make a point to say, "How good Clinton was at that time." And, of course I mean, I was lost in the sauce there but I did well and finally graduated in, in, you know, went on to college [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. I became manager of the basketball team there, too. Story_ID: 19135 Speaker 1: As a mortician's son, you know, was there, this is going back mostly, was there any view of, I mean, did people make jokes, or, you know, do you feel any since of, I mean you felt prominent within the community, I know that. But, was there any spookiness or, you know, you wonder about mortic--you know--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, kids use to come play with us, in, in our room, our playroom and see over there was where the, where the embalming room was; in that room right there. And there were cracks, you know, in those days, you know, those were how houses were built. I mean, there were cracks and we found the cracks and we would peek. And they would peek in the door, you know, we'd be peeking through the door. Through the keyhole looking at so when we use to play with the, the thing that you put the caskets on. We'd use it. Wagon and push one another and all that with the other kids. So we'd play in the funeral home. And so, you know, we didn't have any, if, if there, if there was fear and, and, and about hanks and haunts, we--we call them 'hants.' Of course, I know you probably heard that. My, my girlfriend, who used to tease me, I said, "It's going to come back to hant you!" she says, "What? What are you talking about? What's hant?" You know and she says, "Oh, you mean, haunt!" You know, how I felt and of course, westerners say hant. But we talked about hanks, you know, and things like that but there was a little bit of that but not, not that much, that I can remember I remember the first time there was that my father [George Oliver Primm] had a, a white person to embalm and bury. This, this soldier had been killed during the war and, and he was from Kentucky. And I don't know why my father's funeral home was chosen but he was chosen. And, and, and they had this white soldier that was sent back to dad and, he, you know, had to prepare him and for the family and so forth. And 'cause you know whites didn't bury--blacks didn't bury whites but white funeral homes did bury blacks. you know but it was rare. But, you know, two or three cases of, white case came to my father because of John L. Lewis [long-time president of the United Steelworkers of America], who was close to my father and, I don't know, it, it, you know, my father was well known and well-off, and two or three cars, and hearses and, you know, and mother was a principal at school so, I mean, we were riding high! I mean, you know, I think my, my, my father must have some dalliances also. And my mother [Willie Henriett Martin Primm] wanted to get out of this place. And, you know. Which I think why she also was defiant and wanted to move to New York and, you know, to do her own thing. And he stayed there for another about six months or a year, and then he came to New York, too, so we sold everything there and came here. Story_ID: 19136 Speaker 1: There to New York, I know you say, things are different, you know, and sort of fear because of large, you know, school and--. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: You know, the whole how it's big she [mother, Willie Henreitt Martin Primm] bought this house where was this house located at? Speaker 2: It was located in the West Bronx [New York, New York]. And there were seven private homes there. And the only black families that lived in the whole area was, you know, the seven families that lived in these houses as a matter of fact, who lived next door to me was Hubert Fauntleroy Julian [aviation pioneer]. Did you ever hear that name? The--, Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --the, the--Julian was--he was called the black Colonel Julian. He was--he was going to fly around the world. And remember, he got ready to take off in the seaplane, and it--and it--get, gets ready to take-off and it crashed in the Harlem River. This is the whole story, very similar to the story about Marcus Garvey. But Julian lived next door to, to, to us. Also, living on that block was Dr. Ellis, who was one of the only black psychiatrist in New York. So it was a very prominent seven homes. And then above us, of course, was the whole Jewish neighborhood. Down the street were all Irish, but just those seven homes. Story_ID: 19137 Speaker 1: You had been performing at the top. And, you know, you were at this low level. What were the sort of things that got you through? Were you like determined or did you like--you know, this--'cause people can react--adversely different. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, somehow I got I was picked on when I first went to Dewitt Clinton High School [Bronx, New York]. 'Cause I had on knickers. Cause you could not wear long pants until you were sixteen, so you wore short pants until you were twelve, then you got knickers from twelve to sixteen and that was, you know, that's the way it was in the house. So, I used to pull the knickers down like these kids do their pants so they would be like long pants. And, you know, they would sort of pick on me. And I would fight in them. But I was small. And--but I would fight in a minute. If you--and then--at first they tried to take my lunch money, you know, or take, take my lunch and then take my lunch money. And 'cause you had to take the subway and it was a nickel at that time. And they were trying to take my nickels, so I couldn't get back home. Well, I mean, I would fight and so it got known that, you know, you, you maybe able to, you know, take him down but you, you know, you were going to have a fight with him. And so I got with a group of kids that kind of protected me. Also and because I could play basketball well but wasn't big enough to make the team but became the manager and, the statistician at the team. And--at Dewitt Clinton, so I became well known in the school and I began not to concentrate not so much on, on my studies as I should have and I think that too was responsible for my lack of performance like I did. I just had to apply myself more. And you know, here, here in New York the school system is not as tight knit with parents as it was in West Virginia. I mean, like if I was doing something wrong in, Mrs. Maquini's house, room, or Mrs. Starlings' room or Mrs. Trigs' room, you know, they would tell my mother. You know, "Beny is not doing well" or whatever and I had to buckle down but here, I mean, there was not close monitoring of whatever I was doing in school. Even though my mother--she did not know the New York system at all. 'Cause she had retired. She had been working like thirty-five years teaching. Ta--school by the time we got to New York, so she didn't work teaching schools in New York, at all. She had enough money, she had her retirement money. You know, and whatever and that was adequate. And she was quite thrifty. And, you know, she she was like,--You know, she was matriarchal. And she, she didn't have time to mess with the school. 'Cause then she was bringing her brothers and sisters--My mother was bringing her brothers and sisters to New York. Getting them--Helping them get started. She was incredible! She was incredible! So, so I didn't have the same kind of monitoring that I had in West Virginia. And I, then you know, became a student that was 81, 82 [percent] like that. And I got out but I wasn't all everything, you know. Story_ID: 19138 Speaker 1: Now when you, so you, you graduated [Dewitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York] in what year? Speaker 2: High school? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: 19--but should have graduate--graduated in June 1944. But I graduated actually in January 1945. And the reason for that was, I failed my Latin Regents and by the way Lenell got a hundred on her Latin Regents. Listen to this, Lenell took four years of Lain and two years in the summer and got a hundred on the Regents and I, I've got 63 [percent] on the Regents. And so they wouldn't allow me to graduate. I had to go back and take Latin and though I had passed the course and then when I went back to take the, the exam again, I think I failed again. And instead of getting an academic diploma; I got a general diploma. Broke my heart but it held me up from graduating and my mother [Willie Henriett Martin Primm] wanted me to have the academic diploma and I didn't. I was so disgusted. I didn't really--I didn't really apply myself, that, at during that--'Cause I could have done it. I could have done it but--. Speaker 1: See there, see that's what I want to know. Where are you then, at, psychologically, at this point? You know, you're, you know, you're young, you're young adult, or man. Speaker 2: No, I was only sixteen. Speaker 1: Sixteen! Okay, you're, okay so--. Speaker 2: Sixteen, yeah. But naw I was what? Naw--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Seventeen. Speaker 2: Let's see '45 [1945], I was seventeen. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) There you go! Speaker 2: I would have bench, I was seventeen, that '44 [1944], knaw I was sixteen, when I was just, then I was just a boy; I was sixteen when I graduated from high school. when I should have graduated in '44 [1944]. And then I stayed that summer. And, and in January, you know, with that semester so that was '40--'44 [1944], yeah so, so '45 [1945], I was still sixteen. I was still that January, I was '40--and I was seventeen that--that, that, that a May. Mm-hmm. But I got into college. I got into Lincoln University in [Lincoln University] Pennsylvania. And I went there. And I had a basketball scholarship. Because I played on the church team. And the coach of the church team had gone to, to Lincoln. By the way, he's a physician. And, and he then was trying to get into med [medical] school and so forth. And he had finished Lincoln in 1937, so he sent me down there and I made the team. So I began to concentrate more on basketball than on my studies, really, and I was sixteen. And I made the team. And there were--at that time, there were only seven guys in my freshman class, who had come there that, that January. By the way four of those seven became doctors. On the basketball team--now this is really interesting. On the basketball team at Lincoln at that time, out of the ten guys on the team--eleven or twelve of us were on a team. Six became either doctor or Ph.D.s. MDs were Billy Hall, Piggy Armstead, myself, a dentist was Connie Jenkins who was practicing in New York. Jim Law who was a Ph.D. in philosophy. Charley Cabines was an MD He was Summa Cum Laude from Lincoln, Magna Cum Laude from medical school, all CRAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] quarterback , all CRAA baseball player, and was on the basketball team. Now I mean that's incredible. Isn't it? On that basketball team at Lincoln University that many guys who were academically sound enough to go on to medical school and become physicians. Well Charlie's dead of course--Charley Cabines died, he killed himself. Piggy Armstead died. He became addicted and then he got straight. And then he, you know, was OB-GYN and then he finally just died a natural death. Billy Hall is still living, Connie Jenkins is still living, I'm still living, Jim Law died maybe a year or two ago. But amazing isn't it? As I reflect, you know. Story_ID: 19139 Speaker 1: Well I started [at Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in January '45 [1945]. I stayed there that year. By the way Oscar Brown Jr. [entertainer, poet] was my roommate. Well you probably know from--he's actually from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: We interviewed him. Okay! Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. And for, for about six months, we both pledged Alpha at the time together I made the basketball team, pledged Alpha, didn't make it there, just was--became a sphinxman at, at that time. Then my second year I started, you know, started the second semester was the fall semester of '45 [1945]. And I made the team. And then I got demoted to the J.V. [junior varsity] because all the big guys came back from the war. And you know Jim [James] Usry, who became [the first African American] mayor of Atlantic City [New Jersey], 'Wild Bill' Hunter, all those guys. But during the mid semester of my third semester, I became disenchanted and the basketball season was over and I was you know kind of disgusted. I said I'm going home. I mean I am not doing well because I hadn't been really focusing on my studies. I had been--and I was pre-med. And it's very hard at Lincoln. Lincoln is a tough school. And I think that's why so many students from Lincoln got into medical school you know because it was so tough. But I didn't want to cut the mustard there and I, I wasn't doing well I think in physics or something. And I said I'm out of here. So I just packed my bag and, and, and my trunk and took it across the campus and caught the bus and came home. And told my mother [Willie Henriett Martin Primm], "I want to go to the service." She said, "Go to the service, you're seventeen years old! I'm not gonna sign for you to go anywhere." She says you're gonna go to school." She says, "You're gonna go to City College [of New York, New York]." I said, "Well, I don't want to go to City College." Well my grades were such that if you didn't have an 85 [percent] average in high school, you had to go to the night school to make up and if you did well, then you could go to the day school. So, so when I found that out, and I knew that before to 'cause she always wanted me to go to City College. She couldn't want me go back to a black school, you know and she bought us to New York. She wanted us to integrate education. So when she found out I could only go to the night school, she said, "You're gonna go to night school and you're gonna go to work." I said awe shit, you know, I mean so--she was a tough taskmaster. "If you're gonna stay here, that's what you're gonna do." So I got a job. And I went to night school. This lady saw me playing basketball in the--in the oval up there by City College one afternoon. She said, "How would you like to go to West Virginia State College?" You know, she was in charge of the playground. I said, "You're kidding me." She says, "No!" "I mean you know, we could send you down there you know." 'Cause I had been on that campus with my mother. Okay when she was getting her degree in the summers. Right? So I went home and I said to Mother--she said, West Virginia State!" She says, "Why would you want--." You know she wanted to try to discourage me. Anyway I said I'm going. So I, I went to West Virginia State [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] that next September. And then the rest is history. That was '46 [1946], September of '46 [1946]. And I finished in '50 [1950] and you know went to the [U.S.] Army--. Speaker 2: And you majored in you were majoring in--. Speaker 1: I was, I was biochemist, biology and biological science and German. Speaker 2: When did the German come in? Speaker 1: I--you know, I was good in it, and was getting As in it and so I said you know--I had thought about going to the University of Heidelberg [Heidelberg, Germany] to, to go to school. Always dreamed that--and fencing and stuff, and--so I took the German. Story_ID: 19140 Speaker 1: Here you are, you know, a young black kid and you're, you know, dreaming of going to the University of Heidelberg [Heidelberg, Germany] but I just wanna--because that's where you went. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So I--and that's what was what was curious. I didn't understand that. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Well in majoring in German Dr. Lerner who was the German professor at West Virginia State [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], took a liking to me, you know. And 'cause I did so well in German. And--so it became rather easy for me. So I, I began to develop a liking for it. And I had studied (unclear) and all that kind of stuff. And about Heidelberg, and I said, "You know, I may wanna go there to school." And The Dr. Harrison Farrell, who was the dean he had been a German major also, a black man, okay? And I had to take classes with him by myself. 'Cause I was the only person. And so it was nice for me because he would, he would, have a class--I would be assigned stuff and I would do that. And then I would have my next assignment two weeks later. You know, half the time I'd be off campus somewhere you know traveling. You know? I'd come back and then I'd do my work and he said fine and then do this. And I did that. And then he'd give me an exam. So, you know it was rather--it was rather convenient for me because my last year in college, I had already gotten hundred and twenty hours or more before my last year. And what happened was, my last year, I wanted to finish ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], because it was the wartime for Korea and I know that my brother [Gerome Oliver Primm] told me, "If you were drafted, you gonna--you got a big mouth. You not gonna make it." So I wanted to be--finish ROTC to become an officer. And I did. And so I took courses I didn't even need. I had a hundred and sixty-some hours when I graduated from college. So you know I took those German courses because they were nice and easy, and, you know. And I was able to master. Then and later on they came in handy. Because when I couldn't get into med school after I got hurt in the service, 'cause I went to--from college right away to the Army and became a paratrooper office in the 82nd Airborne Division. And and I got hurt in a wreck, and then I got hurt again jumping. And then I was retired from the army so I had this friend who had gone to the University of Geneva Medical School [Geneva, Switzerland]. But since I was--you know spoke German a little bit, I didn't speak French, that maybe I could go to one of the schools that spoke German. So I applied to Heidelberg and I applied to Innsbruck [Medical University] in [Innsbruck] Austria. By the way I have all those acceptances now. I looked at them about a year ago, you know, that I, I have kept them, you know. And so when I got retired, and I, I had got accepted over there, I just took the boat and went, you know. Speaker 2: So now you were in the service how long? Speaker 1: About three and a half years, almost four years. Speaker 2: And you were stationed where? Speaker 1: At Fort Bragg [Fort Bragg, North Carolina] where I got married, married Anelle's mother [wife, Delphine Primm] from Fayetteville, North Carolina. She was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], went to Fisk and I was there as an officer in, in Fort Bragg and started courting her when she came home from school. Speaker 2: So did all of you move over to Germany at that--she moved with you? Speaker 1: She didn't go to Germany with me--she came to Germany to visit me that year and then she taught, 'cause she was teaching school in Fayetteville. So I started that October. School, school starts there in October and she came that summer and--did she come that summer? No she didn't go that come summer. I came home that summer and what then I went back to Europe in September. And she came--I came home that Christmass and then I went back and then she came to Europe to visit me that summer. I had transferred then from Heidelberg to [University of] Geneva [Geneva, Switzerland] 'cause I couldn't get my GI Bill at Heidelberg. They wouldn't allow you to have your GI Bill at Heidelberg. But you could get in Switzerland, and you could get in Italy and you could get it in France. So I got myself admitted to the college at Geneva, the University--the University of Geneva Medical School. I was allowed to transfer. And so when I did that, I then asked Delphine to come over and she did, and we lived in Geneva in 1955 that was. Anelle [Benne Primm] was born in 1956 that January. Story_ID: 19141 Speaker 1: So how did you find that whole experience [living and studying in Geneva, Switzerland]? One--. Speaker 2: It was incredible. If you--first of all, I don't know how in the world I got through. I mean I was so determined that I was gonna do medicine, you know. And at Heidelberg [University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany], I was doing very well and the language was coming and I played on the basketball at the--even though I was injured, you--I had this leg that I am going in to do surgery on now. But I still played and I did well. I was the high scorer and I coached the little team at one of the athletic clubs and they won the championship with Germany, little kids. And I belonged to this club called Turnenbund which was a Heidelberg sports club, fencing club and basketball and so forth and they played soccer. And I fitted right in you know. And when I was in Heidelberg by the way, there were only about ten blacks in all of Heidelberg, in the whole town. First of all, they didn't allow black soldiers to even go on furlough in Heidelberg. Can you imagine? I use to get stopped in the street and by the MPs [military police] thinking I was AWOL you know absent without leave or something and the would ask me for my identification. Of course I would show them and they'd have to--back off and salute me because I was a retired army officer living in the bachelor officers' quarters. It was incredible. So I was very happy at Heidelberg and didn't want to leave. But if I couldn't get my GI Bill, I was only getting eighty dollars a months which was a lot of money then. Eighty dollars a month was four hundred German marcs. I mean families weren't making that kind of money but my, my GI Bill would have given me $240 dollars a month. 'Cause I would have $160 dollars for my GI Bill and another eighty dollars from my retirement pay and 240 [dollars] would have been more than adequate for me to have a lush life you know. And so I was able to bring over [wife] Delphine [Primm] who was very, very squeamish about coming to Europe. You can imagine--I mean, what's with this guy? Is he out of his mind thinking he can do medicine in German or French. And I'm gonna, you know, give up my teaching career? You know you can imagine the Southern mother and father and conservative and wondering about this cockamamy New York fast talking whatever you know over seas in medical school. Anyway she came and she enrolled in school and she was beginning to get a master's in, in music in, in organ and so forth and she would be, be very afraid being in these--in Geneva [Switzerland]. Have you been to Switzerland? Well if you've been you--in vieil ville in the old town in [Geneva] Switzerland that has its old cathedrals--and that's where the main organ was for the university and she would be there by herself practicing. I mean its cold, its you know dank I mean you know Europe. You know how Europe is. Especially academic institutions. All its history and--I mean its--if you, if you, if you're not caught up in it like I was, I mean you--you know it's a little bit different and she was not too happy. But she did it. I mean you know--interesting. She had had French before and I--and, and I had had no French. So we were in--you have to--all students have to go to this beginner's class. This is a very interesting story. And they give you this test to see where they should place you in the beginning. Intermediary or, or advanced French. So they dictate you a paragraph. And you, you take down what they say and, and she had had French so she thought she'd be fine. But was you know, I was very reluctant 'cause I hadn't had anything--I could speak in German and, and English you know? Anyway, the man would dictate, he would say Lac Lamond, the Lake Lamond in (speaking in French), you know he'd be talking like that. I mean in my dictation I had written what I thought I heard and even when he said virgule, which mean comma. I wrote virgule. Anyway she did her, her thing and we turned it in. And so when he came back, he put us both in the, in the beginning class. And so she was tore up and shocked to pieces. You know because how could she who has had three or four years of French and college French and high school French end up in the beginning class you know like me who had had no French? And so that was a little disgusting. So anyway we got into the--to the beginning class and we would go. We would be given these assignments to do. And so I mean I would take the assignment and I would memorize it. And I would you know just go down the list. And so when you come back to class the next day, she would go and she would say, "Mademoiselle Jule," And you read the next thing. But when she would get to me would say, "Monsieur Primm" you know and I would be there. And instead of reading it, I would just say it, what I had memorized. So she after the second or third class, she says, "I want to see you after class." And so I was afraid. I thought I had done some' wrong. Anyway after class she says, "You can't come--you can't--don't--. I don't want you back here anymore. And not because you're bad because you're gonna be fine. You gonna speak to everybody you can any time you can even you, you gonna make mistakes. But you'll be fine. You go to class every day and that's all you--you'll, you'll see. It'll come." She pulled me out of the class and kept Delphine. And in nine months, I was goin'. But you know I was so hell-bent, you know what I mean. I had just made up my mind I'm gonna do this. And you know, where there's a will, there's a way. You do it. You just--you, you just get it done. And so that's what happened. And the rest is history. I, I went on you know and played basketball in Geneva. I made the team, traveled to France with the team and played at this Cite Universite at Paris [France] and I was the high scorer and it was just a--the experience is unbelievably wonderful for me in Geneva. And the people loved me. When Annelle [Bene Primm] was born, she had--this is the only black kid that had been born in a hospital in years. Okay and so she was a--you know, very novelty at the hospital. Everybody came to look at her and so forth. When we got home from the hospital people had been in our apartment and had made an Eider Down [comforter], a bed and all those lovely things that you have to do for a baby--I mean without us even knowing it. In our apartment building. She was so loved I mean--Annelle was like just unbelievably pedestalized in Geneva. She broke her arm riding around on her bike when she was three or whatever. She, she got rheumatic fever by the way while she was there. So I had to keep her in the bed and you know. But she got well and then she was just incredible. She learned French like this (snapping fingers) and she was speaking as a little kid three years old. She won the hula hoop championship of Switzerland in her age group for kids when she was three years old. And the youngest kid. Her mother [Delphine Primm] was chosen as the mother of the year in, in, in Switzerland. She didn't tell you all this? You aught to see. She's got these you know pictures where she and her mother and--when her mother was chosen as one of the Mothers of the Year--and where she won the hula hoop championship--at three years old. Story_ID: 19142 Speaker 1: Tell me what this experience taught you about life in many ways. I mean we all have you know--I'm just wondering what you learned in that whole period. Speaker 2: Well I, I learned to really give you an example--when I was in, in, in Heidelberg [Germany], I'd be on the trolley and people would be talking about , about me not knowing that I spoke, you know, perfect German almost, you know. Can't do it now but I--you know I could get by. And--but still I was very much accepted. I was in a in a situation where and you--can imagine in a town--I never saw a black person maybe the whole day. There was maybe two Liberian kids in the med school. There was a black American in the med school named, named Lindsey Hamilton that never spoke to me hardly. And there were a couple Nigerians but that was it. And so I learned to be tolerant of people because there they were so tolerant of me. And they took a liking to me, you know and were trying to help me in every way they could knowing that I was a student of medicine at the University of Heidelberg which was you know--. You, you a student of medicine in Europe. I mean you got kind of high class. Especially a black student of medicine, Heidelberg and you know playing on the basketball team and all that kind of good stuff. And it's just after the war [World War II]. You know Germans were pretty elitists and very, very racist. Germans are very, very racist. But--I mean I was totally welcomed and, band by me to become a professional that I wanted to come to become you know to come back here to the [United] States. And I just thought it was a--just a great experience. And I transferred to Geneva [Switzerland], most of the people in Switzerland knew about the prejudices of--against black Americans and they were very--had a great deal of empathy for you and, and admired you when you were trying to overcome whatever the prejudices were in terms of getting into school here and coming there and knowing that it was a heck of a sacrifice for you to, to be learning medicine and another language. Its hard period. And then another language is equally as hard and not to have that kind of language skill, meant that you had to do triple the work 'cause everything is oral. I mean you don't have--you don't have written examinations and, and so after two years of studying in, in the academic portion of the institution, is when your first exam is. And it's in front of the whole class. The whole student body. You know. And you're being quizzed by three professors who asked you anything in the book that has happened in the last two years that you've studied. In anatomy, in histology, in physiology and in biochemistry. It's an incredible experience. And to get through it you really you really feel proud that you've done something extraordinary. And then once you get over that and you look back and you say, you know you just had the will and you made the way 'cause you had the will. And that's, that's it. And I tell my kids if you, or anybody, if you have the will to do something and you put your mind to it, you can do it. You can do it. It maybe hard but try to overcome each one of those obstacles. I just don't think there's anything that should get in people's way you if they try hard enough. I mean its ridiculous. But I'm not a Clarence Thomas who thinks everybody you know can make it on their own. I think you need a little help also because the people in Europe helped me, they--they nurtured me they wanted me to become a doctor. And I've even tried to give back to the school. And they said, you don't have to give back to us. You know, if your daughter or your son wants to come here, they can come here. We'll--but they don't accept any more Americans, you know, hardly at all. But if I had a kid that wanted to go there, they'd be happy to accept him. Story_ID: 19143 Speaker 1: So you graduated [University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland], was it 1959? Speaker 2: December, 1959. Speaker 1: Okay. Now had you been home at all during this period? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I would come back home. [Wife] Delphine [Primm] came back and started teaching for a while. I would come home in the summer and you know I'd work in the post office, even drove taxi for her uncle, stuff like that and you know. Then, then, then also in the summer, once I passed the two years, I went to--worked in hospitals, you know, as an extern. In England, you know, here in the United States. Speaker 1: Now when you--when did you decide you were gonna go into anesthesiology? Speaker 2: When I finished my my residency at Meadowbrook Hospital here [New York, New York]. And it was a two-year-residency. All the others were three and four and I was already thirty-one or thirty-two and it was time I made some money and you know I already had two kids and so I I felt that you know it was a time to get out and do something. So I didn't want a long residency. So I did anesthesia. I didn't stay in it very long because I only stayed in it until '64 [1964]. And then I started branching off into addiction medicine and then the rest is history. I have been in that every since. Speaker 1: Now Annelle [Bene Primm] was your first child. Your second child? Speaker 2: Is Martine [Armande Primm]. Speaker 1: You have--. Speaker 2: I have four children but three children in that brood, Annelle, Martine and Jeanine [Bari Primm]. And the other child is an out of wedlock child whose doing her residency now here in St. Vincennes in psychiatry. Her mother is a physician and--. Speaker 1: Now when you when you came back was it an adjustment? I mean you were you know in--you know in Heidelberg [Germany] and then [Geneva] Switzerland and you sort of living a very nice you know--I mean a nice rich life. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I am sure you were driven in working hard. But when you come back to the [United] States, was than an adjustment at all? Speaker 2: Kind of an adjustment because so much had been going on during that time. [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was you know the rage at the time and I I thought that--I was about the same age I'm a year older really. And and I said, this man is leading his people and I've been wasting all this time--you know I became very unenamored of what I had done. I be--began to see myself as not having contributed enough to my people and I been--and I and I, and I really started to be sort of a revolutionary. You know taking over buildings and demanding things during that whole period. I worked with a guy named Dr. Thomas Matthew who had the National Education Growth in Reconstruction Organization, NEGRO here in New York who was the first black neurosurgeon and we would take over buildings. And I started drug treatments in those buildings and all kinds of things like that. 'Cause there were no drug treatment programs at that time. And you know we--the lady who was killed who was my lady [wife, Delphine Primm] in the wreck you know in August of '99 [1999]. was very involved at that time with me working doing things and lying down in front of bulldozers and--the whole thing. And I became very activist as a physician you know, kind of on the front lines. You know, so. Speaker 1: Now that's what I wanna know. Why the change? You know why going from--was there something that you saw? Speaker 2: Yeah. When I was at a hospital--in Harlem Hospital [New York, New York], I left anesthesia residency and my first job was at Harlem Hospital. And things were so racist at the time. The guys that I had trained in anesthesia were able to go to North Shore Hospital and make forty thousand [dollars] a year. And here I was chief resident. Okay? Had trained them and they were foreigners to, white foreigners. Okay? This boy from Finland and, and was just a bad actor, a drinker and all that kind of stuff. And I had to go only to Harlem Hospital where I made thirteen thousand dollars a year. And it just tore at my heart. I said, you know sum's gotta happen in this country to make things better. And so I began--you know began to be very activist. But anyway, while was at Harlem Hospital, I kept getting all these cases of emergency surgical cases where people were either gunshot wounds, stab wounds coming in. 'Cause I worked the shift from around three o'clock on Friday until Sunday morning. And what was so terrible about it that some people would be coming back and forth multiple times. And I began to see that. And I had this case one night where a young twenty-three year old black male had almost exsanguineated. I mean you know had almost bled to death from a stab wound of the heart and I rushed him to the O.R. [operating room] and opened up his chest. He had had a scar on his chest. And he had been opened up previously maybe two years before where he had a gunshot wound of the heart. Sewed up his heart and sewed up his chest and then he started to move on the operating table. I had to give him a little anesthesia. He lived and I said you know we're crazy. Why just more and more, what we ought to be showing some of them is about this drug addiction that got him into this thing in the first place." And wrote this paper and the dean at Columbia saw the paper and said, "Well what you have written here is good. Why don't you--why don't we pull you off anesthesia, let you do what you suggested and that was to people came in with the diagnosis of addiction and some other problem, gunshot wound or stab wound or some traumatic injury. I would go see them and get them I get--involved in rehabilitation for that problem. And you know while they were being seen for their primary diagnosis in the hospital, no matter what it was. And it became kind of well known that I was good at this. And I changed the whole focus of the hospital in terms of looking at the addicted. And I begin to concentrate on that. And then Mayor [John] Lindsay and [U.S. Attorney General] Nick [Nicholas] Katzenbach had to do some things here in Brooklyn [New York, New York]. They came to me and asked me would I consult with them and you know begin to run programs here and I, and I said, okay. And I did the consulting piece but didn't want to do methadone maintenance. But they made it worth my while, and they made an offer and said look you can do--this was 1969, '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. Story_ID: 19144 Speaker 1: You know, I was asking about you know 1969 and that time. I would before you get into Mayor [John] Lindsay, I would like to know why--what you saw that made you thought that this should sort of be focused on you're sort of short cutting that. I mean why, why did you. Speaker 2: Well--. Speaker 1: You know a lot of people think of you--its drugs anyway. Speaker 2: Well, the transition was a very easy one because I had gotten at [University of] Geneva [Geneva, Switzerland] what was a Ph.D. in pharmacology at the medical school in Switzerland in Europe, well in Switzerland particularly, when you become an M.D., you get what is called a certificat de feund de ze tu de medicale (ph.) which means a certificate of having finished medical school. Your doctorate on mdecine comes after that when you do your thesis and you have to do it in an, in an area of concern. And my thesis was done in the area of pharmacology so really, the, the, doctorate on mdecine is a degree to the note that I've done more than--'cause I could've come back here and practiced with the 'certificat de feund de ze tu de medicale (ph.) that's all that's required. So I knew some form of pharmacology. And so when I saw people becoming addicted to drugs, it, it, it got to me. I said, "Why--how could this be? I mean what is, what is the most thing that's attracting them. Something must be happening besides just poor socialization and, and, all the other bad things that they say about people who become addicted. Because some of these people who became addicted were were well-to-do persons who were not just poorly reared or poor, period, no monies so this was a way out for them and so forth. So I began to think about addiction as a disease entity that had many manifestations that led to its to the problem that you see in people who manifest addictive behavior. And I said hey I think that something could be done about this. And what was bothering me in a community where addiction was so rampant and prevalent in Harlem [New York, New York], if you were a black person in Harlem, that you wanted to get on a treatment program, you had to go downtown to Beth Israel Hospital. A white institution, a Jewish institution to get on the program that they ran inside a Harlem Hospital. I felt, what the hell is this? Don't doctors know, black doctors know just as much as anybody else?" But they would train the black doctor and place him in Harlem Hos--I said, listen, we need to be doing this ourselves. And I looked around and there were a lot of good black anesthesiologists but only one chief of anesthesia in this whole town. And the rest were just either working in Harlem Hospital or on the staff somewhere being taken advantage of. And I had become chief myself at Oyster Bay Hospital. Chief at Whitestone Hospital and chief at Interfaith Hospital and the people began to take so much of my money just for working in that hospital that they wanted first 10 percent, then 12 percent and then 18 percent and then 22 percent of whatever my gross was. I said you know I'm not gonna do this and give my money away and having to be responsible for all the anesthesia, all the obstetric and gynecological anesthesia, hiring nurse anesthetist and having you now fellow anesthesiologists work for me. I said, you know I'll never get anywhere. I said this seems like a field that if I concentrate on it, at least I cam become somebody in this field and do some good for my people who are--who don't have anyone concentrating on this. And I got interested. Story_ID: 19145 Speaker 1: And do think the timing was right? You know 'cause this--you know because here you are you're at Harlem Hospital, mayor--Now why was Mayor [John] Lindsay, why was he interested in this? Speaker 2: They were getting ready--Bobby [Robert F.] Kennedy had just been killed and they needed a candidate the Democrats to run for president and they had chosen him. And he you know all of the Kennedy Democrats had come to New York at that time. They were either at IBM or at Ford Foundation, or at Vera Institute of Justice and [U.S. Attorney General] Nick [Nicholas] Katzenbach was at at IBM at that time as chief counsel. And they were looking to, that Lindsay would be their person who would switch to Democrat and run for the presidential election. He was you know a fair-haired boy and good looking guy. You know, fit the mold. There was no Kennedy 'cause you know Bobby had been killed. Anyway, he had a problem of addiction in this town. It was being pretty much handled in Manhattan [New York, New York] but over here in Brooklyn [New York, New York] . There was just no programs. An, and then they had a model cities program here which you know had been funded by Kennedy and, and the Democrats were running part of that even though Lindsay was a Republican Mayor. But drugs and crime were rampant here in Brooklyn. They knew that that would be turned right against him by any opposition candidate that, that was gonna run against him. Look what you have done in New York. Nothing! The whole borough of Brooklyn is so terrible and you know--and no treatment programs and what not. So they to do something about that. So they were able to finagle money from the National Institutes of Health, mental health, National Institute of Mental Health and the Model Cities Program, and put that together to start a methadone treatment programs and other kinds of programs here in Brooklyn. And they needed somebody to run it. And they needed somebody black to get into the Brooklyn community who had some credibility and talk about the need for setting up drug treatment programs. And I had been around New York doing all these things and it was highly publicized of the things I did were good. But the awareness and so they came to me, black judges and two black judges and asked me to, to consult to the Vera Institute of Justice that was going to do something here in Brooklyn and to Mayor Lindsay. So I consented to do that while still running a hospital for drug addiction in Queens [New York, New York] in a very hospital--and then running my program at Harlem Hospital where I was getting people who were diagnosed with other problems to do something about their addiction before they left and to get them into addiction programs after they left so that they would have follow up you know I went to three or four meetings in Brooklyn and got the people to consent to maybe start some programs here on the one hand. And on the other hand to do Methadone Maintenance Treatment programs. Because they wanted to put 2,500 people into treatment in Brooklyn immediately and then another 2,500 in Harlem later on after we got this thing up and running in Brooklyn. but I wasn't going to run it. I was just going to be a consultant to help get it started and when that finished they said okay its done and we ready to go. We got a building and all that." Says "What about you being the medical director?" I said, Awe naw I don't want to do that. I'm gonna--I got other things I'm gonna do." and my wife [Delphine Primm] was not so hot on that. I'm an anesthesiologist, why are you working with addicts all this and that. And I said no I'm not interested. So they came back they says well we--we'll make it worth your while. And I said, well what's worth my while? And they says well what about if we paid you $40,000 a year. This was '69 [1969]. That's a lot of money. You know I didn't have to pay any malpractice insurance. I didn't have to worry about you know hiring people all this kind of stuff. And it was inte--I says well I, I have to think it over. And I said, that's not enough. They said look, what do you want? I said, well you have to at least make it worth my while more than that. He says I tell you what, we'll pay you $45,000 to start with and you know each year, you'll get 5, 10 percent raise and you know--. And you know just come on and start this." So I talked to Delphine my wife about it and finally I said--She said look, if that's what you want to do, do it. So I did it. And the rest is history. That was 1969. They came, Nick and Mayor Lindsay and Herb Sturz and all these important people helped to even paint the first building and get it ready and you know they whereon the board and you know it just soared since then. Lindsey bombed out, you know, and, and he did poorly in Florida. And of course he was out of the race--he switched to Democrat and all that happened. But he never did run for president. Story_ID: 19146 Speaker 1: What did you accomplished here sir--you know, with this whole project? And I also want to go back 'cause methadone was very--that was new. Speaker 2: Very controversial--, Speaker 1: Very controversial. Speaker 2: --at that time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It had only been in five years. Speaker 1: Who, who where did methadone come from? Speaker 2: From Dr. [Vincent] Dole and Dr. [Marie] Nyswander. Their picture is on the wall over here. I'm talking to Dr. Dole. He--they didn't like me because I didn't think that methadone was the way to go. I thought that you could do methadone to abstinence and but they thought that you had to have methadone ad infinitum because of the metabolic changes that take place and so forth. And so they called me this program where we said the ten-ton airplane with the Volkswagen Motor and I was the Volkswagen motor. That was printed you know. And I--you know that really challenged me. I was--had to build these four or five different clinics here and then four or five different clinics and I was building them. Well what have I accomplished. I mean I've treated thousands of patients, hundreds of thousands of patients in and out of here. and I've developed a human service conglomerate out of this which was just Methadone Maintenance Treatment programs. I've have five hundred people working here. over the last thirty years. And in you know not just meager paying physicians but in a professional and good, good positions and people are retiring from here. They've sent the kids to college. You know it's, it's, it's it's an institution. I mean it's a twenty-four million dollar corporate conglomerate. I mean you know I think its been one hell of a of an accomplishment in a community where things--you're working against odds all the time. It's not in my back yard, not on planet earth. Do they want any programs like this? And I've been able to do that and to be accepted by the politicians. And by the community in which I serve, so--. Speaker 1: Now what about your views about addiction and the treatment of addiction? Speaker 2: Well--. Speaker 1: I mean they've changed I would say. Speaker 2: Of course. I think addiction is is a problem that a chronic relapsing problem brought on by any number of different etiological factors not the least of which is disenfranchisement and hopelessness and poverty and all those kinds of things. And genetics susceptibility to addictive behavior. All influence becoming addicted. Because once you begin to take drugs, you really change your body's homeostasis. That is the body's natural chemistry changes to a chemistry brought about by this exogenous substance that you're taking into your body which sometimes mimics those same substances that you have in your body endogenously. And so that exogenous substance tends to suppress the endogenous substance that you have, making you susceptible to a need and to an addiction to the exogenous substance. And sometimes you never are able to recover your normal homeostasis ever again unless you have this exogenous substance. It takes a great deal of will power and sometimes lifelong substitution therapy with a pharmacological agents that bring about a normal feeling of homeostasis in your body because you've effected so many neurotransmitter systems by this exogenous substance that you take into your body. So it changes your brain really. It changes the transmitters the neurotransmitters in your brain, specifically dopamine and your endorphins your. Inside your body morphines inside your brain, neurotransmitters that control somewhat pain and stress and untoward reactions that you may face in--and even your stressful syndrome that you may face. So these permanent brain changes are sometimes irreversible. Sometimes they are moderately reversible and there is some amelioration of the addiction and you can go on and begin to live very normally. But other times, there is no amelioration unless there is some pharmacological substitution therapy. Speaker 1: And that, that you feel is methadone? Speaker 2: That's methadone--right now, that's all we have. There is LAM which is a longer acting methadone. L-alphacetamethadol. We have now another substance which is agonist, antagonist. That means it acts like a you know a substance that we have in our own bodies like the endorphins which is bupanorphine. But it also attaches itself to the recetocyte (ph.) and blocks the action of other kinds of agonists or substances that are addictive that are in the same class with drugs. So its--the brain changes. The morphology of the, of the cell and of the axons and the dendrites actually change under the influence of drugs. Particularly over a long period of time. Story_ID: 19147 Speaker 1: You became--or it was--were really tapped by the [President Richard M.] Nixon Administration to serve--. Speaker 2: I went to Vietnam with Dr. Jerome Jaffe who was the first drug czar. And he chose me to with him to take the first testing machine for urinalysis testing for substances of abuse to Vietnam. We, we gave the test to all the people who were rotating back to the United States. My responsibility was to aid in that endeavor and then my later responsibility working as a consultant to the White House was to aid in teaching the VA, the Veterans' Administration that is and the [U.S.] Army post hospitals that received these people when they came back from--Vietnam, how to handle them. That was my responsibility after the things that I did in Vietnam. And subsequent to that, I have been in other administrations, the Bush Administration I was the first director of the Office of Treatment Improvement for substance abuse and the first director of the National Center of Substance Abuse Treatment. And which was in charge of the Block Grant dollars to do alcohol and substance abuse treatment in all the states that go to the states for them to you know, to direct to problems of alcohol and substance abuse in each one of the states. Speaker 1: And you were in the war on drugs? What is your view on the war on drugs? Speaker 2: Well I, I think that we've never been very serious about a war on drugs. And I think its wrong to call it even a war on drugs I think because it ended up being a war on the people who became addicted who were sick. Rather than a war on well partially it was a war on where the drugs came from the importation of drugs, and, and, and of course on the supply side of things. If it's a war, it should be directed there. And it should be adequate enough with adequate enough personnel and monies and other things that can take care of that supply side situation. But at the same time on the demand side, we need to be doing things that we have not been serious about doing. Because we have given most of the money to the supply side. Its been a 70, 30 [percent] split of the dollars with demand getting the 30 percent, the short end of the stick and never the kind of support from the federal government or any--anywhere else or philanthropic organizations to do the job adequately. Can you imagine the richest country in the world being set back constantly by a problem of substance abuse in this nation which is ridiculous. I mean when can win wars and go to the moon and, and now just flying around in space and doing everything possible but still we can't stop the problem of substance abuse in our country we can't solve that problem. We can't solve it because we don't commit ourselves to doing so. We don't commit ourselves to correcting the poverty situation. We don-, we don't commit ourselves to correcting this disenfranchisements that certain people feel. Both black and white. Not only the minorities but other people. We don't--we don't do that well. We leave so many behind and so many without hope and so many without a franchise to do what's necessary to get ahead in our society. Those are the people that are susceptible to substance abuse. And once they try substances, and they change themselves neuroanatomically they end up having a permanent disorder that is very difficult to treat. You have to commit yourself to long-term involvement in the treatment process to be successful in doing well with drug addiction. That's why AA [Alcoholics Anonymous] works so well. That's why NA [Narcotics Anonymous] works so well. Long-term commitment to help in this arena. Story_ID: 19148 Speaker 1: Now in this whole process of, of treating, you know drugs, you got--you became involved in HIV Once again also very early in the process. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And I would like, and I would like for you to say what led you into that? You know--. Speaker 2: Well I, I had a patient in one of my Harlem [New York, New York] clinics that had been sort of baffling to the medical staff there. Because he had this panlymphadenopathy. In other words swollen lymph glands all over his body. They called me in one day to see the patient and I did and I said--I tried to entice him into getting a biopsy of one of the nodes and he wouldn't do that. But he became weaker and weaker and he finally lost weight and he finally died. And the etiology of his death was unknown because this was like, like '82 [1982], '83 [1983] and that's before we had found HIV that causes AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. We were calling it the lymphadenopathy-associated virus, LAV after the Frenchman who discovered it Luc Montagnier. It wasn't until '83 [1983],'84 [1984] when they really discovered the cause of of AIDS or GRID ,gay-related immune deficiency. It was called also GRID. They even had things that were derogatory--that gay meant got AIDS yet, G-A-Y, got AIDS Yet? All kinds of ugly things. And I saw this as a disease entity that was confounding most of us in drug abuse who saw our patients. We were responsible for their primary medical care and saw our patients deteriorating and not knowing what happened to them. And so we began to see more and more association of drug abuse with people who were probably infected with this problem and who had immunocompromised systems and all the opportunistic--opportunistic infections that go along with having an immune-compromised system. And then of course they found out that--they founded HIV, then they found a test for HIV in '84 [1984]. And then we began to put a name to it. So all that time I was working and not being able to solve the problem like in a laboratory or at the bench because I'm not a bench scientist. But seeing what was happening and hoping that something would be found to save some of the lives of the people, particularly in my own program who were becoming infected with this virus that caused this major problem. And so the more and more I delved into it, I began to, to be recognized as somebody who was outspoken about it and somebody who was interested in trying to change the policy so that it would impact my patient population differently that it had been. And I was chosen to go on [U.S.] President [Ronald] Reagan's Human Immunodeficiency Virus Epidemic Commission. And I served three years on that and helped to write the part of that report that talked about how to treat the addicted person who was infected with HIV and AIDS. And its its a great document and can be you know, gotten from the Library of Congress. It's well-published and a well-circulated document. And then after that, one thing has led to another. I have been continuously involved and trying to create policies and--particularly for the addicted who are infected with the virus. And when I was the first director of the Office of Treatment Improvement, I established at the federal level programs that focused on HIV and AIDS in injecting drug users. And then as also director of the national treatment for--National Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, I also focused on this. And of course those programs are still in effect today. And then I have when I began to find out that more and more African Americans are being infected with the virus, I started working very closely with the Centers for Disease Control [and Prevention] where I'm serving on the advisory committee and have been chosen to work very closely with the Congressional Black Caucus. And particularly [U.S.] Representative Maxine Waters and [U.S.] Representative Donna Christian-Christensen both in--and of course representative [U.S. Representative] [Louis] Lou Stokes and getting money to focus on the problem in the African American community. We were successful in calling AIDS and HIV a health emergency in the African American community in 1998. And then being able to get appropriated in the President's budget for 1999, 156 million dollars that has been spent on this problem in 1999. In 2000, another 234.4 million dollars and now for 2001, 350 million dollars has been appropriated specifically to target the emergency that's going on in communities of color because of HIV and AIDS. So I became more and more engrossed in the problem and now I'm still one of the fighters that are out there and just got the Surgeon General's medal for my work. And I, I'm just so proud of what we've done and what others have done who have worked very closely with me to bring about this impact on the problem in the African American community where three and sometimes four out of every ten people will have this problem in this country now, all African Americans. And out of the forty-five thousand people that are becoming infected every year almost two-thirds of that population are African American. And its particularly rampant among African American women. And so I'm, I'm very much committed to the rest of my life being spent trying to do something about this problem until its resolved. Speaker 1: What do you think could resolve it? Speaker 2: Well I think first of all their needs to be massive education, sustained education programs that are targeted to the African American and other communities of color. We don't have that. I mean there should not be two hours of radio admission for a station unless they have a message about doing something to, to thwart or wart off HIV infection in the African American community. I think we need massive billboard coverage of what's happening. For example in east New York and Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, New York, New York neighborhood] and Fort Greene here in Brooklyn [New York, New York] where we have one of the highest prevalence rates of HIV Infection in the country there ought to be billboards saying this community has so and so, and so and so number of HIV Infections this month. And show the increase in months to follow. And change those numbers so that people--people become cognizant of what's going on. People are not cognizant of what's going on. We don't--we're not broadcasting--adequately enough. If this was in the white community it would be an incredible onslaught of health professionals to do something about this problem. And but since its in our community we have a few fighters that are doing it but that's about it. And the federal government is not doing enough. The state government is not doing enough. The city government is not doing enough. I think they feel in certain cities, if they make it public what really is going on that they would discourage tourism and all those kinds of good things when indeed they ought to be doing something about it in spite of whether it discourages or encourages touri--tourism. That should have no bearing on it whatsoever. What should have a bearing on it is the death of citizens in this country unnecessarily, who become involved ignorantly so in behaviors that lead to HIV Infection. We need massive, massive programs to influence people to change their behaviors because you get this by behavior and not by any conspiracy theory that we have heard people talk about. Story_ID: 19149 Speaker 1: And the focus is really unnecessary, whether its in Africa or its here to a black population. And so, you know, that feeds on the conspiracy theory, you know, in ways, because there are other places where you know you have unsanitary conditions and, you know, small compartments, you know, other places and its curious you know you have you know a whole that you know because of HIV/AIDS--. Speaker 2: The whole place is also in Africa that were predicted to be wiped away previously up until three or four years ago that now have begun to see a reduction in the rate and prevalence of HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] because of the institution preventive methods, particularly simple preventive methods using contraceptives. Using barrier methods, in sexual intercourse whether its homosexual or heterosexual. These countries have made considerable inroad into stopping the spread of HIV in their countries. Namely Uganda, Senegal, okay? If we could do the same thing in South Africa, we would see those numbers plummet just like we saw them plummet in the gay white community that had a concentrated sustained effort to stop the onslaught of this in terms of annihilating so many young gay white male people. We did it--all we need to do is take a, a, a page out of that book of success and apply it in our, in our own problem and we would see a great reduction rather than to believe the conspiracy theories which are certainly coyable because of our--they also say if you can steal an election, and select a president, rather than to elect a president, you certainly can give people HIV. And because of Tuskegee existed, and most people believe that the government gave people syphilis and, not that people were withheld the penicillin or the treatment for syphilis, but actually gave them syphilis and then wouldn't treat 'em once they got syphilis. So there are all kinds of things that make the conspiracy theory coyable but there is only once thing that can cause you to get infected with HIV and that's your behavior. You either have to stick yourself with a needle that's contaminated with HIV or you have to have sex with somebody in an unprotected manner that--is infected with HIV and then you become infected. You can avoid all of those things by using precautions and not using needles that are contaminated. You can use sterile needles. We, we give injections every day. Doctors every day give injections and our patients don't get HIV, because we don't give the injections with a used needle. Okay? That could have been used on somebody who was previously infected. So the whole conspiracy theory should be attacked by people in public health every day and in language that is comprehensible to the population who we know that are becoming more and more infected by this and that language has to say just what I said. You may use a condom, you don't have unprotected sex, you need to get tested, you need to know the status the serum status of your sexual partner. You don't have unprotected anal, oral intercourse or, or, you can't be a cunnilingus any of those things. You have to get the word out and get it out in the right way in a sustained effort until we begin to see a reduction. And we need to start very young because--kids nine, ten, eleven and twelve years old are now being involved in sexual encounters and we need to focus on all of the society bear none. And the prude, the prudish nature that we have treated--the way that we have treated sex in this country all predispose us to an ignorance that allows things like HIV and AIDS and other sexually-transmitted diseases to flourish. Speaker 1: So do you really believe that behavior--I mean sexual behavior that is--some people say you know just by nature of man--you man's, animal's tendencies--you that that behavior can only ultimately be changed? Speaker 2: I think--I think not, not the sexual behavior. I think sexual behavior of mammals and birds and everything's is here to stay. But I think the way we participate in that sexual behavior can be changed. I think we have to be more monogamous and, and even in monogamy, we have to know the, the serum status of our sexual partner. Whether they are infected with, with syphilis or gonorrhea or HIV, or hepatitis C. I mean we need to know that so that we can take adequate precautions. if a person has a contagious disease in this country, okay? If its bad enough and we know that its gonna cause an epidemic, or an endemic, we do our darndest to isolate those individuals from the rest of society. we don't have to isolate HIV individuals from the rest of society. What we have to so is to make sure that we all know our sexual--I mean our HIV status and practice sexual behavior in a manner if we're positive, that we do not infect others. Or do not allow anyone to infect us. So it can work two-way street. Those who are infected need to protect themselves, those who are uninfected need to protect themselves from those who are infected. So its--And if you have a concordance of infection, you still need to protect yourself because your strain may be different than the viral strain in the other individual. And if you exchange strains, that strain may become even more virulent and more mutant and less able to to be succumbed by, by whatever combination therapies that are out there that presently we have in an of drugs that can do something about the problem. So yes behavior change is the major factor influencing the outcome of this endemic in this country and elsewhere. Not conspiracy. Story_ID: 19150 Speaker 1: When you look back over your now let's see almost forty-year career are there things that you would do differently if you had the opportunity? Speaker 2: Well my own personal behavior I would if I had to go back I would make different decisions about it. In relationship to some of the relationships that I've had. And I, I would rather not share what they--those are but I would certainly make some changes in my interaction with with people. Beyond that, what I have done has been certainly when I look at retrospect--retrospectively I admire some of the things that I have done. I don't give them as much adulation as others do but I, I, I'm happy that I chose to do those things and follow through to, to finish them. I'm still doing. And at seventy-two [years old], I don't want to stop doing because I think what I do is unique I have access to arenas where other people do not and that I don't belong to me any more. I belong to all the people who have helped me do so many good things. And I must continue to, to use that to further their advancement in any way. And the HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], situation. You know there are very few people--there are no lobbyists--no, no permanent or fulltime lobbyist for people who are dealing with HIV. That--certainly we have no fulltime lobbyists for people who are dealing with drug abuse, particularly in the African American community. And I'm one of those lobbyists for that population. And I'm not gonna give that up. I just feel that its it's a calling and, and I've been blessed to have answered the call and to have been protected all along the way so that I could continue to do it. Speaker 1: Now in terms of, of African Americans in the medical profession. For those who are coming along--you came along at a different time. Medicine has changed a lot. The practice of medicine has changed a lot in that--you know in that period. But I'm wondering if you think this is an important area for--you know African Americans to pursue? Speaker 2: Of course it is. I think its more important now than ever before. we now have a whole different viewpoint concerning addiction and what its all about. We're living in an error where we have--we can do microscopic analysis and, and, and positron emission to, to, to, tomography and, and look at the brain and do things that we never were able to do before. And come up with reasons for certain behaviors and, and, and changes and the, the neurobiology of individuals. Before we didn't have that. So these are unique opportunities for young professionals to get into a field that is terribly rewarding and to see what their work can do by seeing changes in behavior of individuals who happen to be infected by some of the problems that we've been talking about. So there are unique opportunities for African Americans now that never existed before with fellowships that are paid fellowships. They're not exorbitanty paid or paid to the extent that one can live a life of luxury but you may have to live meagerly for a while but not in poverty and learn some of these things that I am talking about and make a tremendous contribution to the health and welfare of, of a neglected people of which you may belong. So I just feel very strongly that now is the time. I look at my own family--my own children who have done so well in this era my daughter is, is now--well she's the director of the community psychiatry program at Johns Hopkins. And my other daughter is in her residency at St. Vincent's hospital. And these were places where in my error, you could not be sweeping the floor. So I, I'm just very, very positive about what's going on in America and hope it continues to improve. We are improving but it has not improved enough. We don't have access--Racism is still alive and well. I, I feel it constantly even at my stage where, where I function, racism is alive and well and, and being practiced, being practiced universally. Story_ID: 19151 Speaker 1: When you think about yourself as a young boy in West Virginia, and you know and how far you've come in many ways. But you wanted to be a doctor. You know I go back to the story of you sort of being fascinated with people even coming on horse--you said--. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Horseback. Speaker 1: And, and where you've come to date--you know what do sort of think about that path? You know does it seem sort of unbelievable or--. Speaker 2: It, it, does. But not to me. But to others it does. And it does because it has been a unique path to get to where I am. But the uniqueness came out of the motto that you asked me. What was, what was something that you were saying that you really believed in? I think where there's a will, there's a way. And I had the will to do all of those things and somehow the way was made for me by God or by happenstance. Whatever the case may have been, the way has been made for me. So--but had the will all the time to overcome anything that got in my way. And I think that is what has been admirable with me to have the stick-to-itiveness to endure all of this and the perspicacity to endured all of this and then to be like I am. And I never want to forget where I came from. Never. Never. Because I think if you do, that you miss--you miss your own essence if you forget where you came from. And you, you begin to live a lie I often think of people who have forgotten where they come from and, and forgotten how they got where they are and what they had to use to get there. And how many people helped them to get there and yet they think they have made it on their own. And they didn't. And every step of the way, somebody helped to guide you or to direct you in a manner in which you were able to overcome the odds to get where you are today. And once you forget about that, you, you're in trouble. And you tend not to want to help other people. And I think that each of us should help someone move forward. And I have--my mother [Willie Henriett Martin Primm] lived her life like that, my father [George Oliver Primm] did and I have done so to and I think my children do. They want to help people. And they get great joy out of helping other people get somewhere. Speaker 1: And my last question for you is what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: That I did not die with my music in me. That I have sung all the songs that my energy would have--that my energy has allowed me to sing in a sort of symphonic way so that people can understand the music and use it and also incorporate it--that song into their own tune and sing a song for themselves...