 Story_ID: 482487 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, Frank Emanuel Petersen, Jr. [HistoryMaker Lieutenant General Frank E. Petersen, Jr.] And it's P-E-T-E-R-S-E-N. Speaker 1: Okay. S-E-N. Is there a story behind that spelling of Petersen? Speaker 2: Yes, my father [Frank E. Petersen, Sr.] was born in St. Croix, [U.S.] Virgin Islands. And it was a custom that the residents on the various plantations would assume the name of the plantation owner. And that's how it's Petersen, sort of the Swedish pronunciation. There was quite a mixture of languages. My father could speak German, Spanish, Swedish, and of course, English. So that's the derivation for the name. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My place of birth is Topeka, Kansas, on the 2nd of March, 1932. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, right now retired, but I served thirty-eight years in the [U.S.] Marine Corps as a fighter pilot. So, I guess that would be my occupation. Speaker 1: And you are a three-star general, a retired three-star general? Speaker 2: Yes, a three-star general of the United States Marine Corps. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, today is January--oh, I'm sorry--February 6th, I believe. Is that correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Two thousand seven [2007], right? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's February 7th. Speaker 1: February 7, nineteen--correction, 2007. Speaker 2: All right. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: You're on the eastern shore of Kent Island [Maryland], on the shores of the Chesapeake Bay. Story_ID: 482488 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we ask, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They're kind of a warm-up. The first question is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food? No, I don't, really (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Food is food, that's the old [U.S.] Marine Corps way. If you can eat it, get it. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Story_ID: 482489 Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Frank E. Petersen, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yeah, Edythe Southard [Edythe Southard Petersen], S-U-T-T-H-A-R-D [sic.], that was her maiden name. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Southard? Speaker 2: Southard, S-U-T-T-H-A-R-D [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is her place of birth, and? Speaker 2: Mom was born in Wichita, Kansas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she grew up in Syracuse, Kansas. Speaker 1: And what's her date of birth? Speaker 2: Don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have an idea about when? Speaker 2: Oh, I would say roughly about the--1910. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can only go as far back as her grandfather, who fought in the Union Army, the 55th Massachusetts Infantry [55th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment]. Speaker 1: And his name was? Speaker 2: His name, I don't recall. Archie-- Speaker 1: It's McKinney [Archie McKinney], right? Speaker 2: McKinney, that's it, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. That's something. Now, he was--we were looking at the discharge a little while ago, and he was from Adams County, Ohio, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure if that's where he was from, or if that's where he enlisted from. It's a little vague in terms of how those gents managed to wind up in the Massachusetts Infantry. But they seemed to come from all over the eastern part of the United States. Speaker 1: Well, that's where he was mustered in, right? In Adams County? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, and the tradition is that he was probably free. Was he was free? Speaker 2: A free man, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And are there any stories that are passed down about his activities in the Army? Speaker 2: No. In fact, my aunt was cleaning out her attic in Syracuse, Kansas, and ran across that document, and just asked if I would be interested in it. And I said, "Absolutely." (Laughter) I had no idea, I had no idea. Speaker 1: That's something. So, there are no stories or anything that are passed down (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None. Speaker 1: --from his side of the family about that-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unfortunately. Speaker 1: --period. How did the family, is there a story as to how the family wound up in Kansas? Speaker 2: Yes. My grandmother [Fannie Southard], who was a resident of Wichita, decided that the school system and the segregation issues were such that she wished to not raise her children in that environment, so she moved everybody to Syracuse, Kansas, a very small town. And that's where they all grew up. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So she moved from Wichita to Syracuse? Speaker 2: That's correct, yes. Speaker 1: All right. Is there any story about how they wound up in Wichita in the first place? Speaker 2: I can't go back that far. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't go-- Speaker 1: All right. So, Wichita was--had segregation issues I guess in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's see. Well, any other stories on that side of the family? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What did they do for a living? Speaker 2: Farmers. I can remember visiting the family residence in Syracuse, and it's strictly farm country. And that was, that was it. Story_ID: 482490 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Edythe Southard Petersen] talk about what it was like to grow up in--? Speaker 2: No. In fact, she very seldom would reflect on her childhood. She of course did attend college at Kansas University [sic. University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas], and that's where she met my father [Frank E. Petersen, Sr.]. But she very seldom would talk about the past. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she attended the University of Kansas? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now that was probably, that's sort of a big deal in some ways, I would think (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. In fact, there is a picture showing she and the rest of the sorority there at Syracuse [Kansas]. And that would have been back in the late 1920s. Speaker 1: There would have been very few black students I would imagine (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --at the University of Kansas in those days, in the '20s [1920s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I would assume so, a rarity (laughter). Speaker 1: What did she major in? Speaker 2: I really don't know, I really don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Was she able to graduate? Speaker 2: Yes, she did graduate from KU, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she, was she a teacher or something? What did she do? Speaker 2: No. In fact, once she met my dad, then it was just a matter of becoming a housewife. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did she talk about how she got into the University of Kansas, or if there was a struggle involved in getting in? Speaker 2: No, that's part of the history that's missing. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. And no stories about life as a student at the University of Kansas? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did she ever go back to school for anything? Speaker 2: No. In fact, even though we were living--I grew up in Topeka, Kansas--KU was only about thirty minutes away, over in Lawrence, Kansas. But no trips there or anything, although there were family friends who were in Lawrence. But very seldom did we discuss anything with her school life. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I know that part of Kansas was--I mean there were a lot of stories I guess, and history, of the black migration to Kansas and the, I guess the struggles between the abolitionists and slaveholders back in the 1800s. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You know, there was a lot of, you know, real dramatic stuff in Kansas. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And dramatic history there, so. Story_ID: 482491 Speaker 1: Well, let's go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm his namesake, Frank Emanuel Petersen [Frank E. Petersen, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was born and raised in St. Croix, [U.S.] Virgin Islands. Met--he used to serve as a tour guide for vacationers, one of whom was from Topeka, Kansas, who happened to be the publisher of the Topeka newspaper. And as a tour guide, my father caught his attention, and this gentleman arranged for my father to come to the United States and settle in Topeka. Speaker 1: Okay. So, about old was he when he came over? Speaker 2: I think dad would have been in his mid-twenties when he came over. And he initially served as an auto mechanic. He then did some time as a typesetter in the newspaper. And from there, he graduated and became a self-taught electrician, a radio repairman. And from there, he of course graduated into TVs. So, he was a self-made man, had his own business. And he sort of raised myself and my brother to learn the radio repair business. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how far back can you trace his side of the family? Is there any stories about St. Croix? Speaker 2: No. In fact we vacationed in St. Croix, and one of my brothers did sort of a survey of church records, trying to see how far back he could go on my dad's side. But there was difficulty, because of the commonality of names being associated with which plantation you were raised on. But right now, the name Petersen is pretty prominent in the Virgin Islands. And we were there, oh, I guess about a year ago, and one of the chief judges is a female whose last name is Petersen. And we tried to find a link, but it's just awfully difficult. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What year was your father born? Was he about the same age as your mother [Edythe Southard Petersen], or was he-- Speaker 2: Yes, he was, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have an exact year, do you--? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. So, about, around 1910 then, I guess? Speaker 2: Roughly, I would say, yes. Story_ID: 482492 Speaker 1: So is there a story that accompanies the meeting of your parents [Edythe Southard Petersen and Frank E. Petersen, Sr.]? Did they tell the story about how they met? Speaker 2: No, that's also a little bit vague. But daddy was a pretty sharp dresser, and had his own Model A Ford [Ford Model A], customized licensed plates. And I do recall a picture of he and mom in this old Model A Ford. And so from what I gather, Dad and some of the other guys in Topeka [Kansas] would travel from Topeka down to the Lawrence [Kansas] area, and that's how and my mom met. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is about 1930 or so, I guess? Speaker 2: I would say late '20s [1920s], because I was born in '32 [1932] and my older sister [Anne Petersen Nickerson] was born in '30 [1930]. So, they would have gotten together I would think in the late '20s [1920s], '28 [1928], or somewhere around there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, describe their personalities for me. Speaker 2: Dad was a very outgoing individual--a lot of humor, very concentrated when he would focus in. A pretty stern taskmaster in terms of raising boys. Mom was sort of the peacemaker. She would always be the one to put oil on the troubled waters. Very smart, very educated, and very determined that the growth of the kids would not be affected by those issues of segregation that were a part of everyday life in Topeka, Kansas in those days. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any sense of who you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think my dad more than anything else. He sort of made us self-determined kind of guys, and that was pretty much the way he had made it. So, I think I take pretty much after my dad. Story_ID: 482493 Speaker 1: Did you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I can go back to the age of three or four. We weren't living in the place where we actually grew up. We were living in a house at 1110 Clay Street in Topeka, Kansas. My father [Frank E. Petersen, Jr.] told me not to do something, and that was that I'd throw the rubber toy up on the roof of this house, and dad had told me not to go up there after it. And I can recall as soon as I could get his back turned, I was on the roof going after that toy. I remember that very, very, distinctly. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he have to come up and get you, or what? Speaker 2: No, mom [Edythe Southard Petersen] interceded. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mom blocked for me (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you live--you lived in the City of Topeka? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, lived in the city at two different residences, 1110 Clay Street, and 1726 Topeka Boulevard. Story_ID: 482494 Speaker 1: Did you live like in a black community of Topeka [Kansas]? Speaker 2: Yes, both communities were essentially black. There was no overt kind of ghetto, black versus white, but it was sort of intermingling. Segregation took place in the movies, the restaurants, in other public places. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Was there a name for your neighborhood? Speaker 2: South Topeka [Kansas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: South Topeka. The schools, of course, were segregated. In fact, my grade school was Monroe Elementary School [Topeka, Kansas], and it was that school that was the basis for Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what were--kind of describe your neighborhood for us. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I immediately reflect on summer, because the heat was extremely oppressive. We were still dealing with horse-drawn milk carriages, as an example. A two-lane highway that I watched grow into a six-lane highway as part of the interstate, the national program on building interstates. I can remember in the '40s [1940s] the war effort. I can remember the sounds of bombers taking off from the [U.S.] Air Force base that was just outside of town. Speaker 1: Which one was it? Speaker 2: That was Topeka Army Airfield, which then became Forbes Field [Topeka Regional Airport, Topeka, Kansas]. It's now closed down. But I recently-- I say recently, about oh, two years ago I had purchased an airplane in the Denver [Colorado] area and flown to Topeka and landed at Forbes. And had a chance to, you know, drive down the old streets and reflect, and so forth. I can also remember the war effort, collecting scrap rubber. I can remember the Oreo [sic.] bags with the yellow coloring that you had to mix in the bag in place of butter. I can remember the introduction (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oleo, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --the introduction of the ballpoint pen, which I thought was rather revolutionary. And I can remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is something, we take that for granted, the ballpoint pen. Speaker 2: I know (laughter). Speaker 1: But there was a time when there were no ballpoint pens. You had to dip your pen-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --in the inkwell-- Speaker 2: That's right (laughter). Speaker 1: --right up to the time that you were a kid. Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when was the pen introduced, the ballpoint? Speaker 2: I remember it coming in the--right after World War II [WWII], I think in the late '40s [1940s]. And I can remember with the early models you had to be careful. You couldn't put them in your shirt pocket because the ink would tend to drip out, yeah. And let's see. Oh, geez. The Gold Stars for those who were killed in the war. The Gold Star Mothers [American Gold Star Mothers, Inc.], they would put a little gold star on the windows. I can remember the rationing of gasoline, and you had a certain color sticker on your car that would then allow you to purchase gasoline at certain times. And for some reason, green seems to stick out as being the most desirable. I can't think of some more of those memories. Speaker 1: The sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, yeah. That's about it. Story_ID: 482495 Speaker 1: So the war kind of dominated a lot of childhood I guess, when you think about it? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. The war started in 1941, and of course I can remember listening to the radio and the announcement of the beginning of World War II [WWII] from Franklin D. Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. And I had no idea what the heck was going on. I was then, what, nine years old. As the war dragged on, the draft of course was in effect, and I then began to imagine myself being drafted and fighting in that war. And of course the war ended in what, in '45 [1945]. So, that pretty much took care of that. But the family gathering would be around the radio, not the least of which would be when Joe Louis fought. That was a big occasion. Dad [Frank E. Petersen, Sr.] would go out and get a gallon of ice cream, and we'd all gather around the radio and listen to the fight. So-- Speaker 1: And we've heard these stories of Joe Louis. So, your family had a radio, always had a radio? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. I know we've heard the stories of people gathering at somebody's house together, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right (laughter). Speaker 1: Would people come to your house to listen to the radio? Speaker 2: No, it was pretty much just a family affair. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a family affair. And on one of the funnier occasions, my brother Bill [William Petersen] started crying about halfway through one of the fights. And mama [Edythe Southard Petersen] asked him what was wrong, and he said he couldn't eat anymore, that he'd eaten so much ice cream he was full, and he wanted more. (Laughter) So, I can also remember the coal-burning stove. In the winter you'd have to--everyone had a coal cellar, and you had to cart the coal up to the house. And one of my jobs was first up in the morning at six o'clock to start the fire. The winters in Topeka [Kansas] at times would get down to as much as ten below zero. So, it would get pretty severe. And the house, you know, with just the one stove--and of course I think upstairs we had an electric stove. But I didn't look forward to winters at all, it was miserable. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's not many trees out there, right, in Kansas? Speaker 2: No, not really. Speaker 1: Flat? Speaker 2: It's a pretty flat state. They used to say, you can drive me across Kansas, you could always see where you'd be tomorrow, because it was just flat all the way across. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you actually had to go get the coal, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact, what they would do, they would deliver, they being the local suppliers. And they would dump it through a coal chute into your basement. And then of course you had to take a coal bucket to go down and retrieve to bring it up into the house. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So your house, you'd buy like a stove, a coal stove? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Right. Well, now what did you like to do? What were some of your favorite pastimes when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, Larry [Larry Crowe], I don't think I really had a pastime. I used to build up model airplanes quite a bit. And then as I got towards junior high and high school, I would engage in sports. I would run track, basketball, and mostly just hanging out, you know. Speaker 1: You say you built model airplanes. Would you build them from a kit, or would you actually try to make them from scratch? Speaker 2: In those days you could buy a model airplane kit. And you'd have--they were made of Balsa wood. And the paper covering for the wings, you would treat them with--we used to call it dope. You'd just paint it on, and then it would tighten up the fabric. And LePage's glue to glue them together. And we didn't know anything about sniffing glue, or anything like that. (Laughter) But you'd start, you know, you'd just have the kit and you'd just take it and start putting it together. Story_ID: 482496 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite radio show? Speaker 2: Believe or not, 'Amos 'n' Andy,' that was one. And my mother [Edythe Southard Petersen] with her college education would sit there and go--click her tongue, astonished at the mistakes they would make, and the pronunciation and so forth. But we had no idea, you know, it was just one of those shows. Speaker 1: Now, did you know at that time that they were two white guys doing Amos and Andy? Speaker 2: No, I did not (laughter). Speaker 1: I just wondered, because in radio, you know, you sit--you know, often kids would, you know, they would try to imagine the people inside the radio-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and all that sort of thing. I mean, I don't know. Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of the highlights of my youth--with the [U.S.] Army personnel stationed at the base [Topeka Army Airfield; Topeka Regional Airport, Topeka, Kansas] just up the road, they would have entertainment come through. And they had for the blacks, on one occasion Nat Cole King came through. My dad [Frank E. Petersen, Sr.] was able to get us out there, and I was able to go up and shake hands with Nat King Cole. And so-- Speaker 1: That was a big deal in those days, yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: That was a highlight. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. And the music, the popular music then was jazz mostly, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: Band music and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I can always remember one of the theme songs for, in fact, the 99th Pursuit [99th Pursuit Squadron], 'Straighten up and Fly Right,' but I didn't know about the 99th fighter pilots at that time. I just rem- I do remember the song, though. Speaker 1: Okay. So, we were referring to the Tuskegee Airmen? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: So you didn't know about-- Speaker 2: I did not. Speaker 1: Even though here's something that probably could have inspired a lot of black youth (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's true. Speaker 1: And it wasn't easy to know about. Speaker 2: No. Because we were--there was one black newspaper, the Kansas City Call [The Call], and that came out I think about once a week. And it was of course the source for black news, but I don't recall ever being exposed to the Tuskegee Airmen. Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay. So, you didn't get the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] or the Defender [Chicago Defender]? Speaker 2: Oh, the Pittsburgh Courier, yes, that and the Kansas City Call. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, yeah, that's interesting. Speaker 2: And also in the beginning, there was a magazine that came out about that time called the Negro Digest, I recall seeing that. Also, there was another black magazine that came out, and this was prior to Ebony. I can't recall the name of that magazine. Speaker 1: It wasn't a Johnson publication [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] then, right? Was it a-- Speaker 2: No, it was similar. It was similar to Ebony, but it preceded Ebony. Speaker 1: I don't know if Sepia came out before then. Speaker 2: Our World or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that was it, Our World. I'm not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Our World, okay. Speaker 2: It's a little vague. Story_ID: 482497 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school. Now you attended Monroe Elementary School [Topeka, Kansas]? Speaker 2: Monroe. Speaker 1: Monroe? Speaker 2: Yeah, Monroe Elementary School. And on graduating from there, I then went to Boswell Junior High [Boswell Junior High School, Topeka, Kansas], which was way outside my school district. But what had happened was, there was a new program for supposedly gifted schools in a special class at Boswell. So, I had to bypass my junior high school which was a block away and walk about five miles in each direction to this new school. And I hated every minute of it. Myself and one other black were in the class, Paul Tyler. And we were friends before going to the school, but that program lasted oh, about two years or so. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is at Boswell, that's the name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boswell, yes. Speaker 1: The gifted program, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, now did you, how did you feel about being gifted? Did you-- Speaker 2: Well, one, you had to make sure that you did not appear in any way, shape, or form, of having any intellectual capacity above those of your fellows in the neighborhood. But at that school, I made a heck of a lot of money by--on the algebra class, some of my other black classmates would have me do their homework for them. And I would get sometimes money, sometimes free Cokes [Coca-Cola], desserts and so forth, by doing their homework for them (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 482498 Speaker 1: So, okay, we left you selling homework to the students (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, that was in my second year of junior high [Boswell Junior High School, Topeka, Kansas]. The program was a great program. They gave us advance studies in those days, up to calculus. Some of my classmates were Nancy [Nancy Kassebaum]--oh, Christ--became a senator from Kansas--it'll come to me, and Dean Smith, the basketball coach down at North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], and a guy named Menninger, Ralph Menninger. It doesn't ring a bell outside of psychiatric circles, but his family had one of the largest psychiatric institutes in America; well-known, world famous. But it was an interesting experience, but the move from junior high to high school [Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas], that's when I began to really think in terms of doing something outside of Topeka [Kansas]. In fact, at the age of seventeen I wanted to join the United States Navy. Mom [Edythe Southard Petersen] wouldn't sign, she wouldn't allow that. Dad [Frank E. Petersen, Sr.], of course, since he was an entrepreneur, "Get out and do something." I can remember one day Dad looked at me and said, "Boy, you know, the house, she getting small." I said, "What the hell's wrong with daddy? This house is the same size." And I finally figured it out, that it's time for me to get moving, so (laughter). Story_ID: 482499 Speaker 1: So, at the age of eighteen I joined the United States Navy. And they gave you a test, and it was called a General Classification Test, the GCT test, and I busted the curve on that test. They called me back in, in about a week. And I didn't know what was going on, but they had me take the test again, and I was closely monitored. And then it finally dawned on me what had happened, but I got an even higher score. And they then, they being the recruiters, said I could have my choice of schools, and I chose the electronics school. And I'll never forget, the recruiter looked at me and said, "It would be even better if you'd go into the steward ranks." And of course, the stewards were essentially servants for officers. And I said, "No way." And I went to my dad [Frank E. Petersen, Sr.] and he went down to talk to the recruiters, and I wound up in the electronics school, and that was out in San Diego, California. Speaker 2: Now, before we go--I want to go back a little bit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And pick up with something about high school [Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas]. But that's an interesting story. Here you have somebody that's testing out as kind of a Navy genius, and you want them to go to steward school? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: What kind of--what need is there for a genius steward? Speaker 1: Well, you have to think back to the times. Now, this would have been in the late '40s [1940s] or early '50s [1950s]. In fact, I joined in June of 1950. But one, the services were not desegregated until the Truman edict [Executive Order 9981]. There had never, as an example, been black Marines. The Truman edict opened the doors for the blacks to be--no, I'm sorry, let me go back a little further. It was Eleanor Roosevelt who was fundamentally responsible for creating the Tuskegee Airmen. From that, there were then, during World War II [WWII], issues raised on blacks serving in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, and they were allowed to serve in segregated units, trained at North Carolina at a place called Montford Point [Camp Gilbert H. Johnson, Jacksonville, North Carolina]. Now, we move forward to the '48 [1948] era when the Truman edict came out. But you still had--even though there was an official policy of non-discrimination and segregation in the [U.S.] Armed Forces, in point of fact there still was, even up to the point of the Korean War, where all black units fought in the Korean War in the initial days under the command of white officers. So even though the edict was there, the whole mindset was still looking at the place where blacks should serve in the [U.S.] military--and of course the steward ranks, the cooks, the bakers, and those kinds of things. So that was the whole deal in trying to get me to go to the stewards (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Quartermaster Corps in the [U.S.] Army, I mean? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: And then other people we've interviewed said the Navy was actually the toughest place to rise up in, I mean to rise in the ranks, to do anything other than serve in the galley and that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Well, you have to realize there were no black officers in the Navy, and there were no black officers in the Marine Corps. In fact, just last year we buried the guy who was the first black officer to ever be in the Marine Corps. And-- Speaker 2: Who was that? Speaker 1: That was, the name eludes me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: That's okay, we'll just-- Speaker 1: But that was the whole--that was the whole situation. Story_ID: 482500 Speaker 1: The first black pilot [in the U.S. Navy] had just graduated from flight school in roughly late '49 [1949] or early '50 [1950], and he was killed in the Korean War, Jesse Brown [Jesse L. Brown]. Speaker 2: Now, did you hear about him in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, some while I was in-- Speaker 2: --high school [Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas]? Speaker 1: No, I was then in the [U.S.] Navy boot camp. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, I joined the--good old smart Frank [HistoryMaker Lieutenant General Frank E. Petersen, Jr.]--I joined the Navy on June 6, 1950, and in that same month, the Korean War started. (Laughter) So, as I was going through boot camp, I guess in June or July, around the July, August timeframe of 1950, Jesse Brown was shot down and killed in Korea. He was the first black naval aviator. His wingman was a gentleman named Thomas Hudner [Thomas J. Hudner Jr.]. Thomas Hudner crash-landed his Corsair [Vought F4U Corsair] next to Jesse's, because Jesse was trapped in the cockpit and Hudner was trying to assist by trying to get Jesse out of the cockpit. They could not get Jesse out of the cockpit; he died in the cockpit. Hudner was picked up later by a helicopter, and was subsequently awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor for his acts that particular day. But when I heard about Jesse, I had no idea that blacks could go to flight school. And as soon as I heard, I then put in a request that I would do--go to flight school, and the request was accepted. So, I went from boot camp through the Navy electronics school until the opening occurred in flight school. So, I entered flight school at the age of nineteen in Pensacola, Florida. Story_ID: 482501 Speaker 1: Now, just before we go further-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I just want to ask you a couple questions about high school. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: When you were in high school, did you--you were in this gifted middle school [Boswell Junior High School, Topeka, Kansas]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school, first of all? Speaker 2: I went to high school in 1946. And-- Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Topeka High School [Topeka, Kansas]. Speaker 1: Okay. There was just one in Topeka [Kansas]? Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: There was just one high school in Topeka? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And you graduated in 1950? Speaker 2: In 1949. Speaker 1: Forty-nine [1949], okay. Speaker 2: And I went one year of Washburn University [Washburn Municipal University of Topeka; Washburn University] in Topeka. Speaker 1: Okay. Because I thought that you would probably go to college; that's what I was thinking, you know. Speaker 2: I had one year of college. Speaker 1: Okay, Washburn, okay. Speaker 2: But that also was not for me at that point in time. After one year of college, that's when I signed myself into the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 1: Now, why did you--I mean what was it that, you know, prompted you to join the Navy after one year of Washburn? Speaker 2: Well, a couple of my friends had joined the service, and they'd come home with some pretty good stories. I was always sort of a wanderlust, and I wanted to see more of the world than what would be contained in Topeka, and in Kansas. I wanted to see oceans. Speaker 1: Now that seems, it seems like it's an old story now. It's almost like a script now, when people say, you know, of course, Dorothy wanted to leave Kansas. Everybody wants to leave Kansas. Speaker 2: No question (laughter). Speaker 1: Kansas is--is there something about Kansas that just inspires people to want to get out of there? Speaker 2: Well, it's the same, it's the same routine. It's extremely boring, there's very little excitement. I just wanted to get out and see the world. I had to get away. Speaker 1: Okay. You get to see very little water in Kansas, I guess, too? Speaker 2: There's one river that runs through the center of Topeka, the Kaw, K-A-W, River [Kaw River]. And there are some ponds, but it doesn't compare--of course, if you can read about oceans, you want to go see an ocean. And it was one of the highlights of my youth, traveling by train from Topeka to San Diego [California] for boot camp. And the train would go from Topeka to San Francisco [California], and then travel the coast from San Francisco down to San Diego. And I'll never forget awakening on the train and looking out the window and seeing for the first time the Pacific Ocean. I was hooked from that point on; no more Kansas (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting, though, just to-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Because I wondered why you didn't end up staying in college, you know, with-- Speaker 2: I saw if I stayed in college and if I graduated from college, I would be caught still in that Kansas rut. I wanted to see the world, and get out and explore (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 482502 Speaker 1: Did you graduate from high school [Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas] with honors or anything? Speaker 2: No, just an average C student, see, and nothing really spectacular. Speaker 1: But obviously gifted, being identified as gifted, somebody who can do other people's homework for money. I mean were you, were you bored in school? Speaker 2: Pretty much bored, but at the same time, the mindset is what you see in young kids of today who are truly gifted. They use that to ensure that they do not stand out, as opposed to being competitive. You have to be like the herd. Anyone who's different in the herd is going to be singled out. So, it's sort of a reverse psychological effect, to know that you have the talent, but to ensure that you don't use it. Speaker 1: Did you have teachers that encouraged you? Because you hear it both ways. You hear, like, in some black communities it's, you don't want to be smart because you stand out, and people will pick at you because you're smart. And you also hear that people will, you know, teachers will encourage, you know, excellence, and especially in those days when the black community was more contained. Speaker 2: Well, that was the dichotomy of the situation in that during grade school, you had all black teachers. You go to junior high, and you got all white teachers. You go to high school, you got all white teachers. In high school, you have separate basketball teams, separate social. You got a black basketball team, and you had a white basketball team. Speaker 1: In high school? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: This is--so you got one high school in Topeka [Kansas]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But within the confines of the high school, you got segregation in the high school? Speaker 2: Yes. In fact, the black basketball team was called the Ramblers [Topeka Ramblers]. We had our own tournaments with other high schools throughout Kansas with the same setup. We had our own homecoming queen, our own prom, socially separate. But in the classrooms there was of course blacks and whites, but there were no black teachers. Speaker 1: So were you in, were you--did you take classes with mostly white students? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or did they try to segregate the classes out too? Speaker 2: No, the classes were not segregated, just the social. Speaker 1: And did you take a college preparatory course, or did they have you in some other kind of program? Speaker 2: No. I opted to take trade school courses. Why? Because I knew I didn't have to study. (Laughter) So it's weird, but that's the way it was. Speaker 1: Well, there's an aspect to that. You know, if you consider like what a teenager might want to do, you say, well, you can have more free time if you're taking something easy, right? Speaker 2: Well, that plus I didn't know what I really wanted to become. And by the time I had realized that I had short-circuited myself by taking trade school courses as opposed to chemistry, and physics, upper level math and so forth, biology, I had to go back and redo those things. Speaker 1: Okay. But that was after you got in the [U.S.] Marine Corps? Speaker 2: That is correct, uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Well, this is interesting. Okay, so did your mother [Edythe Southard Petersen] try to encourage you to take higher level courses, or did she-- Speaker 2: She did. In many different ways she encouraged us to read, to study, to expand our knowledge. That was me. My sister [Anne Petersen Nickerson], of course, who was two years older, did take the right courses and so forth. But as I say, I took the easy way during my high school. And even when I went to my first year of college [Washburn Municipal University of Topeka; Washburn University, Topeka, Kansas], I took those courses that would allow me to get through. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, you really were itching to get out of there? Speaker 2: That's it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's basically-- Speaker 2: I wanted out. Story_ID: 482503 Speaker 1: All right, back to the [U.S.] Marine Corps now. So you discovered that you could be a pilot, and? Speaker 2: Yeah, I discovered with Jesse Brown's [Jesse L. Brown] death that blacks could in fact go to the [U.S.] Navy flight school. Once I arrived at the Navy flight school, which was relatively easy for me, I discovered there had never been a black pilot in the [U.S.] Marine Corps. And I found that out by the other black cadet, who was about a year ahead of me. And I say the other because we were entering as blacks maybe about one every eight months. His name was Dave Campbell, Dave was a former Marine. And Dave was determined to try the Marine Corps. When I entered, Dave took me under his wing, and he indicated that if he didn't make it then I should try for it. At the time, there had been three blacks to graduate from flight school--a guy named Jesse Brown, a gentleman by the name of Earl Carter, and a gentleman by the name of Floyd [Albert Floyd]. I can't remember Floyd's full name. There were only three who had managed to make it through the syllabus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dave (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Jesse Brown was the first one? Speaker 2: Jesse Brown was the first one. And he of course had been killed in combat in Korea. Speaker 1: Okay, so let me get--so this is the naval flight school, but the Marine pilots and the Navy pilots are in the same school? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: All right. But when you come out, you-- Speaker 2: A lot of people don't realize-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but all Marine Corps and Navy pilots go through the same training at the same schools. Dave Campbell didn't make it. I did make it, applying for the Marine Corps, and I was the fourth black to have completed flight school, and the first to have been accepted into the Marine Corps. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let me go back to Dave Campbell. Now, what happened to him? You know, he, I know you mentioned him in other interviews (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --as being a real inspiration to you-- Speaker 2: Dave was an inspiration-- Speaker 1: --and somebody that changed your life. Speaker 2: He was older than I, of course. And you have to realize when I received my wings and my commission, I was only twenty years old. Dave was around twenty-five, and he had gone--well, you had your basic training and then you had your advanced training. And in the advanced training, you were required to have six carrier landings in the more advanced kind of airplane. Dave didn't make it through that, and I was heartbroken, because I felt that Dave was much smarter and much more capable than I, and if Dave didn't make it, I didn't think I had chance in hell of making it. Speaker 1: Now, was a story behind why Dave didn't make it? Speaker 2: Dave would never discuss it with me. But he received a down check during those final phases of flight training, and I always suspected that Dave was singled out and they got him. I had a similar incident when I was going through my initial basic training. I received a down check by my instructor, and the other instructors got together and assigned me a new instructor. I had one flight with the new guy, and on my second flight with the new guy we were landed in a grass field. He climbed out of the backseat and hit me on the shoulder and said, "Go fly, and then come back here and land." And that's when I soloed. So, there was an effort to clean things up in the system. But here again, you know, blacks were going through the course, 1-Zs/2-Zs, and again, only three blacks that were going through the syllabus by the time I went through. Story_ID: 482504 Speaker 1: All right. So, this is the time of transition for the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]. They're, you know, they have a mandate from the president [President Harry S. Truman] to integrate, and they're--it's a struggle for them, right? Speaker 2: Well, it was a struggle because it had never happened before. And in fact, on my papers submitted to the Marine Corps, my race was classified as white. The command sent a correction to Headquarters Marine Corps listing my race as Negro. And the answer back, "We have to start sometime, it may as well be now." That would have been--well, I was commissioned October of 1952. And the first black officer's name was Frederick Branch [Frederick C. Branch]. Speaker 1: Okay, Frederick Branch? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Now, you know, the impression that most of us have about the Marine Corps, who have never been involved in it, is that--which includes most of us, I guess (laughter) is that it's like the [U.S.] Navy on steroids. It's like the Marines is, that's the toughest branch of the service. Speaker 2: Well, many Marines believe that. So, you can understand the effect of having a black be one of us, especially in the cockpit. It was an eye-opener for them. In fact, when I received my commission, my next assignment was to have been in Cherry Point, North Carolina [Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point, North Carolina]. I sent a letter to Headquarters Marine Corps requesting a change of assignment. I had had enough of the South, I had had enough of the segregation, and I didn't feel that starting my career as a pilot, the only one in the Marine Corps--I could do a hell of a lot better. And there was one other choice, and that would have been at El Toro, California [Marine Corps Air Station El Toro, California], just outside of L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. That's where I was sent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And by so doing, I was sent to the fighter pilot replacement squadron at El Toro. So, I got away from North Carolina and the segregation there, and instead wound up going to war (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, just to go back a little bit. Now, when you received your commission, did your parents [Edythe Southard Petersen and Frank E. Petersen, Sr.] come? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: The commission took place in Pensacola [Florida]. I had a local lady whom I had befriended, Evelyn DuBose, pin my wings and my second lieutenant bars on. And poor Baby, her nickname was Baby, she and I were like brother and sister. Baby was a schoolteacher and had taken the day off, a sick day. The local newspapers printed the story, and here's Baby on her sick day pinning my wings on me (laughter). Speaker 1: Did she get in trouble? Speaker 2: Yeah, she had a lot of explaining to do, oh yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, here at El Toro, California, they're training these guys to go the Korean War? Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact, the replacement squadron was cranking out, oh, about twenty pilots a month. I spent three months roughly there, going through the combat training for Korea and, let's see, I got my wings in October of '52 [1952]. I wound up in Korea flying my first combat missions in April of '53 [1953], I'd just turned twenty-one. Story_ID: 482505 Speaker 1: This was your first time out of the country, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Going to Korea. Speaker 2: Yes, in fact-- Speaker 1: Were you stationed in Korea itself? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were stationed in a place called Pyeongtaek [South Korea], P-Y-E-O-N-G-T-A-E-K. It was about thirty miles to the south of Seoul [South Korea], and it was where the [U.S.] Marine Corps, one of the two bases the Marine Corps was flying from. We were flying Corsairs [Vought F4U Corsair], and our missions took us all the way up to the northern part of North Korea, up to the Yalu River in some cases. During the period of time I joined the squadron until the time the truce went into effect, I flew sixty some odd combat missions. On one of those missions we were attacked by the MiG aircraft [Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15], and one of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And those were Russian-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --planes. But were they flown by Koreans? Speaker 2: They were flown by either Russians or Chinese. And they were stationed above the Yalu in southern China, and they would come across the Yalu and down into Korea. The F-86 [North American F-86 Sabre] had just come out, the fighter aircraft, and flown mostly by [U.S.] Air Force pilots. And that's when you would have some of the big air-to-air battles. This particular flight of MiGs just happened to wander across us, and rammed through the squadron, and injured one of the pilots, and shot the canopy off the airplane, and then they hauled and ran back up across the border. But that was interesting times, very, very intense flying, and quite a bit of fighting, because both sides were jockeying for position as they were maneuvering at the truce table. And a lot of people don't realize the Korean War never ended, and technically we're still at war, because it ended with a truce from both sides, and that stands today. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is an interesting thing I just ran through my mind here. You entered flight school at the time of--correct me if I'm wrong--it seems at the time of the transition from propeller planes to jets. Is this true? Speaker 2: They did that. In fact that was right at the time the jets were being introduced. But the main inventory consisted of propeller-driven fighters, and I transitioned to jets to jump ahead just a little bit on my return from Korea in 1954. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, you were--because when you said MiGs, I thought jets, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, they are. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were jets. Speaker 1: All right. So, what were you all flying? Speaker 2: We were flying propeller-driven aircraft. Speaker 1: I see. So this is a mismatch? Speaker 2: Oh, there's no question about it. No question about it. During the entire Korean War, one Marine pilot flying a Corsair did shoot down a MiG. The MiG made a pass at the squadron, at the flight, and pulled up in front of the Corsair pilot, and we were armed with four 20 millimeter cannons mounted on the wings. And Jesse got a good shot at him, and blew him out of the sky, Jesse Folmar [Jesse G. Folmar]. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is really arms race activity here. Here's the--so at that point would you say that the Soviet Union was ahead of the U.S. in terms of its equipment? Speaker 2: Pretty much so. Because the initial jet fighter for the Air Force was called the F-80 [Lockheed P-80 Shooting Star], and it was no match, it was a straight wing jet. Then the Air Force developed the F-86, the swept wing fighter, and that was a mainstay during the Korean War. Story_ID: 482506 Speaker 1: So, you flew over sixty missions in-- Speaker 2: Yes, I flew actually sixty-four combat missions during the Korean War (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. What was the strategy of the U.S. Army then, in terms of combat missions? What were they? Speaker 2: Well, it was pretty much a fixed battle line. By the time I got there, the war had been sort of a stalemate. We, the forces, had dug in along the 38th parallel, and it was pretty much hold your position. Because everyone knew the truce was being worked on, and the bad guys were trying to get as far south as they could, and the good guys were trying to keep things pretty much static along the 38th parallel. So most of our missions, we would either do close air support and support the ground troops, or we would have what we called interdiction missions, where we would wander up as far north as the Yalu [Yalu River], and our targets would range from any kind of conveyance, motorized or otherwise. In fact, ox carts were prime target, as well as trying to breach some of the urban dikes to preclude rice being grown. On occasion, we would hit a factory complex, but most of it was sort of free-range interdiction kind of missions. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now this is about--we're at about 1954 now? Speaker 2: No, we're still in 1953. I think the war ended in September of 1953, and the truce was signed in roughly that timeframe. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did that make a difference? Well, the combat actually--I guess flying across the border and all that stopped then, right? Speaker 2: That pretty much stopped. All ground action essentially stopped. And on occasion, there would be raids by one side or the other, but here again, the 38th parallel was a fixed point. And the truce--we received word of the truce--we received word that the truce would be signed let's say the following day at noon. On that morning, there was an attempt to get the last combat missions in. Most of the pilots in the squadrons were reservists who had been called back from World War II [WWII]. That was, again, a Truman [President Harry S. Truman] initiative to recall the reserves. Most of these guys had been pulled from--well, as is happening here today--from fixed family life and so forth. And on that morning, we lined up on the runway and went through our various checks. And I looked over at the leader and saluted, which meant I was ready to go. He looked back at me and gave a hold signal, and I noticed his engine was shut off. And the prop came to a stop, he sat up in the cockpit, saluted the runway, climbed over the side of the airplane, and walked away, and said, "That's my last combat mission." (Laughter) Oh, yeah, no more. Speaker 1: Now how--now, you're the first Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] pilot. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How were you treated? I mean, we can just imagine that it was not easy. But how were you treated in general? Speaker 2: It was interesting, in that the squadron was a mix of individuals from throughout the United States. And the two who sort of took me under their wing were from the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area, and both had played pro ball. They became sort of my godfathers, I guess is the best way to put it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So pro baseball or-- Speaker 2: Football. Speaker 1: Football, okay. Speaker 2: And they went to great lengths to ensure that I was somewhat protected. On the other hand, there were those who were from, let's say Alabama. And one individual made it very plain that, one, I should not be in the squadron; and secondly, I should not be a pilot; and third, I should not be an officer, et cetera. But it was toned down pretty much by virtue of the influence of these other individuals, as well as the squadron commander who was from Seattle, Washington. So, it was a mix, a variety of things. But for the most part, I had essentially no problems. Story_ID: 482507 Speaker 1: I was going to ask you, like what--did you have much contact with the black enlisted men in the [U.S.] Marine Corps? Speaker 2: Well, of course that was my first assignment in the Marine Corps, was to. In that squadron there were about three or four black enlisted, and they of course were somewhat protective of me. But you have to realize in those days, you had 2-Zs and 3-Zs, and of course, I was the only pilot. So, the corps had only accepted blacks, oh, I guess about ten years before that. So it was all still relatively new, relatively new. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now that prompts another question, especially after telling me about what happened at--well, we talked about what happened, to a certain point. Now, was there, did the black press know that you were the first black Marine pilot? And did they make any kind of big deal about it? Speaker 2: Well, not a big deal, but they knew about it. In fact, the Jet magazine carried articles with reference to my being commissioned and becoming the first black pilot. And that would have been, oh, back in the 1952 era. But in terms of the combat zone, no, there was very little in the way of black press coverage. Here again, it's 1953, '54 [1954]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, what happens after the truce was signed? What happened? Speaker 2: Well, after the truce was signed, everyone was sort of in a stagnant position. I was re-assigned with the 2nd Marines up on the DMZ [demilitarized zone] as a fort air controller. And it was pretty much nothing really spectacular happening until such time as I was finally transferred back to the states. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was it during this time, I mean during '53 [1953], before '53 [1953] that you earned the Distinguished Flying Cross? Speaker 2: That was while I was with the squadron in 1953. I led a mission up in the, above the DMZ, and we took some fire and hit the targets. Here you have a second lieutenant leading a flight. It was considered noteworthy enough that I was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for that particular mission. Speaker 1: Okay. And anything else of significance from that period that you want to talk about before we move on? Speaker 2: No, nothing really. I mean living in tents ten degrees below zero, I'd never been so cold in my life (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So yeah, Korea is cold; I've heard it's cold. Speaker 2: Oh, there's no question about it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No question, I can attest to that. Story_ID: 482508 Speaker 1: So, did you come back to the states in '54 [1954]? Speaker 2: Yeah. After my tour in Korea, I was then rotated back to El Toro, California [Marine Corps Air Station El Toro, California] again. And that's when I made my transition into jet fighters. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, had you ever piloted a jet before? Speaker 2: Oh no, uh-uh. Speaker 1: Was it difficult to learn, I mean? Speaker 2: No, not really. The basic flying is the same, whether it's a prop or a jet or an airliner. What you had to become accustomed to was the speed differences on landing, takeoff, and of course while you're in cruise, and the reaction. The controls were a lot more responsive, so it was just a matter of getting accustomed to these. The only variable really was the reaction of the aircraft as well as the speed of the aircraft. And the technology of the aircraft, you had about four times the fuel capacity that you would have in a prop fighter, and the jet engine would consume fuel at a much greater rate than a prop fighter. So, you had to become used to all these little things. But once you got those under your belt, no problem. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well, what plane did you learn on? Speaker 2: I started out in what is called the T-33 [Lockheed T-33 Shooting Star], which would be the [U.S.] Navy, [U.S.] Marine Corps version of the F-80 [Lockheed P-80 Shooting Star], which was called the Shooting Star. And from the T-33, I then graduated to the F3D [Douglas F3D Skyknight], which is a twin-engine jet fighter. Then, to the F9F [Grumman F-9 Cougar], another jet fighter. And from that point on, as new aircraft came out I would advance to these other jet fighters. Altogether I flew about, oh, twenty-five different aircraft throughout my career. And just to jump ahead, I flew on the F-16 [General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon], the F-18 [McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet], the AV-8 Harrier [McDonnell Douglas AV-8B Harrier II], which is a vertical takeoff landing jet fighter for the Marine Corps. So, I flew a variety of various jets throughout my career. Story_ID: 482509 Speaker 1: Now, in '54 [1954], now the Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is correct. Speaker 1: Did you know any of the actors in that? Speaker 2: I knew the young lady [Linda Brown Thompson] who had filed, whose father [Oliver L. Brown] rather had filed. She would have been about oh, five or six years behind me. But within the Topeka [Kansas] community, the black community, it was pretty small and pretty well-connected. So, we all sort of knew, or were aware of, you know, who was there and what was going on and so forth. Absolutely surprised at the conclusion, and regretted the passing of the black school system, which had created an elite cadre of black teachers. And that was essentially lost, never to be regained. We're now seeing the final evolution, which is, it's pretty much the same as it was then. You have all-black schools in the inner city, and essentially all-white schools, depending upon income, location. And we lost that cadre of highly skilled black professionals who were not picked up in the white school systems, who just sort of faded away. Speaker 1: And now, I guess you'd say now we really don't have the black elite teachers in the black schools anymore, do we? Speaker 2: In the inner cities, I think no matter which city, you'll find that the inner city school systems have been degraded to the point that we--especially as I say in Washington, D.C., it has become a major initiative to rebuild, to refurbish, and to regain. That's in the inner cities. The charter schools and so forth, they seem to be doing okay. But the inner city schools are I think one of the biggest problems the nation has today. Story_ID: 482510 Speaker 1: You were here in the states from '54 [1954] to-- Speaker 2: Through about 1960, all at El Toro [Marine Corps Air Station El Toro, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at El Toro I had a variety of assignments, for the most part flying assignments. And some of the newer jets began to come out with the afterburner. I managed to fly those as well, and it was sort of between wars, so to speak. Interesting fact that just before I left Korea, many of the Corsairs [Vought F4U Corsair] that we were flying were ferried to a place called Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam], to be used by the French forces. And I can recall even going to a chart and saying, "What is this place called Saigon?" Even though we're in the Far East, you have to remember that was when the French was getting their butts kicked. And under the lend-lease program--although not the lend-lease, but the assistance programs, the United States began to turn these Corsair aircraft over to the French. And I thought, "That's a strange place, I never heard of it," not realizing that a decade later I would be there. Speaker 1: Now, did you ever--I think the first time I read about Saigon was in the funny paper, Milton Caniff's, Steve Canyon, I think. Speaker 2: Steve Canyon, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and they were flying in Southeast Asia-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know. And Terry and the Pirates was in the strip. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: But this is a, you know, I think most Americans, they saw, you know, this was their first exposure to any of that. So-- Speaker 2: Strange. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Strange. Speaker 1: Yeah, Milton Caniff's cartoons. So, were these--did you encounter these planes again during the Vietnam War? Speaker 2: No, no. During the Vietnam War, these--well, the French had of course been defeated. Most of these Corsairs wound up Lord knows where. But no, I never encountered the planes again-- Story_ID: 482511 Speaker 1: We were discussing the planes flying overhead, you know, making a trail. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you have an interesting remark about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had pretty much free airspace flying back in those days. And one of the things we'd do was to go up and try and write our names with the contrail from the jet engine. And it was--or we'd try and do circular patterns and so forth. Because we always knew that once we hit, let's say, roughly 30,000 to 35,000 feet, you start conning. And one of the tactics, believe it or not, was to, in aerial combat, was to fly until you--until you're high enough to reach the contrail level, and then drop down about two thousand feet below the contrail level, and then hunt for the other guys who might be up there counting. So, it was a new phenomenon. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, I say new. But even in World War II [WWII], if you were to get high enough, you would leave an exhaust trail. Story_ID: 482512 Speaker 1: Were you married by this time, did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I married, let's see now. Speaker 1: By 1960? Speaker 2: In '55 [1955], shortly after I returned from Korea. And the kids were all born at either the military hospital at El Toro [Marine Corps Air Station El Toro, California] or the military hospital in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii [Marine Corps Air Station at Kaneohe Bay; Marine Corps Base Hawaii, Hawaii], where I was re-assigned in 1960. Speaker 1: How do you spell that place? Speaker 2: K-A-N-E-O-H-E. Speaker 1: Kaneohe Bay? Speaker 2: Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii. It's on the windward side of Oahu [Hawaii], near a town called Kailua [Hawaii], K-A-I-L-U-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how did you meet your wife [Eleanor Burton Anderson]? Speaker 2: We grew up together in Topeka [Kansas]. She was about two years behind me, and we had been, we had known each other from about the age of sixteen. When I returned back from my Korean tour I went to a cocktail party, a social function, ran into her, and that's where we picked it up from there. Now here, of course, I was returning from war. I was then a first lieutenant, and she was in her then third year at Kansas University [sic. University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas]. So that's how that first marriage started. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting that you would marry somebody from Topeka-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --you know, after going all over. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Right back home. Speaker 2: In fact, one of my first girlfriends while I was at El Toro was a lady named Evelyn DuBose. Evelyn went on to become a congresswoman--I'm sorry, not Evelyn--Yvonne Brathwaite [HistoryMaker Yvonne Brathwaite Burke]. Yvonne went on to become a congresswoman. She then returned to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and became a city councilperson. And she, when I met her, she was in law school at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. I was stationed at El Toro, and we came very, very close to being married, but I couldn't quite see a brand new lawyer traveling with a brand new lieutenant around the world (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, she becomes Yvonne Brathwaite Burke, right? Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: A hell of a nice lady. Story_ID: 482513 Speaker 1: Now 1960 is when the Vietnam conflict [Vietnam War] starts cranking up. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960] was--the early 1960s was sort of weird. The Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] were initially involved as advisors. I was at El Toro [Marine Corps Air Station El Toro, California] from '60 [1960] to '63 [1963]. And when I left there, I went to a school assignment. But during this whole time, the forces were building up in South Vietnam. I knew that this was going to be a long one, and during the mid-'60s [1960s] on I began to maneuver to go back into combat. And I did return to combat in 1968. The needs of the Marine Corps were such that they wanted transport pilots; they had a paucity of transport pilots. And my commanding general--at that point, I requested to see him to ask to be assigned to fighters. He denied my request. I then went to Headquarters Marine Corps to plead my case, and happened to run into a friend who was in the assignment branch, and they took steps to ensure that I would go back as a fighter pilot. And the reason I did this is that I knew, one, I was then a lieutenant colonel. There had never been a black commanding officer of a squadron. I also knew that if I wanted to stay in the Marine Corps and continue to compete, I needed that kind of record to remain competitive. So, as it turned out--well, one, the commanding general called me back in his office and accused me of back dooring him. And I pleaded complete ignorance, "I don't know what the hell is wrong with headquarters," blah, blah, blah. At any rate, he was angry. Headquarters Marine Corps prevailed, and I was assigned to fly F-4 Phantoms [McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II]. And on arriving in Vietnam, I was given command of a squadron, an F-4 squadron. And it was the first time in the history of the Marine Corps that a black had commanded a squadron. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this is '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now the F-4, tell us something about the F-4. Speaker 2: The F-4 Phantom was a twin-engine afterburner that could carry a load, an external load, bomb load, of around eight thousand pounds. It could fly at about Mach 2, a twin-seater, with your radar operator sitting behind you. You could do either air-to-ground kind of work, or air-to-air, a very versatile airplane. During my training at El Toro and Yuma, California [Marine Corps Air Station Yuma, Arizona], I would fly up and down the coast. In fact I once flew from San Francisco [California] back to El Toro in something like fifty-five minutes, because I climbed up and put the aircraft in the afterburner, and went down the coast at about 1.5 Mach. (Laughter) And the airplane was just a real, real beauty to fly. It was big, and the cockpit was very comfortable. I'm what 6'1", and I could really fit in that thing. And it could take hits; it could absorb damage and continue to fly. Story_ID: 482514 Speaker 1: During my tour as a squadron commander, I flew close to two hundred missions. And about halfway through my tour, on one of those missions, the aircraft took a hit and the left engine caught fire almost immediately. We were above the DMZ, above the demilitarized zone. And opted to try and fly back to South Vietnam, because if we were to eject, we knew no pilot had ever been rescued once the bad guys got them. No one had ever escaped from the prison camps, and we knew what the situations were in the prison camp. So, we opted to stay with the airplane. Here we have one engine on fire. We got halfway back to the DMZ, and the other engine caught fire. So I felt that engine number one, which had been burning the longest, would be the one most prone to explode. So, I shut that one down to continue flying on the other engine. And just as we crossed over into South Vietnam, the fires had burned through the hydraulic system of the airplane. And with no hydraulic system pressure in a jet airplane--I don't care if it's an airliner or what--the controls will freeze. And that's what happened in my case. So at that point, it was time to eject. And my rear seat went first, then I went, and while hanging in the harness I activated my emergency beeper, which would signal my position. And as we were going down into a rice paddy, I looked down and I could see guys running towards my landing site. And I also looked over to the west and saw a Marine CH-46 [Boeing Vertol CH-46 Sea Knight]. Speaker 2: Now, the guys you're talking about are Vietnamese? Speaker 1: Vietnamese, yeah, on the ground. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I didn't know who they were or what they were after, but I just assumed they were bad guys. And we were only armed with a snub-nosed .38 pistol. So when I hit the ground, I landed in a rice paddy and scrambled over a dike and hid on the other side. And I waited for the CH-46 to land, which it did. And they landed in such a way that the waist gunner, with a .50 caliber, was pointing in my direction, in the direction of those bad guys. So, I figured that's a better match than me with my snub-nosed .38. So I hunkered down, I didn't move. As it turned out, the bad guys stopped, and as I saw one of the crewmen starting to get out of the CH-46, that's when I jumped up and ran to the CH-46 and slid into the back end. And the co-pilot happened to be black, and they knew who I was, obviously. And the squadron was called, my squadron was called the Black Knights [Marine Fighter Attack Squadron 314]. So, this young kid, the co-pilot, looked around and gave me the thumbs up, and said, "Attaway, Black Knight." And I said, "Later for all that black bullshit, let's get this thing out of here." And it turned out they may have been bad guys who were running towards my touchdown point, but in retrospect I think they were after the silk from the parachute. And I said, "Welcome to it, gang, I'm out of here" (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, I think I was reading that they made clothing out of the parachutes. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: They make--yeah. In a country with diminishing resources, a lot of things are valuable (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's no question. Speaker 2: --that are not necessarily valuable to others. Speaker 1: No question. But Vietnam was weird, because you never knew who was good and who was bad. And we refer today to the Green Zone in Iran [sic. Iraq]. That was pretty much what we had in Vietnam. If you were one of ground troops out snooping and pooping--we lived in armed bases, and very, very seldom went off base unless we were flying. In fact, we did not go off base. And we were subject to mortar attacks, rocket attacks. The most terrifying thing was to be under rocket attacks, because they were essentially not aimed at anything specific, just at a general area. So, you never knew where they were going to hit. And when they would go off, it was like a crack of thunder. I mean, it was terrifying. And they would normally set them up on a timer and a tripod, and just leave it. And normally between midnight and about five a.m. was when these things would go off. I'll never forget. I had one pilot come in from the carrier to deliver new aircraft to us, and he stayed with me in my hooch. And I began to tell him about, "Here's where you run; here's where the foxholes are. And you may or may not hear the siren, because if they don't see it leaving the tube, then the first thing you'll hear is just a very loud crack." I remember waking up at three o'clock in the morning and this guy's eyes were this big, just awake (laughter). Story_ID: 482515 Speaker 1: How were things different, you know, in Vietnam than from Korea, in terms of how the service treated you? And how, you know--well, first of all let's start with that, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, Korea of course was pretty controlled, in the sense of having a stagnant, or a battle line, whereas in Vietnam there was no battle line. The VC, the Vietcong, operated pretty much where they wished to. And the NVA [North Vietnamese Army; People's Army of Vietnam] would have to, of course, come down from North Vietnam through the Ho Chi Minh trail and infiltrate into South Vietnam. So, battles would take place in the most unexpected places. And the Vietcong, of course, would be hard to identify, because they would tend to blend with the villagers. Along with that, there was a social revolution taking place within the United States military. Specifically, the draft issue had created an influx of people from all walks of life. But at the same time, coupled with the civil rights revolution, there was a great deal of animosity between blacks and whites, especially in the ground combat units. So as a result, I viewed it as a war within a war in that you had the fight against the enemy, but also there were fights amongst the troops. And it reached such an extent that--people perhaps don't recall that a United States aircraft carrier had to be pulled off the line. It was operating up off the coast of Hanoi [Vietnam], and returned to the Philippines because of race riots on board. Also, within various units there would occasionally be race riots. There were also incidents of troops taking it out on officers by tossing hand grenades into their huts and so forth. So-- Speaker 1: They would call that fragging, or something? Speaker 2: Fragging, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a very common solution to the strikes that were taking place. The upshot was, for the first time the U.S. military began to take a hard look at education in terms of race relations. It created quite a few innovative programs to deal with the problems. But once you, the closer you got to the front lines, the more you were aware that there could be problems within a unit. So, it was a rather sensitive time. In fact, one of my friends, a guy named Wally Terry, published a book called 'The Bloods' ['Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans,' Wallace Terry]. And it dealt with some of these racial issues that were taking place at the time. Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember that book. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, this is like twenty years basically after the desegregation of the [U.S.] Army, or the Truman [President Harry S. Truman]-- Speaker 2: Edict [Executive Order 9981]. Speaker 1: --edict. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: And yet it seems, the Vietnam War seems to expose a lot of the racial contradictions in America more so than even in those days. Speaker 2: Well, I think it brought one issue, of course, right to the forefront. And that is that the troops had be treated equally, and there had to be a lot of awareness. In fact, when I returned from Vietnam I was assigned to the Headquarters Marine Corps to help develop programs to deal with some of these issues. Part of the problem was, and even to an extent today, there's difficulty in talking about race relations. And it's sort of a taboo subject in such cliches as: race doesn't matter. Well, just look at the recent Super Bowl [Super Bowl XLI]. What's the big hype? Not about what team, but you know, the black coaches [Tony Dungy and Lovie Smith] in the team. And I'll never forget trying to explain some of the issues to senior officers, obviously white, who had never encountered the sensitivities or the depth of emotion concerning racial issues. They were under the assumption that for the most part it was a matter of white officers not being able to deal fairly with the troops. And I said, "Gentlemen, you have to understand there are some black folks who hate white folks. So, you're only dealing with a part of the problem. You have to really understand the depth of the problem. Don't be at all surprised if you were to find a black kid who would rather kill a white than kill a Vietcong." Story_ID: 482516 Speaker 1: And of course, you had then some noted black figures, not the least of which was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], who was speaking out against the war [Vietnam War]. You had Muhammad Ali, who--I guess to paraphrase Ali, he said, "I ain't got nothing against them folks." (Laughter) So he refused to go, and of course he was roundly condemned. But now in hindsight, and the historical issues that have taken place, there's now much greater understanding of the depth of emotion that was associated with the war in Vietnam, much greater. I guess it was oh, the president, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], who pardoned all of those who had to gone to Canada to avoid the draft. Vietnam essentially tore this country apart, not just in the money and the lives expended, but also in the policies and the politics. And in a way, in my own view, it helped the country to mature and understand what this country is really, really all about. And of course here today, we're finding ourselves in a very similar situation. But it's still not quite what it should be, but it's still better than what we had before. But for those who fight--the rhetoric in [U.S.] Congress and the various halls of decision-making--wars should be fought by those who are trained to do so. You can't fight a war on a political basis. And my good friend, Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], whose philosophy as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs [Joint Chiefs of Staff], was, "Don't go to war unless you're ready to go to war. And don't go to war based on a budget. It ain't going to work." And that's where we find ourselves today. Speaker 2: So, you can't just throw money at it and expect results. Speaker 1: Absolutely not. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Absolutely not. Story_ID: 482517 Speaker 1: Let's take you back to '68 [1968]. Now, in '68 [1968]--now you're in Vietnam until? Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. At the time, did you have any--what was your feeling at the time about what was going on? Did you have a-- Speaker 2: It's interesting in that once you're in a combat zone, your politics and your philosophies tend to dissolve into, "I got to get out of here alive." (Laughter) So, the rhetoric and so forth becomes moot. Because you're there, you're in combat, and the political issues and the philosophical issues disappear. The only thing you want to do is get there and get out. I didn't really give a lot of thought to the rightness of the wrongness of the Vietnam War. Civil rights issues? Absolutely, because that was so much a part of my own life. But in combat, the philosophers disappear. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what did you--well, okay, all the missions you flew in Vietnam in the '60s [1960s]--now you received some medals for those missions too, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. You know, I can't even list them all. But the top one would have been the Legion of Merit as a commander. And the Purple Heart for when I was shot down; I got banged up a little bit, more so than I realized at that point and time. My real injuries didn't manifest until quite frankly I was back in the states. And I had a herniated disc caused by the ejection seat. I had a fractured femur caused by the ejection seat, which eventually led to the replacement of the left hip. And then I had a knee injury, and so forth and so on. So-- Speaker 1: Now what, well, let me just--I guess I have to ask this question, because most people have never experienced this, and you have. What in the world is it like to be ejected from a jet plane in combat? What is that like? Speaker 2: It's a terrifying experience. But in my particular situation, too many pilots wait too long to get out of the airplane. There's a basic thought to save the airplane. I always taught my guys, "Don't worry about the plane. We'll buy another one." But to actually eject-- Speaker 1: And these cost like--these planes do cost like-- Speaker 2: Well, about $3 million a copy, which has now risen to about $115 million a copy for some of these latest ones. But still, it's just a piece of metal. And it's the womb effect as well. While you're in the cockpit, you know, it's like being in the womb. And when it comes time to eject, you're going out into this raw world. We pushed out at about three hundred knots. And quite frankly the ejection seat, it's called a one-step ejection. You pull one lever, and the canopy comes off and the seat fires. The seat is released from your back, your parachute opens automatically. And if you have oxygen requirement, then the oxygen automatically starts to flow; it's a one-step ejection. But it's like being born again, in that here in this nice comfortable cockpit, and all of a sudden you're out there in temperatures well below zero, and you've got a wind blowing against you of over three hundred miles per hour. And you're pretty well protected, but at the same time you sit there and you wonder, "I hope all this stuff works." (Laughter) It's a terrifying experience, I don't care how they put it. It's a terrifying experience, and-- Speaker 1: It's one that you really can't practice for, right? You can't-- Speaker 2: You can practice. We have a mock-up where you can sit a seat that's mounted on a rail, and it has about one-tenth the charge of the ejection seat. And you pull the curtain and it fires up the rail, but that's only a miniscule portion of the forces that are with you on an actual ejection, which is instant acceleration of about twenty g-forces, G being one times the force of gravity, which is what we have as we're sitting here. And can you imagine sitting in that chair being accelerated upward to twenty times what you're dealing with? That's what happens. Speaker 1: So it's not, it's likely that you probably will be injured in this process, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it's a matter of posturing the seat. I was looking back over my shoulder to make sure my rear seater had gotten out when I pulled. And that, I think led to the compression of the disc, as well as the hip fracture. But that was the old, what we call the Martin-Baker seat. They've now modified the charges, so you have an accelerating charge as opposed to one instantaneous bang, and that then decreases the g-forces to more acceptable pressures. But back in those days it was one big bang, and that was it. Speaker 1: I know we've all seen James Bond be ejected, and he hits the ground fighting in his tuxedo and all that. Speaker 2: Unh-uh (laughter). Speaker 1: But it doesn't happen like that. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Story_ID: 482518 Speaker 1: Back in the United States in '68 [1968], you got involved in race relations. Speaker 2: Race relations with the [U.S.] Marine Corps. The Marine Corps and the [U.S.] Army were having one hell of a time. Traveled all over the world on fact-finding missions in terms of--I'll never forget in Heidelberg, Germany under the [U.S.] Department of Defense team to take a look. And the Army kids were having it pretty tough. It was a lack of manpower. And what was happening is the kids would go to Vietnam for a combat tour, come back stateside or to Germany for about a year or so, and then they'd be going back into Vietnam. And with the racial issues that were taking place, there was a great deal of friction. Even here at stateside they had riots, race riots, at many of the major bases. Even in the Marine Corps, there were two. There was a riot at Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California] and there was a riot at Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Jacksonville, North Carolina]. The Army had the same problems. On this fact-finding tour in Germany, I would talk to the kids. And one of these groups wanted to meet with me off-base to discuss issues. And what they wanted to do was discuss what would be the biggest signal to give to the Army to show their displeasure. And what they were concentrating on was killing the Army, the U.S. Army Europe commander, General Polk [James H. Polk], P-O-L-K. And they were serious, they were very serious. They didn't carry out their plan, and when I reported it, it got a lot of attention. It got a lot of attention, because these kids were serious. They were trained to kill; they knew they were going to die, or had the high probability of dying, and they said, "Hey, we'll take somebody out with us." Speaker 1: Now, this is serious. Now, I've read that there were conflicts, you know, some bloody conflicts during the Korean War down on the ground, too. But this is really a plot to actually blow up the commander of the-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --U.S. forces in Germany. That's-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. In fact, one of my good friends was a guy named Curtis Smothers [Curtis R. Smothers], who was an attorney with the JAG Corps, the Judge Advocate General [Judge Advocate General's Corps]. And Curt was black and had come from the inner city, and was just as smart as he could be. And Curt would tell a funny story about some of these court martials. He would be sitting there with a white attorney, and this young kid, black kid, would come in and they would begin to talk. And this black kid said, "Where's the motherfucker been messing with me? I ain't going to take no more of that shit." And the white attorney would say, "I'm sorry, I don't understand you." And Curt would say, "I understand him, let him go." (Laughter) "Let him keep talking." So, these kinds of things. Another incident was when I was the squadron commander in Vietnam, this is in '68 [1968]. Big commotion in my hooch, in my office, and I looked up and a sergeant major was telling this kid, "You can't go in there." And this kid was black, he was a ground troop. And I looked out at the officer and I said, "That's okay, sergeant major, let him in." And this kid walked into my office and he said, "Okay, you the one. I heard there was one of you over here." You got to realize I was a lieutenant colonel, and I was about the only one in the Marine Corps. I said, "Sit down, son." I said, "Well, what's your problem?" He said, "Well, sir, they're fucking with me." And I said, "Well, tell me your problem." He said, "Well, sir, I guess it all happened when I shot the lieutenant." (Laughter) I said, "Whoa." So these kinds of things were going on, these kinds of things. So very, very severe problems in the [U.S.] military. And they really didn't--I say they, the problems, didn't really resolve themselves until the late '70s [1970s] when everybody finally got their act together, and a lot of this stuff was knocked off. A lot of the bad guys were kicked out of the services. And if you look at the services today, it's the ultimate, I think, in terms of working together, equality, and so forth. It's the place to be, it's the place to be. Speaker 1: Yeah, we often hear there's a lot more equality in the service (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --than in regular life sometimes. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: A lot of people say that. Speaker 2: And you can see it as you go aboard the bases nowadays. When I was coming along, if you saw a mixed couple you would stare. Nowadays, if you don't see a mixed couple, you stare. (Laughter) So it's totally different, totally different. Story_ID: 482519 Speaker 1: Oh, do you remember Dr. Charles King [Charles H. King]? I think he at one time was--he was, he conducted these racial encounter sessions on behalf of-- Speaker 2: Charles King? Speaker 1: Charles King, yeah, a heavyset man. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And he-- Speaker 2: Never ran across him. Speaker 1: --I think he's the one that handled the situation on the aircraft carrier. Speaker 2: Charles King? Speaker 1: Yeah. He was featured on Phil Donahue's show ['The Phil Donahue Show'] way back when. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He actually handled that situation on the aircraft carrier. He did some encounter sessions between the soldiers and tried to smooth out some of the conflict. Speaker 2: I never ran across him. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: In fact, the executive officer on board that aircraft carrier was black, a guy named Ben Cloud [Benjamin Cloud]. Ben now lives in La Jolla, California, and he got out as a captain in the United States Navy. He was the XO [executive officer] onboard the carrier when that thing went down. Oh, yeah. So-- Speaker 1: Did he get--did it negatively affect his career? Speaker 2: It did, it did. And what Ben thought was that by virtue of being black, he could placate these kids in talking to them. The captain of the ship was isolated, and they didn't know if the captain was alive or dead, so Ben essentially assumed command of the carrier. And then of course, when it all settled down they discovered the captain was still alive. But Ben took some heat from that particular encounter. Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So they actually had sealed off the captain somewhere? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And Ben had to take over. Speaker 2: Well, the black troops essentially took over the ship. They overwhelmed the Marine guard onboard and got into the hangar bay, as I understand the story, and barricaded themselves and put the ship out of commission. Speaker 1: Has that story ever been told? Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: And the name of that ship was the--? Speaker 2: I forget. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is an aircraft carrier? Speaker 2: An aircraft carrier. I want to say the Kitty Hawk [USS Kitty Hawk CV-63], but I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's like a city almost, a floating city (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: A huge operation. Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah. But that was just one of the incidents. And here at stateside there would have been, oh, I guess no less than about six different riots aboard base, various bases throughout the United States. Speaker 1: Is there any specific thing or things that you think have made a difference? Or has it just taken time to--? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's a matter of not just taking time, but also the recognition of the problems. We now have, we, being black America, greater representation in the [U.S.] Congress and the [U.S.] Senate. We also have, there have been laws that have been enacted; President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], of course, with the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] and so forth. And a lot of the racial discord I think in the cities has diminished considerably. It's not as it should be as yet, but it is a hell of a lot better. Also, just the recognition of the problem that race is in fact an issue, and that it needs to be discussed--there's also a growing awareness of the growing powers of the Spanish-speaking community. For the first time, the United States is no longer the major minority. Speaker 1: Of black Americans. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Spanish-speaking population has become the major minority. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there's recognition of that. So, it's constantly-changing turf. But there is now much greater awareness that we do still have problems, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So yeah, just to put it in perspective, in those days, the days of Vietnam, a man could be theoretically in Mississippi or be in Alabama, being hosed in Birmingham [Alabama] one day, and be in the [U.S.] Army the next week (laughter). Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And you know, what kind of--you know, and the hoser could actually be in the next week. Speaker 2: Well, not only that, but also, quite frankly, many of the judicial systems were using the draft as a method of getting rid of the problem. Young kids would come before them and they'd say, "Okay, son, do you want to go to jail or do you want to go to the [U.S.] Marine Corps?" (Laughter) So, that was also part of the issue. In fact, one of my buddies, the guy who lived down in Norfolk [Virginia] was a street hood. And he made it through the Marine Corps up to about gunnery sergeant, and he served three different tours in Vietnam. And I said, "Snick," that was his nickname, "Snick, why in the hell do you keep going back?" He said, "Because I can do in 'Nam what I go to jail for here." (Laughter) So, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I've heard quite a few stories about the connections being made for narcotics trade, and that sort of thing in the Far East. Speaker 2: There was quite a bit of that, quite a bit of that. And in fact, there are stories that even Air America, which was a CIA-sponsored [Central Intelligence Agency] airline in Vietnam, was on many occasions transporting dope, drugs, and gold to pay off certain factions who were supportive of the United States' efforts. And that's something that has not been told. Speaker 1: So it sounds like there's a book here that you might be able to write, or somebody (laughter). Speaker 2: No, I'm retired, and I'm happy where I am. Uh-huh. (Laughter) There's a story there, it's a hell of a story. Speaker 1: There's quite a few. Now we, I think we've touched upon maybe three good books here for somebody to write. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: If they want the gig (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a lot that went on, a lot that went on. Story_ID: 482520 Speaker 1: So you served until 1988 in the-- Speaker 2: In the [U.S.] Marine Corps. Speaker 1: The Marine Corps, right. Speaker 2: Yes. I received my first star in 1977, and my second star in about '82 [1982], and my third star in 1986. At the time I retired in 1988, there had not been another African American general on active duty in the Marine Corps. So I, of course, commanded everything from a squadron to an air group to an air wing on a major base. And of course, no black had ever done that before. But it was always disappointing to me that during my entire tour as a general officer in the Marine Corps, there had not been another black general officer on active duty in the Marine Corps. Speaker 1: So, was it--I guess--well, I don't know. Was it impossible for you to try to mentor somebody from the position that you were in? Or-- Speaker 2: Well, you could mentor them, and I did that on many occasions, but it was up to the individual in terms of how much they would stay and fight the course. Many of them opted just to retire because they didn't feel that they were being given significant treatment. And in fact, up until the time, five months ago, no other black had ever had three stars in the Marine Corps, although there had been other general officers. And about three months ago, I traveled to Quantico [Marine Corps Base Quantico, Quantico, Virginia] to promote a black officer to the third star rank, almost twenty years to the day that I received my third star. Speaker 1: So in 2006, the second black three-star general (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I got mine in '86 [1986]. So today, in the history of the Marine Corps, only two blacks have achieved the rank of three stars. Speaker 1: So we can conclude it's not easy to do that, right? Speaker 2: No, it's not easy to get three stars in the Marine Corps, period. But from the time I got my first star to, let's say last year, about thirty blacks had achieved general officers rank. But again, it took twenty years for one of those guys to make it to the third star. Second time in the history of the Marine Corps. Speaker 1: Well, what's the highest level you can reach (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Four. Speaker 1: Four? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 482521 Speaker 1: Let's talk about, I guess, events leading up to your retirement in '88 [1988], I guess. Speaker 2: It was, in 1988, I had spent thirty-eight years in the uniform of the United States military. I had reached the point where if I was going to make a transition I had better do it soon, the transition being going into the civilian world and looking for something that would be satisfying to me, or making a run to the fourth star. My wife then, Alicia [Alicia Downes Petersen], and I discussed it. And I told her quite frankly that if I get my fourth star, one, there's no pay raise associated with it because I was maxed out in terms of the length of service. The only thing that would happen is we would move to another government housing, I would pick up maybe another house assistant and a driver. And quite frankly, I felt there was a hell of a lot more out there, so I decided that no, I'm going to go ahead and retire. Plus, the then new commandant was trying to bring his own guys in, in terms of promotions and so forth. And of course at that level, you know, from the first star to your last star, it's always political, and it becomes even more political as you go up. I had the political connections, but I just said, "No, I've had enough." So I retired, and I'm here at Quantico, Virginia. And I was contacted almost immediately by a headhunter, and was offered a position with the DuPont corporation [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] out of Wilmington, Delaware. I went with the DuPont corporation and stayed with them for ten years as a vice president. I traveled more with the DuPont company than I did in the [U.S.] Marine Corps. I traveled all over the world. DuPont had its own fleet of corporate aircraft, and had business enterprises in about every major country in the world. So, we traveled to places such as Amsterdam [the Netherlands], the Philippines, India, Africa. And one of my responsibilities was to manage the corporate fleet of aircraft. So, it was a good transition for me. And I'll never forget being absolutely surprised at their abilities. We took off one morning out of Amsterdam and flew non-stop in a corporate jet to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So, the corporate world is totally different. In fact, the chairman of the board was a guy named Ed Wollard [Edgar S. Woolard, Jr.]. And Ed had served briefly in the [U.S.] Army, and he and I got along very, very well. And Ed once asked me what I thought of Corporate America. And I said, "You know, Ed, one, you don't work them hard enough; and secondly, you pay them too much money, present company excluded." (Laughter) Ed said, "If you've got it, you can make it in Corporate America." It's unheard of. As naive as I was, never having been exposed to Corporate America, when the headhunter and I were negotiating salary, we reached a pretty decent number. And then he said, "And of course, on top of this there's a bonus." I said, "A bonus for what?" "Well, you know, that's the way they do it." I said, "Wait a minute. They pay me to do a job, and if I do the job they give me a bonus for doing it?" He said, "Yeah." I said, "Okay." And then he said, "Also, there are options." I said, "Options? What do you mean by options?" "Stock options, Frank [HistoryMaker Lieutenant General Frank E. Petersen, Jr.]." I said, "What the hell is a stock option?" (Laughter) You know, it was a whole new world, a whole new world; I just couldn't believe it. That's one reason I'm living here, thanks to DuPont. Very, very (unclear). Speaker 1: This is a very nice house (laughter). Speaker 2: I designed it and hired an architect to finish out the ideas, and then built it from the ground up. I designed this house, yep. Story_ID: 482522 Speaker 1: So your major responsibility with DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company, Wilmington, Delaware], you said you managed their corporate fleet. But you did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The corporate jet fleet as well as the corporate logistics in terms of where--if they're in real estate, they're in capital. I discovered on joining the company that DuPont owned more real estate than the company realized they owned, and it was all over the world. The company was designed in such that the business sectors were individually competitive. And I pointed out to the chairman--here as an example you have--and they were heavy into the issue of diversity. And one consultant had come to a business sector, as an example, with a package of training that was readily accepted. She then took that same package and went to another business sector and sold it to them for a price 50 percent more than the first individual group. And I pointed this out in terms of that's quite a waste, and that as you have your business sectors competing against the other, the overall big picture is being lost, in that the company is losing some profits just by virtue of these guys competing against each other as opposed to having a central pool of talent that can be pooled by any business sector, but you can then also standardize the prices, and you don't have these guys bidding against each other. And I said, "Oh, by the way, Mr. Chairman [Edgar S. Woolard, Jr.], do you know you own a graveyard?" He said, "What?" I said, "Yes, sir." On our real estate tax rolls, which I had to go to, I discovered that the company was paying taxes on real estate that had sat vacant or unused for decades and had been lost in the big picture, and that some business sectors were going out and buying new buildings, let's say, in City A, while we had four vacant buildings sitting there that we owned. They had no idea of what they had. They do now, not just because of me, but because it has become so competitive on a world basis that your expenditures have to be really severely looked at, and your stockholders are demanding it. So, it's a different world in business America today. Business is business. Speaker 1: Well, that certainly represents a picture we don't really think about much, or I wouldn't as an ordinary person here (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I know. Speaker 1: That a corporation would have an empire so large it wouldn't even know the breadth of it. Speaker 2: Yeah, DuPont is one of the largest businesses in America, in terms of chemicals. But you look at Ford [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan], GM [General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan]--one of the boards I sit on, the executive vice president of GM also sits on the board. And GM had some of its biggest losses. Who was it that just announced a last quarter loss of--was it General Motors or--? One of the major auto makers. Speaker 1: It was Chrysler [FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan], I think. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Chrysler. But they had something like, oh, I can't remember, billions of dollars as compared to a previous quarter. Speaker 1: Okay. So, any other stories from DuPont you'd like to tell? Speaker 2: No. I think DuPont is one of the best companies in America, having looked at some of the others and bounced off against them. But no, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. So you worked for DuPont until 1997, right? Speaker 2: About '97 [1997], yes. Story_ID: 482523 Speaker 1: Now, when did you decide to write your autobiography? Speaker 2: While I was at DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company, Wilmington, Delaware], I received a call from a gentleman named--what was Joe's last name? Anyway, he was looking to write a story on my life, and when he called--Joe Phelps [Joseph A. Phelps]. And when Joe called, I had no intention of--it had been in the back of my mind, but Joe put it this way. "Without your help, I can say pretty much what I want to. But with your help, you can have pretty much the way you would like to have it written." So, I said, "Okay, Joe, let's go for it." And that's how it came about. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the book is called 'Into the Tiger's Jaw: America's First Black Marine Aviator' [Frank E. Petersen and Joseph A. Phelps] released in 1999 [sic. 1998]. 'Into the Tiger's Jaw,' now why that title? Speaker 2: Joe and I were discussing a title for the book. And I said, "Joe, you know, most of my career has been concentrated in combat. And let me just throw this out as a topic. Into the tiger's jaw, that's when you're on a close air support mission and you're right down on the ground amongst the weeds. And it's sort of like sticking your hand in the tiger's mouth and hoping like hell it doesn't close. So, it's the end of the tiger's jaw, it's the end of the combat, and hope the tiger keeps his mouth open and lets you back out." Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And basically the book is like, it's an autobiography (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it is. Speaker 1: It covers a lot of the information we just covered today. Is it still available? Speaker 2: It is, Amazon.com. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What I've discovered is that a publisher over in England somewhere. I put the book out at about twenty-four bucks [dollars] a copy. And it seems to be a hit in Europe and in England, in that some of the books that you look at on eBay [eBay Inc.] as an example, they're as much as a hundred dollars. So, I don't know what that's all about. I'm trying to find out, but it seems to be more popular outside the United States. I can't, I don't quite know what it's about. Speaker 1: Do you have a stock on reserve where you can-- Speaker 2: I have a few. (Laughter) But it's no longer in print. And I sort of save those for close friends and so forth. Story_ID: 482524 Speaker 1: You're involved with the National Marrow Donor Program [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Speaker 2: Yes, that's one of the boards I opted to sit on when I retired from the [U.S.] Marine Corps. And the National Marrow Donor Program is a program designed to find bone marrow donors for patients who have blood related diseases. It's the only known cure, as an example, for leukemia and some other diseases, in that you take bone marrow from a compatible donor. And essentially kill all the cells in the recipient's body, inject the new marrow, and then allow it to grow, hopefully without infection. At the time that came about, the founder of that process was awarded the Nobel Prize. And I stayed with the National Marrow Donor Program for, oh, up until about two years ago and then they elected me as chairman emeritus. So, I'm still involved with them in that program. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, you're also involved in, I think you made a recommendation about recruiting from the historical black colleges and universities [HBCUs] for the Marine Corps? Speaker 2: Yes. That was while I was on active duty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were looking to increase the number of minority officers in the Marine Corps. So we traveled to the various campuses and we attended various Afro-American functions just to sort of sell the program to prospective candidates. Story_ID: 482525 Speaker 1: What advice would you give to a young black man or woman today about the service, and specifically the [U.S.] Marine Corps? Speaker 2: What I would tell them, if you have a chance to go and complete college, that should be your first option. The [U.S.] military still offers a very viable life, but in these days and times, let's face it. If the nation is in combat, you can't in all good faith say, "You should go into the military," especially with the adverse comments associated with what we're doing in Iraq at this point and time. My advice today is go to college, get your degree, and then you'll be mature enough to make your own decision. I can't in good faith tell anyone, "You should go into the military today." Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what are some of your thoughts about the Iraq War? Speaker 2: It's a war that was fought for the wrong premise with the wrong assets, and now we're suffering the consequences of political decisions made by civilian leadership in terms of the military and how it has affected the military. Few people realize that Rumsfeld's [Donald Rumsfeld] philosophy was to do more with less--the downsizing of the military forces, the downsizing of commitments in terms of going into combat, and downsizing in the sense of the realities post war, which have come to the forefront today. Shinseki [Eric Shinseki], who was the [U.S.] Army chief of staff, went before the [U.S.] Senate at the start of the war, before the start of the war, and indicated that what Rumsfeld had said was 1x would be the number required, that in reality it would be 2x. When Shinseki made that statement, Rumsfeld ostracized him to such an extent that Shinseki, when he retired, Rumsfeld refused to attend his retirement ceremony. When Rumsfeld retired here in the last month or so, there were some senior Army officers who refused to go to his retirement in retaliation for what he had done to Shinseki. Shinseki's name is coming up more and more in terms of congressional testimony, in terms of: "He told us, and we didn't listen. The administration [President George Walker Bush administration] lied to us in terms of what it would take." So, where's all this going to end up? I don't have any idea. I applaud those who feel there is still a viable solution. I am not at all impressed with sending twenty thousand more troops in there; it's like dropping a drop of water into a bucket of water. One of my good friends is now a Marine commander up at Anbar Province [Iraq]. He's black, he's the first time in the history of the Marine Corps a black has commanded a division, and the division is a counterpart to an air wing. He just went over, and I just wish him the best of luck. So there's a lot going on, and quite frankly it has not been made public, but it's starting to come out a little bit more. Both the Army and the Marine Corps are on their hind legs in terms of equipment, in terms of personnel, and in terms of longevity. We're stretched thin, and that rubber band is about to snap, in both the Army and the Marine Corps. And it's beginning to come out, and folks are beginning to realize now that the United States is stretched thin, and the military readiness capability is at its lowest in virtually the history of this country. Speaker 1: So, if something else were to break out at this point, we would really be in trouble. Speaker 2: If you look at the global strategies of our enemies, if they could get another Iraq going, beautiful. But you have hot spots that are simmering. You have North Korea that's sitting there bubbling. Africa, the horn of Africa is starting to get hot. Ethiopia, Somalia, the Philippines, that's hot. Indonesia, that's hot. But our capabilities, we cannot afford involvement in another major conflict at this point in time. We're on our hind legs. Story_ID: 482526 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: For the? Speaker 1: African American community today. Speaker 2: I would pray and hope that the impetus be more aligned towards improvement of conditions in the inner city; then improvements in terms of family life; improvements in the sense of babies having babies having babies; improvements in the ability of the participants to see beyond their own neighborhoods, and to be able to expand their thinking outside of the hood. There's a cult that has sprung up where the hood is featured as something that's glamorous. We own fault in many of those instances. Who do we glamorize? We glamorize the athletic side of life, as well as the hip hop side of life. Who do we see in terms of Jet magazine as being profiled? Entertainers, the rappers. And I, for the life of me, cannot understand one of those damn tunes. I try and listen carefully, but I don't know what the hell they're talking about, I really don't. But that's the kind of life that's being glamorized, as opposed to things such as advancements in the political world, in the scientific world, in the military world. Our images are skewed, screwed up at this point and time. Speaker 1: Is there any one thing that gives you hope, you know? Speaker 2: My daughter [Monique Petersen] teaches at Ballou High School [Frank W. Ballou Senior High School], inner city of Washington, D.C. And she has each year brought her best students here [Kent Island, Maryland] during the summer to spend a day or so kicking back and relaxing. And the expression and the response of those kids to this setting gives me emotions, both mixed and ashamed, that I live like this, and they have never even dreamed of a black American in this kind of environment. But many of her kids have gone on to college and are doing very, very well. So, there is hope and there is progress. But our black communities need to take a firmer position in terms of what happens in their communities. Even if you go to a high school today--I don't know if you've been in one recently. It's like an armed camp--metal detectors at the door, cops in the hallway. It's a zoo. But that's the way it is today. Story_ID: 482527 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you had it to do again? Speaker 2: The hell of it is, I wanted to do everything. I wanted to break down the barriers within the United States Marine Corps, and that became a personal objective. I wanted to be a lawyer. When I went back for my training in college, I tried to think of a way I could get a law degree, as opposed to a degree. I just, if I wanted to do it over, I'd probably do the same thing. But I just couldn't do it all; I just couldn't do it. Speaker 1: Okay. There's not enough time in one lifetime. Speaker 2: Couldn't do it all. Speaker 1: Okay. Likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today do you see to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I'm pretty much of a mild guy, in terms of tooting your own horn and so forth. And what I look at is that I don't think that I did anything that significantly different, as opposed to being offered a challenge and accepting it and winning. Last week we had a black-tie dinner in Washington, D.C. of retired [U.S.] military. And on several occasions, a black officer would come up to me and offer me congratulations for everything that I had done, because it made it easier for them as a path forward. And I find that embarrassing because, quite frankly, if I were white, it would not be significant. But because I am black, and because of what took place in those periods, then it is significant. But I think my legacy is nothing other than the fact that it can be done. And I have other friends who have done similar accomplishments, like Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], as an example. A lot of folks don't even remember a guy named Chappie James [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.]. What's interesting is that the first black officer, general officer in the military, was a gentleman named Benjamin O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.], World War II [WWII]. His son became the first black general of the United States Air Force, Benjamin O. Davis, Jr. The first black admiral of the United States Navy is a personal friend who passed away about a year ago, Sam Gravely [Samuel Lee Gravely, Jr.]. So, of those who were first in terms of general officer, I'm the only one remaining as one of those who--of the military services. In fact, at Admiral Gravely's funeral a good friend of mine and I were walking away from the grave, and he looked at me and said, "Well, Frank [HistoryMaker Lieutenant General Frank E. Petersen, Jr.]," he said, "you're the last one." I said, "Thank you for reminding me." (Laughter) But it's all recent history. It's all very recent history. Just to think that I knew the first black Air Force general, the first black Navy admiral, and then myself of course being the first black general. I have a picture here somewhere showing the first black admiral, the first black Air Force, and then of course, me, first black Marine Corps. Story_ID: 482528 Speaker 1: Of course, Daniel "Chappie" James [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.] was a high profile person in the [U.S.] Air Force during the Vietnam War. Did you have any, I guess, reflections on him? Speaker 2: I met Chappie when I was down in Pensacola [Florida], that's his hometown. And I was having a pretty rough time, and all of a sudden I walk in this bar and I see this great big tall black guy wearing captain's bars and wings. And I thought I was seeing a mirage. But I managed to get close to Chappie and talk to him. He spent some time with me, and from that point on we were always friends. And Chappie was, of course, the first black four-star in the history of the [U.S.] military. His son, Danny, Jr. [Daniel James III] is now a three-star in the Air Force, working in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] in charge of Air Force Reserve [sic. Air National Guard]. So, circles within circles. And B.O. Davis, Jr. [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.], of course, I met while he was still on active duty. And of course, Sam Gravely [Samuel Lee Gravely, Jr.] and I were stationed together, the first black admiral, in Hawaii during the '60s [1960s]. So it was a very, very, it was a small community. Now, I don't even know how many generals and admirals there are. I do get a copy of those who are in the [U.S.] Marine Corps. And right now, I think there are about four black generals in active duty in the Marine Corps. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in terms of Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] being the first black head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and, you know, secretary of state as well. I mean there are some, the black community--I mean there's mixed opinions about him, about his cooperation in terms of the war effort and his endorsement of the war [Iraq War]. He's, you know, criticized a lot for that, but at the same time people say that he tried to steer, you know, steer the ship in another direction, you know. Do you have any reflections that you want to share with us about that? Speaker 2: I think Colin Powell did one of the most honorable things ever, in the sense of going against the administration [President George Walker Bush administration] in terms of the war in Iraq. Colin was one who spoke out, saying, "Don't do this." Of course, he was part of the administration. I also think Colin Powell was set up when he made that announcement in front of the United Nations [UN] in terms of weapons of mass destruction. I read carefully his account, and some other accounts, of how he was presented evidence by the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] in support of weapons of mass destruction. I think they were all bullshitting Colin. They knew there were no weapons of mass destruction, and I think it was just a sell by the best salesmen the administration had, giving false information. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. How does--do you have any idea of how he feels about this? Speaker 2: Colin Powell has publicly stated that was the lowest point of embarrassment in his entire career, military or otherwise. Story_ID: 482529 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your family. You told us about your daughter. How many children do you have? Speaker 2: I have five children. My oldest [Gayle Petersen] is an attorney. She's working for the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. The second girl [Dana Petersen Moore] is an attorney, a partner in a law firm in Baltimore, Maryland. My son [Frank E. Petersen III] is a GS-15 [General Schedule], an SES [Senior Executive Service] working for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] in Washington, D.C. My youngest [Lindsey Petersen Pulliam] is an information network engineer, and she's working in D.C. And my youngest, who is adopted, Monique [Monique Petersen], is working as a teacher in Ballou High School [Frank W. Ballou Senior High School] in Washington, D.C., and I've been trying to get her out of there ever since she started (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything else about your family? Speaker 2: No, that's about it. They're all doing great, no complaints. There've been some rough spots when the kids were developing, and they now tell me stories sometimes of the things I supposedly did and forgot about. But they always are proud of the fact of what I have done, and what I've accomplished. But I always tell them, you know, it's a new world out there, go out there and get it. And I really can't complain about these kids; they're doing great, doing great. Story_ID: 482530 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that you think we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I think we've pretty much covered everything. It's been a good, it's been a good run for my money. And again, as I say, I didn't think I was doing that much, as opposed to understanding the challenges and being able to read the tea leaves at the right time. I mean, you know, I made some good decisions. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the last question is similar to legacy. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, that's a hard one. In fact, I've always envisioned--I'd sure like to read my own obituary, but that ain't going to happen. (Laughter) But I don't really know. I'd like to be remembered as a fighter pilot and a capable individual, and that's about it...