 Story_ID: 67077 Speaker 1: I'd like to start out--my name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Samuel Adams is the observer. And I'd like to, first we're going to slate it. I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it, the complete name. Speaker 2: Roy Donahue Peebles, Jr., R-O-Y, D-O-N-A-H-U-E, P-E-E-B-L-E-S. Speaker 1: And you cannot swivel. Speaker 2: I will not swivel again. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: When I do the television live, I'm on these stools that swivel. I won't do it again... I've got it. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Next I'd like to have your date of birth. Speaker 1: March 2, 1960. Speaker 2: And today's date? Speaker 1: Today is April 15, 2002. Speaker 2: Our location? Speaker 1: Miami, Florida, 100 Southeast 2nd Street, Suite 4650. Speaker 2: The offices of? Speaker 1: Peebles Atlantic Development Corporation. Speaker 2: Okay. And your profession? Speaker 1: Real estate developer. Story_ID: 67078 Speaker 1: And I ask five questions of everyone. They're somewhat People-Magazinish, short answers. And I'd like to know your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is desserts. Speaker 1: You don't look like a dessert guy. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Aspen, Colorado. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: The last time I said it, it got me into trouble. So, let me think of one that will be less, I guess, real reflective of me: "Anything worth having is worth fighting for." Story_ID: 67079 Speaker 1: Okay. I'd like to start out by asking you about your mother, and her name. And I was curious, because her last name is my brother-in-law's last name, and you don't find it spelled a lot that way--Poole. But anyway, if you would just state her name, and what you know about her and her growing up. Speaker 2: Ruth Yvonne Poole. My mother's maiden name was Willoughby. She grew up in, she was born in Washington, D.C., and grew up in Washington, D.C. Went to Brown Junior High School in the District of Columbia and Spingarn High School. She got married in her last year of high school, and had me a few years after that. And so, her childhood was spent entirely in Washington, D.C. She was one of five children, all girls. And her parents both were from North Carolina, and moved to Washington I guess in the forties [1940s]. Speaker 1: Does she talk at all about or share anything about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. Growing up in a different time than I did, of course, where our society was a segregated society that she grew up in, and the challenges of growing up in that environment. And also how her father, who worked in the hotel industry, an industry that I'm involved in, how he worked as a doorman for forty years without the opportunity to grow in his career because of the limitations placed on African-Americans by our society at that time... but how she watched Washington grow and evolve into the city that it is today. Speaker 1: Is your grandfather alive? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So, he didn't--did he ever get to see your success in the...? I mean I just thought... because he worked at the Sheraton Hotel. Speaker 2: No. In fact, he died when I was just starting off in my real estate career, in my early twenties. Story_ID: 67080 Speaker 1: Now, also can you give me your father's name and his background, and what you know? Speaker 2: Sure. My father is Roy Donahue Peebles, Sr. He grew up in Emporia, Virginia and went into the military after high school... was in the Korean Conflict. And then after being in, after leaving the military service, came to Washington, D.C. Worked as an auto mechanic and then ultimately worked in the federal government at the Federal Power Commission, which was, now is the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, where he worked as an administrative level employee. Story_ID: 67081 Speaker 1: What are some, what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up is as a child playing in the living room of my parents' home and waiting for my father to come home from work, and then hiding from him when he came home; to play kind of hide and go seek. Story_ID: 67082 Speaker 1: And when you think about, when you--your parents... what do you, what traits do you have of either one? Speaker 2: I think that I have my energy and focus of my father. I think my father is a very energetic person. And in having an intense work ethic, I think I got that from him; a bit of shyness which I think I got from him. I think I got my mother's drive and my mother's commitment to winning, and the "no limitations" placed on me. I think my mother, in spite of growing up in a segregated environment, didn't grow up with the sense of any limitations imposed on her. And so, I think that transcended to me. And also, watching her as a black woman in trying to accomplish things in the business world, I saw the challenges that one faces. And so, I saw the commitment that it takes to be successful. And I got that from her, as well my willingness to make the sacrifices necessary to be successful. And I think part of my sense of--the area of my personality that's outgoing, I got from her as well. Story_ID: 67083 Speaker 1: I'd like--you were raised as an only child, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, right. No siblings? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so if you could--if you could describe what family life was like, early. I would like to have any memories that you have that may be five, six--you know, those early years. Speaker 2: The early years, my, I remember... My parents, as I said, divorced very early. So, I remember a little bit about the holidays. I remember my school play, for example, when I was in pre-school. I was tall, I was always tall for my age. And so, I played Santa Claus in pre-school. So I remember that, and my parents coming to, you know, watch my performance there as well. And so, I was, I remember that. And I think my birthday party when I was five, where we were having a party in the basement of our home. Those were some of the early family memories. Story_ID: 67084 Speaker 1: Did you--when your parents divorced, do you think you were of the age that it affected you much, or that you were aware of what was going on? Speaker 2: Oh, I think it affected me, certainly, that, and I have an eight year old son now. So, what happens with boys mostly, is it they are orientated towards their mother. And as they get to that five or six years of age, they begin to expand their family relationship to their father more, and begin to identify and emulate their father. So, consequently as I was doing that, my parents got divorced. So, it was a big disappointment to me that my parents weren't together. But as many kids do in our society, I adapted to it as well. Speaker 1: And did your father--I couldn't tell. Did he play an active role in your raising, or was it really you and your mother? Speaker 2: He played an active... a reasonably active role, under the circumstances. My mother, they divorced I believe when I was six. And they, my mother, by the time I was eight, we moved to Michigan. So I saw my father on, you know, like Christmas, the Christmas holidays, and then for the summer for a period of time during the summer, maybe a month of the summer, from the time period of eight until I was thirteen. And so, I think those were probably the more formative time periods of my age and my life. And so, I'd say that to the extent one can have a role with that kind of interaction, he had one. But I think my role model was my mother, without question. I'm, I'd say that she had obviously the major influence, not only on me as a person, but my goals and objectives, and what I expected out of my life. And in fact, my parents differed. And probably the reason they got divorced is my mother got married when she was 16 or 17 years old. My father was 27. He was the person he was going to be, philosophically, and she was not the person she was going to be. She was becoming the person she was going to be. And I think she grew up, and they grew apart. And so, they were different. My mother was an extremely driven and ambitious person, and my father was a more conservative, less aggressive person. Story_ID: 67085 Speaker 1: Now, what was some of your mother's messaging? What were the things that she was telling you? You know, as parents--parents, you know, give us messages. And I'm wondering, what were the things she was telling you about your role and what you should be or, you know, early... I'm talking about early time period. Speaker 2: I think it's interesting, you know, I was speaking to my wife about--you know, we were talking about what our company has accomplished and what I've accomplished as a business person, and how--did that exceed, did it exceed my expectations as a child? And in fact, I looked at it and tried to examine it clearly. And in fact, I did not anticipate--it didn't exceed my expectations, but it's a different accomplishment than what I had expected to do with my life. When my mother taught me that I should make... One, I could accomplish anything I wanted to do, that there weren't any limitations on my ability to succeed, that we lived in a great country that had, while it had problems, it had limitless opportunity, and that if I went out and embraced it and learned to compete in the world, that I would be successful when I went out and did that. But that I was also expected to do something big, or something to contribute to our society... make our society a better place to live. And in fact when I, as I grew up, I always--I didn't want to be a pro basketball player, I didn't want to be an entertainer. I wasn't impressed with entertainers or athletes. I was impressed by someone like John Conyers [Jr.], who was a friend of my mother's, who I met when I was five years old and knew over the years. Or, someone like Sterling Tucker, who was the head of the Urban League in Washington and chairman of the City Council. So, one of the things my mother made a point of doing was exposing me to successful African-American men who were in different areas other than the traditional visible roles. And so I grew up with the expectation and the idea that I could, if I wanted to become President of the United States, that there was no limitation to what I could accomplish. Now, how realistic that was, I don't know. But I grew up not having any limitations imposed on me. And so, when I look at it... But I grew up expecting that I was going to do something important, and help change the lives of others. And so, now I wrestle with the idea of--recently as to what building another luxury condo or making another ten or twenty million dollars is going to do to improve the quality of life for others. When you really get down to it, not much, unless I do something with it. And so, where I am today, it didn't exceed my expectations. In fact, I don't think it's met them. So, what I've accomplished today has fallen short of the expectations I had on myself when I was a child. Story_ID: 67086 Speaker 1: Now, do you know what prompted your mother's move to [Detroit] Michigan? Speaker 2: Yes. She was, my mother, in Washington she was working as a secretary, administrative assistant to Sterling Tucker at the Urban League, and she was doing real estate sales part-time. And she had a sister, her closest sister, who had moved to Michigan. Her husband was a physician, and got a residency in Michigan, in Detroit. And so she, her sister convinced her to move to Detroit [Michigan], start a new life, and to... The real estate was very strong there, and she went there. And it was almost by accident, I went there for the summer to visit my aunt and uncle and their children, who were a few years younger than me. And I was very close to her sister and my uncle, her husband. And so, I went to spend the summer there. My mother came there, spent a little time there, liked it, and we decided to move there. Speaker 1: Now, do you remember how that move affected you, and what you thought, you know? Or was it a new experience, or? Speaker 2: I mean, well, I had just--we had... It was interesting. I had gone... My parents had been divorced. We, when my parents separated, my mother moved to an apartment in Washington. We lived there for I think two years together. My mother got re-married, moved to Maryland, to Seat Pleasant, Maryland where we had a house. I developed friends there. And about a year and a half after that, she got divorced and we moved to Michigan. So, it limited the stableness of consistency. So, I was disappointed to see my friends--to leave my friends in Maryland. But I adjusted, and grew to like Detroit. One of the nice things was that I was very close to my aunt and uncle. And they had a son at the time who was four years younger than me, but he was like a brother to me. And so, I made the adjustment and actually grew to really like Detroit. Story_ID: 67087 Speaker 1: When you think about your, you know, your youth. Are there any sights, smells and sounds that sort of remind you of your childhood? And you know, it could be in Washington or it could be in, you know... or it could be sort of collectively between Washington and Detroit. Speaker 2: I would say that music, and the late sixties [1960s] Motown music and the early seventies [1970s] music reminds me of my childhood. I listen to it even now. And then there is a sight. There's a street in Washington called North Capitol Street. It's a street from the Capitol. In fact, I built an office building on North Capitol Street. But the Capitol--literally the street name is self-descriptive. It's the street north of the Capitol. So, if you drew a line from the Capitol north to the boundary of the Maryland state line, you would--that would be North Capitol Street. There's an underpass under North Capitol Street that is along, it runs under I think Rhode Island Avenue. And that underpass, when I drive it--even, you know, when I was there in December and my driver was taking me from an appointment back downtown, we went there. And it reminds me of when I was a little boy, and my father let me sit on his lap while he was driving and I got to hold the steering wheel as he was going under the underpass. So, that's probably one of the most distinct memories of me that I had as a child. And then going to National Airport from Washington--even today when I'm driven there or drive there on my way to the airport--the road really hasn't changed as, again, an underpass that you loop off of the 14th Street Bridge on George Washington Parkway. And that reminds me of when my father would take me to the airport on my way back to Michigan. So-- Story_ID: 67088 Speaker 1: Now, what were you like as a little, you know, boy? What were you... were you shy? You know, you said earlier that there's a shy part of you. You know, and then there's also--were there two sides of you, is what you're saying? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I'm just wondering what you were like when you... were you shy? Were you rambunctious? Were you well-mannered? Were you, you know, hyperactive? I mean-- Speaker 2: I would say I was definitely well-mannered, and probably more mature than most kids my age. I was basically the man of the house almost, at a younger age. My mother and I, we have 19 years between us. That's not a wide gap. So, we, as I got older, we became more friends. The relationship began to equalize a little bit more intellectually. And, but I was well-mannered. I would say I was outgoing, but just as comfortable reading. I would many times in the afternoons during the summer--like if I were visiting my father, I would read, get a good book and read. Or I'd read... and I'd read... and the books I would read would be about people's lives--Martin Luther King's life, Lyndon Johnson, Malcolm X. Story_ID: 67089 Speaker 1: So, I used to go to the Martin Luther King Library in downtown Washington, and I'd listen to records or tapes of Martin Luther King's speeches and Malcolm X. And so, that would be part of what kind of kid I was. And I did that when I was--I'd take the bus to do that when I was eleven, twelve. I liked sports. I played basketball, baseball. I was pretty good at basketball. And I had lots of friends. I always had--and my friends were always diverse people, you know, from different walks of life. I had non-African-American friends. I had friends who--at one of the schools I went to in Detroit--Friends School in Detroit which was a Quaker school--had a cross section of different ethnic backgrounds, and also economic levels. So, I had friends who were, you know, who lived at the low end of the economic scale, to friends who, like Berry Gordy's son Kerry... and got a lot out of that. And I think one of the things that helps me today is I'm very comfortable with people. And so my personality as a child was more serious, but fun. And I certainly probably pushed the limits a little bit here and there, too. And, but I always... It's interesting... I was speaking to one of my uncles this past weekend. His mother had recently died, and I was calling him to speak to him about his mother, who I had good memories of, and used to spend the summers as a kid at their beach house in Baltimore County. And he was congratulating me on what I had accomplished in my business career. And he said that I had told him all along that I was going to do very well, and that I was going to be prominent and successful and rich... and then I made that come true, and that he knew I would have done it, because I was willing to work hard all the time. So, it was interesting. I didn't have that perspective of me; I didn't realize that I was professing to know the outcome of what my life was going to be like, but I certainly did have goals. And that was expected of me, to have goals and be responsible. My grandfather taught me that, you know, if you give your word, you should live up to it. And if you make a promise, you should keep it. And if you... you know, one other advice he gave me--if you're going to be, if you have an appointment, to be there on time. But I don't think he had in mind the schedule that I have, of an intense amount of activity in a short period of time. But aside from that, I've tried to follow his direction. Story_ID: 67090 Speaker 1: Now in Detroit, give me the schools that you went to. Can you start with the schools that you went to, even in D.C.? Speaker 2: Sure. I went to, there was a--I went to pre-school at St. Luke's Episcopal Church. Then I went to Barry Day for kindergarten. I went to Carmody Hills Elementary School in Seat Pleasant, Maryland for first grade and second grade. Then we moved to Detroit. And then third grade, I went to Lafayette Elementary School in downtown Detroit on Lafayette Street. And in fourth grade, I went to Vernor Elementary School. My mother bought a house in an area of Detroit, and I went to the elementary school there for one year. And then after that, from fifth grade through seventh grade, I went to Friends School in Detroit. And then we moved to Washington [D.C.], and I went to--when we moved back to Washington we lived in Maryland, Silver Spring. The first year, I went to Buck Lodge Junior High School for eighth grade. And then for ninth grade, Alice Deal in Washington, D.C.; tenth grade, Woodrow Wilson; and then eleventh and twelfth grade, I went to the Page School in the Library of Congress on Capitol Hill. Story_ID: 67091 Speaker 1: Your mother, her political involvement started with the Urban League, is that how it started? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And I think I read someplace that you were often having meetings, you know, in your home. Or, there were meetings, and you would attend-- Speaker 2: She did like--back then, when we moved back to Washington, she got more involved politically. So, she did some local political fundraising and "Meet the Candidate" meetings. And that's when I met Marion Barry, actually, and other political people locally. Speaker 1: Okay. I want to--before we leave Detroit--were there other things about Detroit that influenced you, from that age? It was eight to thirteen, right, that you were there? Speaker 2: Yes. I mean, any other person, you know... spending time? Your uncle was a doctor? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Right. Was--and that's where you spent the most time, with he and your cousin? Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: But was there any--I'm just trying to see what, you know, was there anyone else who influenced you, or who served as sort of a quasi-father figure or anything like that? Speaker 1: I had another uncle, one of my mother's sister's, Caroline--her husband, Anthony Kramer, who's an attorney. And so, he had an influence on me. We played basketball... he was... he played basketball, and we played basketball together. And he was a lawyer, and so he had an influence on me. I think what was good about Detroit, is that Detroit was a--in many regards, ahead of Washington, D.C. when it came to African-Americans involved in the business world. You had Motown there. So, while other kids around, you know, the country were excited about, you know, the Jackson Five, I got the opportunity to know how they were discovered, and who was really making a lot of money off of them singing. There was a business behind someone singing, and that that, you know, shaped me as well. And then, you know, I had the opportunity to meet other lawyers, African-American lawyers in Detroit--judges--at the time the mayor was getting elected, I believe Coleman Young. So I got a chance to see African-Americans in major businesses, you know, in the city. And so, my role models were a lot different, I think, than many other kids growing up. I had the opportunity to see from a very early age African-American professional men and women on a daily basis. And so, it wasn't unusual to me. You know, in fact, it's a culture shock for me down here, to see such a shortage. But I grew up in Detroit, where African-Americans had a great deal of influence and power in the political and business world. And I think that was very important to my foundation growing up. I just, it didn't occur to me that that--that those were not options for me. And I could see it with other successful, you know, black business people. In fact, I remember I went to--my uncle gave me tickets... We'd just moved back to Washington [D.C.]or to Maryland, and I came to visit my aunt and uncle in Detroit. And I went, he gave me tickets and took me and my date to the NAACP's Freedom Dinner at Cobo Hall. And Sammy Davis, Jr. performed. I took my date, who actually grew up to become the first black Miss Michigan. And so, I got a chance to see--it was not unusual for me. It was a normal thing to see very successful, affluent, well-educated African-Americans. And so, it just didn't occur to me that there was, you know, any limitation on me doing that either. Story_ID: 67092 Speaker 1: When you moved back--okay, so you're back from Washington. What prompted your mother to move back this time? Speaker 2: Detroit, in 1973, was having a recession. Crime had gone up tremendously, and so it wasn't safe. Some of her friends had been killed. And, you know, Detroit was an unsafe place. And the economics, the economy had really declined tremendously. The automobile industry was in a recession. And so, she went back to Washington [D.C.], where she ended up working for the Federal National Mortgage Association. Speaker 1: And so, you're back. Now, where do you move? You move to Silver Spring, right? Speaker 2: Yes, exactly. Story_ID: 67093 Speaker 1: That's right. And you're thirteen, okay. This is--I have a question about--how did you end up going to the page school [United States Capitol Page High School]? That's what I'm sort of curious about, how that came about. You know, you say your mother was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --she got active. Marion Barry--when you moved-- Speaker 2: When my mother--yeah, when we came back to Washington, I didn't go to page school for another couple of years. Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: But what happened is my mother thought, you know, I wasn't really being challenged. I actually--I was older, you know, at 15, 16. So, I had more free time. I played basketball, but I wasn't getting academically challenged at school. And so, my mother thought that I could, it would be a good opportunity for me to really see what the real world's like politically, and get to go to a better school, but also to begin to take more responsibility. And so, you know, she called [John] Conyers actually, to ask him to help do that. And he actually didn't have the seniority himself at the time, so he asked one of his colleagues, Gus Hawkins, to use his seniority to appoint me as a page, which he did. And I became a page for six months, and then I developed a rapport with Ron Dellums of California, and then he hired me as an intern when my term was up as a page. And then after that, I went to work for [John] Conyers--I volunteered for Conyers. And then he saw that I was doing such a good job, one day his administrative aide came in to me and said that the Congressman saw that I was doing so well, and they had some excess dollars in their salary, and they wanted to give it to me. And so, I worked for him for my last year of high school. Story_ID: 67094 Speaker 1: But moving back to Washington was a transformation of where I thought I was going to go, and where I ended up. In fact, as I was saying earlier, that I had thought that I was going to grow up and do something probably more political, or more on the side of doing something good for society--to change the world, to really make an impact in the world. And going back to... my mother left Detroit, sold her business. She had had a real estate business. So, our lifestyle changed. And with her success, you know, came, you know, a nice lifestyle and some privileges as a younger kid. And so, going back to Washington [D.C.]--she left Detroit [Michigan] and was going to work in a real estate company, had an agreement to work there. And when she got there, things changed. And so we--she had to go and re-build... go out and find a job and start all over again. And so, that put some economic strain on us. And so, I, for the first--and I was thirteen, and so I was old enough to understand what was happening, but not old enough to do anything about it. And so, it was a frustrating time. And I had a chance to learn what it feels like to have money and then not have it again at all. And I think that experience over--I'd say from six--from thirteen on to--from thirteen on, I think my experience there shaped me. And by the time I had graduated from high school, I made a determination that I was going to make sure that such an experience never happened to me again--that I was going to make enough money to where I would be insulated from that type of an experience of not having to have the necessities, or having to worry about paying, you know, my bills and things like that. Not that most people in our society don't do that. But for me, it was enough of an unpleasant experience, and it was a distraction to me. And I saw the distraction it had on my mother, and I was going to make sure that my focus was going to be that that was not--I was going to insulate myself from that, so that I'd be able to focus on doing the other things well. And so, that's what I set out in my business career to do. So, that time period had, I'd say, had the biggest impact--had a bigger impact on me than any other life experience. Speaker 2: And can you be a little more detailed about that? I mean, what were the things? Was it just all of a sudden, you know, you're doing okay--you know, you and your mother are doing okay, and then you're not, and it affects--you know, how daily life... I mean, just... Speaker 1: It was a subtlety. Let's look at it this way. My mother, in Detroit--when we left Detroit, my mother had her own business. She had a Mercedes that she bought for herself. We had a lovely apartment overlooking the Detroit River--spacious apartment, doorman, you know, the whole bit. She entertained. And so, we went from that to living--we moved to a nice charming garden style apartment complex in Silver Spring. She ended up having to sell her Mercedes, and use the money to buy a more practical car to help support us. We had to make basic decisions on necessities of--you'd buy groceries for a two week cycle, as opposed to a month's cycle. I could go and... I couldn't buy a saxophone for band class, we'd have to rent it. You know, things that most, many Americans deal with on a regular basis. And I think there's a lot of truth to, there's a lot of truth to be said with the statement that "It's worse to have had money and lose it than to have never had it." Because if you've never had it, you don't know what you're missing. And when you do have it and lose it, it's, you know, can have a tremendous impact. And as a kid not understanding all of those things, and not being able to do anything about it--you know, getting a new bike. Story_ID: 67095 Speaker 1: You know, now, what was interesting though, is that I think I even then I wanted a new bike that summer, and we couldn't afford it. So, my father and my father couldn't afford it. But he had a friend who owned a gasoline station. I said, I want to work there. And so, I worked pumping gas for two months in the summer to buy my bike. And I remember my grandfather who was still, I think he still was working at the Sheraton Hotel. He came and saw me doing that, and didn't want me to do it. And I had a savings where he had given me, each Christmas he would give me money and a bank book, to show me how to save. And he told me - and I could never withdraw from it. He said, "You can withdraw from it and get your bike." I said, "I don't want to. I'm going to buy my bike, and I'm going to do it this way." And so I worked and had my job, and then I, you know worked through the summer doing that. And then I wanted to do some other things... to buy some of my other toys. So, I worked for one of my father's friends who was a supervisor for a janitorial services company that cleaned a medical office building in Maryland, and I would work there. And my mother finally put a stop to it, because it was longer hours. It was after school and I'd go work there. It was like, say, from about 6:30 until 9:30 or so. And I'll never forget. One of the offices that we cleaned was an orthodontist's office. And the guy--you know, a huge orthodontist office. So, they must have had a few dentists there. And it was the wires that they used for the orthodontic work. And when they would change them, they would drop them. And I guess they would drop them all over the floor. So, I'd have to get there, and the wires would get caught up in the carpet. So, getting that out... And so, I would say the experience of going from a privileged, you know, little lifestyle where I had my own little mini-bike and I had every toy that could be imagined--you know, to then going to Maryland and having a different experience, and learning what it was like to have to work for things you want--I, it had a tremendous impact on me, huge. And that continued. And so I became, I transformed as a person from being driven--where my vision for my future for my life was more theoretical--or more I guess good-willed--to being a businessperson. And so, and also the willingness to work for it, and the willingness to work hard, and to the point now that I don't think I work hard. And I probably do work hard, but I don't really feel that I work hard enough. So, I was driven by that. And it got to a point where, you know, I used to always--when I built my business, I used to worry about going back to that time where I didn't have enough money. And finally, I realized one day, I don't know why I'm worrying anymore. And you know, it was actually liberating. But that was, I would say the biggest impact on me as a person, in terms of defining my career today. Speaker 2: It probably is what led to your success like you are today. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Right, that's right. Speaker 1: I think I would not have been as driven. Because it's interesting. I was talking to, met a businessperson from Detroit, Atwater. He did the casino in Detroit. And he told me he works on business deals like his life depended on the success of it. And I couldn't have thought of a better way of describing how I worked on things, and losing would have been like death. I couldn't handle the concept of losing. The burden to win was so heavy that I had to win. I couldn't look, couldn't see the other alternative, and couldn't accept it. And so, yeah, it drove me to being focused. And so, while in my twenties while my friends were going out to parties, having fun and so forth, I was working building a business. So-- Story_ID: 67096 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you just one thing about page school. Because it's really, you get accepted in the program... I just didn't understand what it was. Speaker 2: What you do is that the House of Representatives, they have, it's like a messenger service on the floor of the House. And it was designed to expose young kids to government and public service. And they have a school that's a high school in the Library of Congress. In fact, they make the District of Columbia government pay for it. It's part of the D.C. public school system. However, it's not open enrollment. It is just for the kids that are appointed as pages. And they come from all over the country. And you go to school from 6 in the morning until 10:30. And then from 10:30 until the House is out of session, or the Senate's out of session, you work; and I did that. And I played basketball, so I went and practiced basketball after that, and then went home and did my homework. And because I lived in Washington, I didn't stay in one of the dorms close to the school. So, I got up at 4:30 every morning. And I'd be at school at 6, and then work all day and get back home about 9 at night, do my homework, and go to sleep and start the day again. Story_ID: 67097 Speaker 1: Now, was that a heady experience, when you first, you know, started working on the Hill? I mean was that-- you know within the halls of Congress? Was that sort of vetting? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, it's interesting. It gave me a great sense of self-esteem. I went to work--I had to go out and buy blue suits, white shirts, and blue ties. And I had to shave, you had to be clean shaven. And so, I got a chance to go to work in a suit and go work in the huge Capitol Building and meet very imposing people. I'll never forget, on my first day there, I guess I must have looked a little nervous and awkward. And Harold Ford, the Congressman from Tennessee, came over and introduced himself to me. And he talked and asked me about where I was from, etc. And I ended up watching his kids from time to time--Harold, Jr., who's now a member of Congress. And, but it was an interesting experience. It got me, again, the opportunity to see, you know, major political figures, many of whom were African-American, who were willing and able to stand up and tell the President of the United States what they thought. I remember John Conyers standing up to Jimmy Carter. And I met Vernon Jordan when he was at the Urban League, and how they were criticizing Carter for not doing enough for African-Americans. And I remember the early days of the Congressional Black Caucus, when Charles Diggs was the chairman of it. I also witnessed my share of scandals. Charles Diggs ended up indicted and leaving office, I saw that. And I saw the scandal--I mean Wayne Hayes or Wilbur Mills, one of those two. I got a chance to see the political world. I got a chance to watch the State of the Union Addresses from Jimmy Carter, two of them. And got my diploma in the Rose Garden of the White House from Carter. And so, it was a wonderful experience. It gave me a great sense of self-esteem, and exposed me to, you know, the political world in the real way. And so, I got to meet and develop relationships that I still have today there. And so, that was a tremendous opportunity for me. Speaker 1: So, you said it was Hawkins, Dellums and Conyers? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Those were the three that you-- Speaker 2: And I worked with Charlie Rangel-- Speaker 1: Charlie Rangel, okay. Speaker 2: --for about a month or so. And he and I always got along; it was very interesting. And what was interesting with [Ron] Dellums, is Dellums happened to be a much more relaxed personality. John Conyers is a very conservative person. And I would say Conyers is probably similar to my personality in some regards. But I also happen to have a fantastic relationship with Ron Dellums, who's an outgoing personality, as I am as well. And we would sit and talk about sports. He had a good friend of his who was his press aide as well, John Aperson. We'd sit around and talk about sports. Story_ID: 67098 Speaker 1: Marion Barry was running for mayor of Washington in '78 [1978]. And [Ron] Dellums and his wife, Roscoe [Leola Roscoe Higgs], they were very good friends with Marion Barry. And I remember he brought Marion Barry to one of the Black Caucus receptions and introduced him as the next mayor of Washington. I remember telling Dellums later, I said, "I don't why you embarrassed yourself like that. He's not going to be mayor of Washington, D.C. You know, Sterling Tucker's going to beat him." And he said, "Oh, no, he's not." And my mother was friends with [Marion] Barry and his campaign manager, Ivanhoe Donaldson; and I'd known him. And I remember going as a young kid, and when I think back on it, it's pretty funny. In my last year of high school, the mayor's campaign was heating up, for the mayor of Washington. And I remember--and I, a few years before that, volunteered for [Marion] Barry's City Council campaign. So, I worked and did, you know, various errands and activities at his campaign office. So, I knew Ivanhoe and knew Marion. And I remember telling Ivanhoe that Sterling Tucker's been a friend of my family for years and years, and I can't work for Marion Barry this summer. Not that my 17-year old support would be much for Marion, but as a principal person, I went and told Ivan, I said, "I can't do it. I'd like to, but Sterling's been a friend of my family for so long. And I'm going to help him this summer." And he, I guess smiled and told me, "Well, you know, Marion's going to win." And I said, "Well, I don't think Marion's going to win. But even if he did, I'm going to support the person that, you know, that's closest to me and my family." And lo and behold, Marion won. And I was away in college when that happened. But I was very politically involved, even then. And I remember having debates with my friends about home rule, and who really ran the city of Washington, and how we could hold--when we were complaining about the public education system--you know, who was at fault. And you know, I remember the mayor at the time was Walter Washington, and he had responsibility and so forth. So, I was always an intellectual person, I think when it came to politics. And that was early on, so I understood it. So, by the time I went out to work in the business world, I think I was certainly pretty good in understanding the political world. Story_ID: 67099 Speaker 1: Now, when Marion Barry got elected, how was Washington--how did Washington take it? Because he was the second black mayor, right? Speaker 2: Right, he was. Speaker 1: But he had the support of things like the Washington Post, and things like that, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Marion Barry always had--one of I think his best--his deep... I think Marion has a deep insecurity. And that deep insecurity is a huge basis for his success, because he's unwilling to accept no, and he's going to work hard. If you hate him and dislike him, he's going to work harder to convince you to like him than he will to keep his friends. So, he will focus on those who are not likely to support him. And so, Barry, when he ran, you had Sterling Tucker who was the establishment, the one who paid his dues through the organized civil rights process, and was more business oriented. The Urban League, he was more building something. And Marion... so Sterling worked within the system. Marion was working outside of the system. And then you had Walter Washington who was running for re-election, who had been installed as a non-elected mayor, and then had been elected when the city had home rule the first time. And people thought that it was time for him to go. But he didn't, and so you had the three of them running. And Sterling Tucker, the favorite of the business community. But what happened is Marion Barry went out and convinced the guilty white community in Washington that it was time to make some broad changes, and that if you're really liberal, he's the man. And he won by I think one percent in the primary. And in Washington, they, there's no run-off. So, the Democratic primary and a simple plurality is what carries the day. And so, he won by a hair. And I remember people were shocked when he won. But he actually turned out, I think in that first term, to be a very good mayor. And he was smarter politically, and he had some exceptionally smart people around him. I think Ivanhoe Donaldson was probably one of the most brilliant political people. And Marion had the ability to attract very bright people to work with him. And so, they came in and they turned the government around, and also made it... What they did best was make it responsive to the citizens who elected him, as opposed to responsive to Congress. So, he transformed the city of Washington. Story_ID: 67100 Speaker 1: Now, you, as you said, when you... you were away during that time. But you had graduated from high-- Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: --from page school. And you decided to go to Rutgers, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so, and at that time you're thinking you're going to follow your uncle? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Into his--you know what I mean, his footsteps as a doctor. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So, what, tell... so what was that year like? And what... because it was a year. Speaker 2: It was a year of transition. Again, you know, I left Washington. By the time I left Washington, I was making a nice salary, so I was able to support myself and go out and buy things for myself and so forth. And so now, I went back to being a student, with more limited resources. And so, I began to, I worked for my uncle part-time in his office. I also worked in Congressman Rodino's office in Newark, and got a feel for both things. And then I started spending more time in New York City. I realized at that point that medicine wasn't going to be what I wanted. And it wasn't, it was too confining of a profession for me. It wasn't right for my personality. And the reason I was interested in medicine was the prestige that the community gave to doctors, and the respect that doctors were afforded, and the economic stability. Both of those are the wrong reasons to be a physician. So I felt that, you know, that wasn't an appropriate reason for me to go into medicine. And so I--these were my goals. And I had to look at what profession those attributes would be welcomed and appropriate, and that was business. And I thought about politics a little bit. And I remember taking a political science class, or a government class on government. And I remember them talking about how laws were passed in Congress. And the professor was discussing how the laws were passed in Congress. And you know I remember after the class, I think I told one of my girlfriends at the time, I said, "You know, if these guys are this wrong about everything else here... And unless I'm taking an exact science type of class, and I'm going into an exact science field like medicine, then I need to leave. Because there is nothing that that guy can teach me in politics." He was so wrong, so off-base about how laws are made. Because laws are not made... you don't have these debates on the floor of the House of Representatives. You know, the founding fathers I'm sure conceived it that way, you know, several hundred years ago. But the reality of the circumstance is that somebody sitting up at the microphone on a dais, or at the podium on the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives, is not going to change the minds of 250 to 300 members to vote on a particular piece of legislation. It's all done by compromise, and done by the leadership. And so, they were so wrong about how laws were made in Congress. And I remember challenging the professor about, "Well, what about this?" "Oh, no, no, no, that's not right." I'm saying this guy has no idea what he's talking about. So, at that point, you know, I decided that if I wasn't going into medicine and I wasn't going to be an engineer or an architect--something that's an exact science--then they couldn't teach me anything, and I'd rather go out and learn in the real world. Because obviously the real world is going to be accurate, and this is going to be theoretical. And so, I decided that if I'm going into business, then I want to go out and learn it in the real world. Story_ID: 67101 Speaker 1: But who was the business protege? That's what I--you know, you had plenty of political proteges around you. And I'm just--you know, and for some reason I would think you would have gotten lured into, you know, the power and all of that--that you know, is often attractive to people to enter politics. But that didn't seem to-- Speaker 2: Well, actually, I have to credit Congress a little bit with that. Congress told me that the true power in our country is not just political, but economic. But no, I--my mother was in the real estate business. And I think she certainly thought being a businessperson would be a significant accomplishment. I saw, I saw the control and the influence, rather, than the business community had over somebody like Marion [Barry]. And how with all the trappings of being mayor, he would be very careful about making enemies of prominent businesspeople. And so I recognized that early on, that economic power can transcend easily into political power. But political power, when you try to transcend it into economic reward and economic power, people end up in jail. So, one way... it's a one way direction. And so, I liked the idea of business. Also, I liked the idea of being able to be in charge of my own destiny, being able to make my own decisions, and not having to--you know, for my job and my stability--to have to appease. And politics is a profession of appeasement, unfortunately. And so, I got, I had the experience of being on the Property Tax Appeal Board and chairing it, and having my induction into local politics. But I always felt that--and I don't rule it out--that at some later date, that I can go into politics. And I'll go into it with a different perspective, on my own terms. You know, I won't have to go out and appease the business community to give me five thousand dollars in contributions, or beg someone to do a fundraiser for me for twenty thousand dollars; I'll write my own checks. And I'll, and I think one of the things about the benefits of being a successful businessperson--while there are many sacrifices--that some of the benefits are, that one of them is that you get the freedom of choice. You can do business with whom you want, and you can, you know, make your own decisions. And that's very important to me--to be able to do something on my terms, win or lose. And I'm prepared for the consequences of losing. And, but I want to have the benefits of making my own decisions. And I think it's inappropriate for someone who has economic aspirations to go into politics as a means to that basis. I think that's caused a lot of problems. Story_ID: 67102 Speaker 1: I want to ask... I want to ask about you... So you're just, you're in school, you decide this is not for you. You know, you don't want to go on... But you're early in school. So, what is--you, you just decide I'm quitting and I want to go get in real estate? Or what is the deal? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was bored. Think about... I was living in the real world, in the House of Representatives for two years. And then I'm walking around a campus listening to some and going into a class listening to some guy telling me about theoretical politics that, you know, maybe worked two hundred years ago, but is not the real world today. And people are out, you know, having beer parties, and I had just left, you know, the seat of power of the world. It was an anti-climactic experience for me. And I played the game on Capitol Hill, I worked in that environment, working for real. I needed the money. I helped pay my household expenditures. So I had the, I took it as a responsibility, not a, you know, field trip. So, I went there for six months and stayed for two years, because it was important to my future. And so to leave there and go and work, and go to college, and read some books, and hang out at the pub after class with some students--you know, was anti-climactic. What am I going...? And what intellectual, you know, stimulation could I get from talking about a book on political science versus talking to Ron Dellums or John Conyers about, you know, the B-2 bomber or, you know, the Humphrey Hawkins Act? You know, or the Bakke Decision of the Supreme Court? You know, it was the real world versus the theoretical world. And-- Speaker 1: So, what is your mother saying? She's, she's horrified. Speaker 2: She actually--you know what... she... I have to say, I think my father thought I was making a big mistake, and my uncle thought I was making a big mistake. But my mother said, after having a similar conversation with her, she said, "You're right. You know the... but you understand the consequences here. It's that without a college education, you're going to be unemployable." I said, "I understand it, I just won't work for anybody then." Story_ID: 67103 Speaker 1: So, then what did you set about doing? That's what I-- Speaker 2: I started working as a real estate sales agent in a company, Shannon and Luchs. My mother had left Fannie Mae, and was working as an appraiser. So, I went and took some appraisal classes and started working with her. And so, that was 19. By 23, I had, or 22, I had-Marion [Barry] was running for re-election against Pat Harris, and she was expected to beat him. And that time around, I was older, I was more knowledgeable, and I knew Marion would win. And so this time around, I knew he'd win. And I knew the way to develop some political IOU's. And that was raise money and help him get votes. So, I lived in Ward 3. I had an apartment in Ward 3, which was the most affluent ward in the city, primarily white. And I gave some "Meet the Candidate..." I organized. There was--the area I lived in must have had maybe a dozen large apartment buildings and condos. I got all the associations--the condo associations--of all the buildings to collectively and jointly do a "Meet the Mayor Event." So, I did a "Meet the Mayor Event," did mailings out, got involved in his campaign. And then I had an idea of doing a fundraiser a few days--a breakfast fundraiser a couple of days after his successful victory in the primary, where he was trailing in the polls. And people said, "Oh, no, he's not... you can't do that, it's too presumptuous." I said, "Well, all the people that are giving money to Pat Harris are going to be in shock when Marion beats her. And you know, are going to want to redeem themselves. And we need to give them a vehicle to redeem themselves immediately. So, let's host a victory breakfast a few days afterwards. We'll send out invitations now. And right before the election--let them get them before the election--and then they'll come, you know, and contribute." So, we did this event for five hundred or a thousand dollars a person for breakfast. And I sent them, I went, I got the campaign finance reports of all the people who gave Pat Harris major contributions, and we sent them to him. And we had very few RSVP's, but the place was standing room only at the Washington Hilton Hotel. And I remember I was sitting at the head table. I was 22, and Marion was thanking me for having a great idea. And I had my mother sitting at one table with some of the top developers. And I had met several of the top developers, and so forth. And at that point, I'd begun a political relationship with the mayor, who now had four years office, and was going to be in the formative time period of my business career. And so I had, by that time, I knew that I wanted to become a major player in the real estate business. And not having a lot of money, what other way to become a major player in business? Politics. But I didn't want to run for elective office, because it would be too confining. But I learned how to use the political system to become a player. Story_ID: 67104 Speaker 1: So, he rewarded you with his appointment--your appointment, I'm sorry--to the tax board. And was it a principal-- Speaker 2: Now, let's, let me, [Marion] Barry is not the, Barry is not the person, doesn't have the personality that goes out and seeks to reward his friends. But given the opportunity, he... if it presents itself to him, he will do it. I got a call one day from one of the people I worked with during the campaign. She had gone back into government. And she--there was a vacancy--the chairperson of the Real Estate Commission in Washington, D.C. And she said, "That would be a good position for you. Are you interested?" And I said, "Absolutely." So, she said, "I'll have the mayor's Board of Commissions person call you." So, I got called by a woman named Betty King. And she called me, and she has this kind of northeastern-y speech pattern, an Anglo woman. You know, she speaks very proper. She says, "I understand that you're interested in the, for being on the Real Estate Commission." And I said, "I am." And she said, "Well, are you a licensed broker?" I said, "No, I'm a licensed sales agent." She said, "Well, the position is for a broker." She said, "But I saw your resume, and you have some appraisal experience. So, the Board of Equalization and Review would be the appropriate board for you." Now, my mother had served on that board from 1975 to 1980. So, this would have been 1982. And I said, "Yeah, you're probably right, it would be. So, maybe I'll have a seat on that." She said, "Well, you know, actually, I would have done that, but it's too late. I just filled, there were four vacancies, and they were just filled recently. I just sent the names up to the mayor's office for signature, so it's too late. He's going to sign them and make those appointments." And I said, "Well, thanks very much. If anything comes up, give me a call." And I thought to myself, "I don't have time. I don't have four years, or three years. I need, I want to be on it now." So, I called Ivanhoe [Donaldson]. And I said, "I would like to be on the Board of Equalization and Review. Marion's committed to equal economic and political opportunities for young African-American businesspeople. I'm an aspiring young African-American businessperson, and I'm qualified, as anybody else is. So, I would like you to call the mayor and see if he can change his mind on one of the nominations up there before he signed it?" He called him, I got a call back the next day. "Don, one of the people... This is Betty King, the mayor's special assistant to the mayor for Boards and Commissions. One of the nominees was unable to serve, and I told the mayor that you were interested, and I've convinced him to nominate you." And I said, "Thank you very much." And that was, and then I got a call from the mayor telling me he was appointing me to the Tax Appeal Board, and I got appointed that year. And so, at 22, I was appointed to the Tax Appeal Board. I may have been... and then I started serving at twenty three. Story_ID: 67105 Speaker 1: And then after my first year on the board, the board chairman, who was a Walter Washington appointee, and had survived four years under [Marion] Barry, his term was up. And I was a little more--you know, I was young and I was, you know... more hardball politics. I'm saying why is Marion needing somebody who Walter Washington had appointed? But knowing, now knowing him as I do, he figured he could convert this guy to be his supporter, too, since he was a Walter Washington supporter before. So, I decided that I would be interested in being chairman, and what an opportunity it would be for me, and that they needed some new leadership there. There was one person--after serving that year on the board, there was one senior person on the board, and who was an appraiser, who was well-qualified. And I asked him, I said, "Are you interested in being chairman?" "Oh, no, I don't think I--oh, no, no, no. I don't think, you know, I don't think I want it." I said, "Well, will you support me?" And he said, "Well, if you want it, I'll support you." And I asked a few of the senior members, and they said they would. But I realized that wouldn't be enough. So, I went and I met with Ivanhoe [Donaldson], who was deputy mayor at the time. And I said, "I want to be chairman of the Property Tax Appeal Board. How can I accomplish that?" He said, "Well, you know, what your problem is going to be is that you're young, you know, and so forth. So, you've got to get the mayor comfortable with doing that. Get some key, you know, community leaders and so forth, and some of your board members to support you." I said, "Well, I have a few of them." And then I thought about it, and I said, "You know, I just made a bunch of friends at the fundraiser that I gave for the mayor. And they were so happy that I included them. And a lot of them redeemed themselves. I'm going to give some of them a call." And then I knew who some of the other key supporters of the mayor were for his finance committee and so forth. I knew some of them from the campaign; I'm going to call them. So, I went and met with some of the top developers and so forth, and said... made my case. "I'm young, but I've been in the business, you know for three or four years now. You know how complicated it is, real estate appraising, I know it. I've had the experience, I've had classes." I said, "Most of all, you're going to get a level playing field with me. I'm not going to have any political agenda, and I'm not going to be afraid for my job, because I'll have a good relationship with the mayor. I won't be afraid to stand up to the city assessors if they're wrong. I won't split it down the middle like the guy who's there now doing. He's splitting it down the middle, because he doesn't want to offend the city assessors who will go and complain to the mayor, because he's in a weak position because he wasn't appointed by [Marion] Barry, he was appointed by Walter Washington. I won't be afraid to rock the boat." So, I got enough of them to call the mayor. And then after enough of them called him, I called the mayor and asked him if I could go and meet with him. And I remember I was nervous. I went into the mayor's office. It was a big, huge office, 20-some foot ceilings. And I go in and sit down, and we start talking. And he asked me, you know, about how my mother was doing, and asked me about the, you know, how I liked the board, and so forth. So, after some pleasantries... and we talked about politics a little bit. And then I made my case about being the most qualified to be on the board--I was as qualified, and I had more commercial experience than the chairman then had, and what drove the economics of that board were commercial property owners. You know, while, you know, they paid 90 percent of the real estate taxes that were appealed each year, and someone should have that experience. And most importantly, he'd have somebody, you know, that was going to make him look good, and not cause any problems. And I guaranteed him, you'll never have a problem from that board. And, you're going to have a problem with the guy who's there now, plus he didn't support you, and I did. And shouldn't that mean something? And he had a, he had a, it was a compelling argument. And he said, "Well, let me think about it." And so, he thought about it, and then Ivanhoe and a few others I think worked on him a little more. And then he called me and told me he was going to nominate me as chairman. Story_ID: 67106 Speaker 1: Your... you know, initial appointment, you were young. And people--was there any criticism at all when you got appointed chairman--from the press? Speaker 2: Not really. No, I think people were--there were a few skeptics. But I think the Washington Post did a story on the board after my first or second year there. And it said how I had transformed the board, and made it more professional. You know, for example, you know, we ran--the board was run like, you know, the phone company, before I got there. You'd get, you'd have a hearing, and they'd hear you sometime between 9 and 2. And so, a homeowner, you know, who has a job and has to go to work, that's a real problem for them. So, somebody who's got a $100 million office building, pays her lawyers and the lawyers wait. And so what, they're on the clock, they don't mind waiting. But the homeowners, it was a problem for. And so, I thought the system ought to work, even though the economics were not as important to the city in terms of homeowners. [Marion] Barry and his future was very important to people who were homeowners; they were his voters. And so, the system needed to work for them. And so, I made it work for them. And I created a community outreach program. And I took the, we would go out and conduct seminars to various neighborhoods telling them how to appeal their assessments. We'd bring the city assessor out and have him explain, you know, how the assessments were done. I'd have my staff of the board there with appeal forms, so they could fill them out and file them right then if they wanted to appeal. I made the system work for the homeowner. And also what I did, I reorganized all the rules and procedures that govern the board, and how it conducted its hearings and so forth. Took it through the City Council and the voters, and changed them. And I created four vice chair positions as well, out of a 15 member board. And I created four vice chairpersons that I appointed as chair. And so, I bestowed the positions of vice chair to four of my colleagues. And so, that gave me a solid block of support on my initiatives to change things here. And so, I think what was good was that I left it a far better place than when I came there. And I think that, you know--and also I got to testify in front of the House of Representatives--Julian Dixon's Committee on D.C. Appropriation; testified before the City Council for my confirmation hearings. And so, it was a good experience as well. And again, all of the City Council members--there were eight ward representatives. So, there were single member districts. And of course, homeowners were very important to them, too. So, I'd go to each one of... we'd organize it through each of the City Council members... our community outreach efforts... for their wards. And go there in the evenings after work, in public libraries and schools, and conduct these seminars; have the City Council members present and say how they asked us to come to the community and it was important idea, and I'm glad they invited us. I let them take the political credit, because I wasn't a politician. And we brought the government, in that regard of the government, to the homeowners. And I think that helped establish me in terms of the political leaders in the city as well. Speaker 1: Now, you held that position--you were chairman for four-- Speaker 2: Four years. Speaker 1: Four years. And is that how long someone can be chairman? Speaker 2: I was, I had a term on the board of five years. So, I served at the pleasure of the mayor as chairperson. But my term was a fixed term of five years. I could have been re-appointed to another five years. But at the expiration of my term, I was building an office building. I had, my career had grown so much; I was becoming very high profile myself. And it was a situation of diminishing returns for me to serve on the board. And I'd accomplished--there was nothing left to accomplish. I'd re-organized the rules and procedures; the board operated very smoothly. We had a full-time executive director. We had a full-time staff; we had new offices. We had hearing rooms where the taxpayers got privacy. We had, we brought in new members of the board that were well-qualified. And so, we looked... At the board, I'd accomplished everything I wanted to accomplish there and set out to. And so, it's time to move on. Story_ID: 67107 Speaker 1: During this time that you're serving on this [Property Tax Appeal] board, are you, you're still working in real estate and building your business? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Was there, there was no conflict of interest? Speaker 2: No. Because I, well, the only limitation would be that if I had, as an appraiser, appraised a property that went before the board. And I never did that. Speaker 1: But that would have been, that position would have been a wonderful bird's eye view of the real estate industry. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. And I became a major player in the business community, because I could sign my signature and save somebody a million dollars. Speaker 1: That's right. I mean, that's where it's all in, is in appraisal. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean when you're trying to get taxes and-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So, the business community was taking to you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, by that time--by '86 [1986] when Barry ran for re-election again, I was a major fundraiser. I then held a fundraiser at my apartment, where it was $500 a person in my home. And you know, I had a good link to the commercial real estate community. And so, I became a major fundraiser for [Marion] Barry, and for many of the City Council members. I probably had as much support on the City Council as Barry did. And you know, I had a great relationship with the chairman, a good relationship with several of the City Council members, and was in the process of supporting, unseating, a few of the City Council members that were there by supporting long-shot candidates like Harry Thomas who was a, ran for Ward 5 against Barry's ally. And Barry didn't want to, he didn't want to support Thomas. And I went out and supported Thomas, and he won. So, I began to be more active in politics in the mid-eighties [1980s]. Story_ID: 67108 Speaker 1: And while you're doing this in the mid-eighties, what was your real estate practice--what was it, and what was taking hold in that? What kind of investments were you making? Speaker 2: Well, I was doing--basically, I had a real estate appraisal business. And in 1986, I got involved on a project for my first office building on Martin Luther King Avenue. Speaker 1: Well, I have one question for you, though. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: You know, just--when I was reading your material, and I was thinking back to the interview with Marion Barry, when I asked him what regrets he had of his, you know, time in office. There were two, and I can't remember the second one. But one was that he had not allowed for a major black investment, a downtown office building investment. What was he referring to? Because then you say that's, you know, you had been an investor. What was he talking about? Speaker 2: Well, he's talking about-- Speaker 1: The deal that fell through? Speaker 2: Yes, probably. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because he had the opportunity to, you know, I, I, I-- Speaker 1: I'm just-- Speaker 2: I believe, yeah, I believe that it's easy to be... Friendship, what friendship should give you in politics is a level playing field. That's it, just a level playing field. But it, that level playing field should survive anything. So, that means... It's easy, a beautiful day out today, sunshine and clear sky. There's no problem giving a level playing field. But when Hurricane Andrew comes through here, or Hurricane Bob, it takes some character to give a level playing field. And that's when you know that--that's when there's a difference. And where Marion came up short is when there were--when it was difficult to keep--give a level playing field to his supporters and friends, he didn't. But when he imposed a similar burden on all of us to give him a level playing field, in spite of his conduct, he didn't feel that anybody had any room to hesitate. And he would, you know, he felt hesitation was disloyalty. And so, when I won a competition fair and square to re-locate government employees to a--from government office buildings into two office buildings I was involved in at a savings of $58 million compared to my nearest competitor--you know, Marion... I should... I won it fair and square, and I should have gotten it. And what happened is that the Washington Post, suspicious of him, and not wanting him in office again after he had been, you know, had his drug problems and gone to prison and come back out and got elected--didn't--and I was a supporter of his--they looked at me as, you know, a crony of his. And so, they were penalizing and they were distrustful of me, because of my relationship with him. Not because of who I was, but because of my association with him. And so he was unable, or unwilling, to stand firm and tall and support fairness in that issue, because of his desire to appease the community that didn't support him anyway, and was never going to forgive him for his problems. And so, what ended up happening is that they ended up doing business at considerably more money with a white developer instead of me. And this was a man who had built his reputation supposedly on equal economic opportunities for African-Americans, and who asked us, as voters and supporters, to excuse his personal shortfalls because he was targeted because he was African-American. And yet he wouldn't--you know, I didn't get indicted and I didn't go to jail. And I didn't need anybody to forgive me--just to treat me fairly, and he couldn't find it in his character to do it. And I think it is a shortcoming of his administration. Because for the mayor to be mayor of the nation's capital for 16 years, and there's only one African-American that owns a building in downtown Washington, and it's me, in spite of him, that he should be ashamed of himself. And actually, you know, and you look at--you know, and I think that the fact is, is that the position he finds myself in today is an example of his lack of commitment to that regard. It's, I think it is a big regret of his. I think, you know, if I were mayor, I would have wanted to change things on a permanent basis. And the only way you do that is to give some equal economic opportunities. Story_ID: 67109 Speaker 1: What happens is that you see this in politics quite a bit, especially--you know, here you have a system, a political system, that is based on rewarding friendship and punishing enemies. And over the past thirty years, our urban centers have evolved to where the electorate is African-American. And so many non-African Americans, especially the media, like the Washington Post, want to change the rules and say, "Okay, now it's no longer okay for a black politician to help a black supporter." And if a, if a--you look at the standard--if a white politician supports a white businessperson, and the merits of the deal or the project are strong, then people say there's nothing funny there. But you can't have an African-American businessperson and an African-American politician do business together without the perception that there must be something wrong. Because there's no way that a young African-American like Don Peebles could possibly beat a white seasoned developer out by $58 million dollars. There must be something wrong. And we don't have any evidence that there's anything wrong, but there's gotta be something--and he's connected to Marion Barry, so it's all wrong. And so, you know, that's what happens. And unfortunately, Marion [Barry] reacted to that. And that was his downfall politically as well. That's why he'll not be back in office, and that's why he's going to--he's left office with very minimal accomplishments, because he bought into that. And the fact is--one of the things I'll say is that the Hispanic community down here does it differently. They don't care what the Miami Herald says. They don't care, you know, what the perception is. They're going to work together, they're going to support each other. And that's what they're--and they're going to make sure that they make a major change here. And that's why you see every major industry here having huge Hispanic representation. It's almost every major national bank that has an office down here, this region's run by a Hispanic banker. They're developers, businesspeople, they're all--you know, there are Hispanics at every level here. And so in Washington, D.C., Marion should have insured that that happened, and he did fail. Story_ID: 67110 Speaker 1: You know... that Marion wasn't going to help me ever again. Speaker 2: He wasn't-- Speaker 1: She [Sharon Pratt] told me that Marion Barry, if he--she said, "I know you think that Marion Barry is your friend, and Marion Barry's going to help you if he gets into office, and he's going to do more for you than I would. And I'm telling you that you're wrong. I'll do more for you than him. And I said, "Come on." She was asking me to chair her finance committee. And I was telling her-- Speaker 2: And you said no. Speaker 1: And I told her no. And I said, "Of course... Marion." I said, "I've known Marion all my life." And she said, "Well, no, do you know why he's not going to help, why he's not going to help you?" And I said, "No, what are you saying?" She said, "Well, let me explain to you. Marion grew up in the segregated South. White people were here, he was here. He always grew up there. He's not accustomed to looking white businesspeople, white powerful people, in the eye and challenging them. So, he sees you and sees what you've accomplished, and thinks you've got enough, and that you wanting to have anything more, you're greedy." And I said, "No way." I said, "Come on, no way." She said, "I'm telling you." Okay. She lost, he won. When he reneged on my deals, he said, "Don, how many office buildings do you need to own?" I said, "What?" He said, "How many office buildings do you need to own?" I said, "Well, do you ask Oliver Carr, or Joey Kemper, or any of these other developers how many buildings they need to own, or Jack Kent Cook how much money he needs to make? What is this? I can't own more than one?" Then he kind of, you know, shucked it off. But I remember when he was set up smoking crack, and the videotape that he was on, he, the girl that he was with, I'd met through him. And she asked about me and my girlfriend at the time. And Marion said I had bought a new house in Georgetown, and it was a very big house. And she said, "It's a really big house?" And Marion said, "Yeah, it's too big for him." So, Sharon [Pratt] was right; Marion saw me as having enough. And that, see, what happened is society had imposed a limitation on him. And he imposed that limitation on us black businesspeople in Washington, D.C., that we could have our little 35 percent of the pie, but we had to chop it as thinly... take a piece of cake, and as thinly sliced as you can make it. Like, taking a loaf of bread and saying "Here's one-third for African-Americans," and making it the most thinly sliced bread. "This is your slice, now, do not come back. This is it, this is your slice. Now, even if you have the merits and you deserve it, don't come back." And instead of saying, "You know what, 35 percent of the loaf of bread isn't enough, we need half." You know, he imposed limitations on us. And that's what was wrong with him. And that's why his tenure as mayor--you know, when he looks back on the accomplishments, he's made some wealthy white developers even richer. And you know, he didn't even help Bob Johnson. You know, Bob Johnson got, became successful, you know, in spite of Marion. And you know, it's interesting. When the MCI Arena was being built in Washington, D.C. and the city was going to give $130 million of land to the owner of the Washington Wizards and build the arena for them, Bob Johnson said, "Wait a minute. I'll build it with my own money. And why are you giving him this property?" And Marion said--you know, they like treated Bob Johnson like an outlaw. The Washington Post wrote editorials against him like he was an outlaw. Yet, you imagine... Let's take the... Imagine the city of Washington and Marion Barry saying, "I'm going to give a $135 million of property on a non-competitive basis to Bob Johnson to build a new television studio for BET." They'd be investigating them for criminal activity. They'd be saying how they shouldn't do it, because it's not an RFP and so forth. And so what happened, Marion bought into the double standard. He didn't try to stop it. Story_ID: 67111 Speaker 1: Didn't have... you know, he was so happy having his job as mayor. And being mayor, obviously, was his whole life. Politics was his whole life. He hasn't been anything else other than that--not made a difference in any other profession whatsoever. And after being mayor for 16 years, he left the office in disgrace and couldn't earn a living. So, you know, what's wrong is I think we need people in office who are accountable to the people who elect them, not the people who help pay for their campaigns. And so, you know, I would hope--and that's what I mean by buying--people like me helped contribute to that. And at the same hand, while he's sitting there presiding over office and doling out jobs, our young people are being murdered in the street. We have a drug epidemic in the city, and we're spending ten thousand dollars a year to educate people and send them through high school. Each student, ten thousand dollars per student, and they can't read at a--they graduated from high school, and can't even read at a seventh grade level. That's a failure. And he left the worse public education system. And those things are a measurement--it's not just giving people some jobs. Giving people jobs and using that patronage system is like what the white segregationists used to do to us in the South. They'd go out and give us some turkeys and some other stuff, and hand out some gifts, and get us to vote for them. You know, Marion gave out jobs to co-op people and distract them from looking at the other failings of the government. You know, is it acceptable that our young people who can't afford to go to private schools and get a decent education--where public schools and education is our way out to a better life--that they can't get it in the nation's capital of the free world, that's run by African-Americans? Sure, we should be able to give our children that. And the person who holds that office ought to see that as a tremendous responsibility, and as the number one objective. Rebuilding downtown is great. You know, making some other rich developers richer, that's a... good for you. But not at the expense of the other things. And that's, you know, why I think that, you know, his tenure was disappointing. Speaker 2: Now, this was what year that this happened? Was it 19--? Speaker 1: Nineteen-- Speaker 2: Ninety-- Speaker 1: Nineteen Ninety Four [1994]. Speaker 2: Four, okay. Speaker 1: Was it 95? [1995]. Ninety-Five [1995], '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: I thought it was '95 [1995], but I wasn't sure, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, '95 [1995]. Story_ID: 67112 Speaker 1: So, you say this is, this is--for someone who's had a meteoric rise, really, at this point... Once you hit Washington, D.C. after coming back from Rutgers, it appears from an outsider's standpoint that you went like this? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And so this was your, really, first disappointment, or a thing that you didn't get--that hadn't come easily? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it was a big thing because it's--I think you were, you had stood to make $20 million off of that. Speaker 2: A considerable amount, yes. Speaker 1: Right, that's the important thing. So, here it is--and this is really disheartening. I mean you've done everything right, you know, from campaigning to doing all the things-- working your contacts and all that. And so, you're like pissed off. Speaker 2: Yeah. You know what bothered me more was that--the way I found out, and the way the mayor handled it. One, I think that I had the support--he's an indecisive person, and that's another shortcoming of his. He's slow to make a decision. So, he let the political storm fester instead of closing it out quickly. And I had the support of the City Council, including the white chairman of the City Council, begging him to send over the lease so he could get it approved by the City Council. And what happened is after meeting--I was in the office, in the mayor's office trying to finalize some issue on this contract. And I'm walking in the office, and Marion's walking out, and he can barely look at me. And he's walking by, he's rushing out to a meeting, and he's with his security team; he can barely look at me. So, he keeps going. And I go into the office, and I thought to myself, "He's going to double-cross me." And so, we go in, we have this meeting and so forth. Marion has--I go home that evening and I turn on Channel 4. I'm watching the news at 11 o'clock. And there's a guy standing, a reporter standing outside of the mayor's office saying that the mayor is planning to withdraw Don Peebles' deal tomorrow morning. And I say, "This is unbelievable." So, I call him, and I can't reach him. So, the next morning I go down to his office, and I see him again. And he's walking by me again, and he says, "I got to run." He walks into a press conference and withdraws my deal, without saying a word to me. And so, it was that lack of character--to look me in the eye and say "The political climate is so bad I can't withstand it," and to give me an opportunity to tell him, "No, you should... you know, we have the support, and we should do it." And the stupidity of doing it in the first place. Because what, the fight wasn't about Don Peebles. The Washington Post has written nice things about me since. The fight's not about--this wasn't about Don Peebles and Don Peebles' inability to produce a product. It wasn't about Don Peebles' reputation would be harmful to the city. This was about Marion Barry, who had come into office after going to jail for smoking crack, and who had won as a surprise, and who they were getting ready to clip his wings and create a control board to stop his, limit his authority. This was about stopping him. The fight was on him. And they wanted to build this arena for this wealthy white building owner, have the government and the black taxpayers pay for it, and make sure that Marion didn't get anything out of it and that his supporters didn't. And they were going to make Marion ineffective. So, they figured they couldn't beat him at the polls, but they could make it so that if he won, what did you get? If you're a businessperson backing Barry, if he won and couldn't effectuate anything and had no power, what good would he do? So, you'd have to go and start looking for somebody else who was elected, and could have some influence. And so, Marion didn't recognize that the fight was about him, not me. And so, when he double-crossed and abandoned me, he hurt himself, because then that was it. That deal was it. And then as a turning point of his short administration at that time--and then at that point the control board took over a few months later, and he had no power. And you know, but he had his job, and he got to be called Mayor Barry again. And that was enough for him, and he got redemption. And, but he didn't recognize what it was all about. And he would have been more respected and had more support had he done was right, and what he should have done. John Ray and other Council members begged him. They said, "Step up, tell the City Council this is the lease we're submitting. It's $58 million better. If you want to support the arena and get it built, this is the only lease you're going to get from me." And he didn't do it. So, that's why--so I got disappointed. And I realized that I was never going to get a level playing field in that environment again. If I couldn't do it and be $58 million better, how--you know, what more compelling argument could I have? And at that point, I realized it. You know, it was time to look at some other opportunities. And I said there's no way I'm going to be a taxpayer in this city a moment longer than I have to be. And then I moved to Maryland. Story_ID: 67113 Speaker 1: Now, Sharon Pratt came in after that, right? Speaker 2: No. She came in before. Speaker 1: Before--in between. Speaker 2: In between. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He had been mayor for three terms. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. And then the whole... okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But her... look how dismal she, I mean did she try to approach the business community? Speaker 2: You know what happened. Poor... I feel sorry for her in some regard, because of the mess she inherited from Marion [Barry]. You know, the reality is she didn't create that mess. You know, it was there when she walked in the door. It was a mess. She had--there was a $750 million deficit by the time she got the dust settled there. Marion had made a mess of the government. And all of the top leaders had had it with him. You know, Elijah Rogers left, you know. And some of his top people left, and others had legal problems. So, Marion... and so the government... Sharon came in and inherited a mess. And she was a fighter, and she was stubborn. So, she didn't, she wasn't a great politician. She didn't know--she didn't have the Machiavellian attitude that [Marion] Barry had, which was to go and convert your enemies, do business with people you don't like--you know, make them your friends. She wanted to stay as far away from Barry as possible. She felt--you know, she was born in Washington, D.C. She felt that Marion had embarrassed us all, which he did. It was a sad day when he was on video--the fact that that man allowed the country to see him smoke crack on videotape and make us all endure a trial. It was a sad day for our city for him to be arrested, and even a sadder day when the whole world saw him smoking a crack pipe, you know, in a hotel room with a woman that wasn't his wife. What a terrible example it was for African-American men throughout the world. And that's what he allowed to happen. And so she was rightfully so, embarrassed and angry, for what he done to our city, and wanted nothing to do with him or anybody connected with him. And she carried it a bit too far. I think she was naive politically, and she didn't reach out to the business community until it was too late. And she wasn't a mayor... she didn't placate people; she went in there and made some tough decisions. And the mess that he left her, you know, she didn't have any time. You know, the city was teetering on bankruptcy, and she didn't have any time to go in and make nice, and smooth things over. She had to make some hard decisions, and she just didn't have the political experience to carry out making those hard decisions. And I'll bet you today, she'd have been a more received... If she was Anthony Williams right now in Washington, she would be, you know, mayor again without a problem--if she had the same environment that Williams came into, and you know, with a good economy and so forth. Sharon came in after Marion Barry for 16 years, and an economic recession. So, it was unfortunate. And you know, in retrospect if I had to do it all over again, I would have been her finance chair. It would have been better for the city, and probably better for me. Ironically, though, I was confident that Marion, or John Ray... In fact, who I supported was John Ray. And but I would have, if I had to do it all over again, I would have supported Sharon [Pratt]; she would have been a better mayor. She was a better mayor than any of the candidates, and she was a better person than Marion. Story_ID: 67114 Speaker 1: Marion Barry's a good example. The man can go--the man can do pretty much anything, you know. Adultery is not a problem, you know; drug use isn't a problem, you know. Half of his administration going to jail's not a problem, and he can still get re-elected. You know, that's because of what we as businesspeople help get presented to the public. You know, I think if the public were given a broader choice, Marion wouldn't be elected. Speaker 2: But I, just one thing, and I want to get you here to Miami. I just, when we were doing interviews last year, I'd get in cabs, and they still loved him. And I tell you, I think it's more like he was touchable. He was like a peoples' person. And it's amazing to me that cabdrivers were saying... Well, mainly, you know, Ethiopian... I mean other, you know. But they all said how they still loved him. And you know, how he was so--you know, normal and average and cared about the normal, the average person. I'm just-- Speaker 1: He should have done--Marion missed his calling. He should have been one of those multi-level marketing guys. You know, been on television, you know, selling some land down here in the Everglades. You know, I'm telling you, he's very good at that. He's very, he--you know, it's interesting because he doesn't have an exceptionally engaging personality. He's not a great speaker. He is a man of the people, and I think what people see is their own shortcomings. And he's a very, obviously, a very humanistic person, and with a lot of flaws. And I think people see that. And I think more than that, I think Marion was able to use race to divide and conquer. He basically said that I'm not doing anything that other white politicians aren't doing, and look, they're targeting me. They set me up. And I think the black community just said, you know, he's right. You know, they set him up, they went after him like they've been doing to us for years and years and years. And we're going to send a message that we're not going to accept it. He couldn't get re-elected as mayor today. I think that--and they saw John Ray as the white businessperson's candidate. And that vote would have gone to [Sharon Pratt]Kelly otherwise. And I think they saw Kelly as ineffective, and she had to make tough decisions. She just... timing's almost everything. Sharon's a very smart person--articulate, hardworking, cared about the city--un-co-opable by the way--which is one of her, I think her failings, that she was co-opable; you know, businesspeople couldn't co-op her. And I think that was part of, you know, why she, you know, didn't get the support from the business community. And she wasn't afraid. Sharon [Pratt Kelly] was also, she was different from Marion [Barry]. She would tell Jack King Cook, you know, you're full of you know what. Or, she would tell the white business leaders, "You can't have that. No, I'm not doing it, sorry," and mean it. Marion would try to work it out. "Oh, wait a minute. You want to build a 20-story building. Can't you do a 15-story building?" You know, come on. That was his way, the Daley way. Story_ID: 67115 Speaker 1: Now, what, so you are sort of--you know, you are very disappointed. You are sort of re-thinking things, and you take a vacation here. Speaker 2: Yeah. What happened is we did this... this lease deal stretched out from the summer all the way to the fall, because the City Council went in recess and Marion went on vacation, and he kind of let things just fester, you know. And so, it went on. And so, my wedding anniversary is September 12, and my wife's birthday is September 11, of all days. And we worked through all of that. And after this... and he did that to me, I said you know what, I'm never making these kind of sacrifices like this again. I didn't go away--you know, we didn't go anywhere; we didn't go out to dinner for our anniversary or her birthday. And I said, "Let's go away. Let's go to Miami, and let's go to Miami Beach, and let's look for a vacation home and get an apartment." And our son was about a year and a half old, maybe two. And so we came down here for that, and got a vacation home down here in October of '95 [1995], and then started just coming down here on vacation and quickly got into business. Speaker 1: And tell the story. I mean, so you came down and you saw this hotel. Speaker 2: Well, what happened is I came down, and I'm seeing all these cranes that were going up. And Washington was in a recession. And Miami Beach was growing, and lots of development. And so, I started looking for opportunities. And we were here New Year's Eve, December 31, 1995. And I'm reading the Miami Herald Newspaper, and there's a story about--it's like, they have like a magazine kind of section called "Neighbors." And it was a story about South Beach on the cover. And inside, there was a companion article that was a case study of a real estate property, of how real estate had appreciated in Miami Beach. And it was about the Shorecrest Hotel, which was bought for $900,000 for the leasehold interest--for $900,000, and was on the market for $4 million. And it was next door to the Royal Palm Hotel that was owned by the city of Miami Beach. And it was set aside for an African-American developer that had terminated the negotiations with the group they selected. And they were doing a new RFP that was going to be issued next week. So, I said "Well, gee, they're looking for an African-American developer. I fit that criteria. I wonder how many of them are looking at this newspaper today?" And I said, "Oh, and it's next door to the Shorecrest." So I said, "I may want to buy that too." So, I called the real estate agent who found the apartment I was in. And I said, "Look, I want to go and see the Shorecrest Hotel. It's in the paper today. The real estate agent that's got it listed is Joanne Rosen. Call her up. New Year's Day is Monday, I want to see it Tuesday." And so, and I said, "Also, go down to the city, or send a messenger down to the city, and get a copy of the Royal Palm RFP for me to look at, too." So, by Tuesday, I was in the Shorecrest Hotel looking at it. I called my lawyers in Washington, and I got the name of a firm down here to represent me. And I proceeded on buying the Shorecrest Hotel property, and putting together the RFP to bid on the Royal Palm Hotel. Speaker 1: And the Shorecrest, you did that through really a long term leaseholder? Speaker 2: I bought, we bought both the long-term lease and the fee interest. We signed contracts to buy them both. I felt site control of that property would enhance my ability to do the Royal Palm. But if nothing else, the neighborhood was going to get better, and I'd have one property I'd build on. Story_ID: 67116 Speaker 1: And it would give me an opportunity to get out of Washington [D.C.], which was limiting. And I realized Washington, D.C. is not--you know for all the theory of progressiveness, I'd seen it too many times to where any black businessperson that tried to do something bigger--be it Bob Johnson, be it me--that the business establishment, the white business establishment, and the Washington Post was not going to permit it. You know, I can't tell you... Think about, I challenge you to go into the Washington Post archives and find some front page stories about African-American businesspeople on a positive note. And so, I realized that the limitations are going to be what's imposed on me by them. And I don't--and I'm going to have to fight this establishment every time I try to break a barrier. And to do anything of any significance in that city, I was going to have to break a barrier. And so, I just got tired of having to fight and break the barrier, and then having no allies politically with any courage. You know, Marion didn't have the stomach for it. He had the stomach to embarrass us all with his conduct, but he never had the stomach for a fight for a greater cause. And so, I realized, you know, that I needed to do something somewhere else. Speaker 2: Now, you saw Miami as virgin territory. But I would never say this community down here, black community, is that progressive. Speaker 1: No, it's not. But there's a--but you know what? It's easier if you can swim upstream without a ball and chain around your neck. You know, Marion [Barry] was a ball and chain. And, and, and then you have the sharks, like the Washington Post and others nibbling at your feet. So, it's hard to swim upstream and survive under those circumstances. I can swim upstream, you know, without any weights on me. And, you know, in a pond without, you know, any sharks. You know, so that's what Miami was like, swimming upstream, but without the shackles. In fact, quite the contrary. The community wanted some successful African Americans, because they needed it politically. And so, the media wanted successful, a successful black business community. The public, the politicians wanted it. And so, and then you didn't have to rely on an African American political leadership, you know, who was trying to convince the white community that they weren't playing favorites. There wasn't any black political leadership. So it was a better environment, because you didn't have any of the other circumstances. Just swim upstream, and if you get there, you're going to win. And that's a whole different, a much better environment. Actually, it's like walking around with ankle bracelets, you know, ankle weights. You know, walk around for a year, you know, and then take them off. You can, you know, you're like walking on air. And that's what it was like here. I had challenges, you know, but not insurmountable. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: And also, I saw it coming. I never expected to be betrayed by, you know, my own community. I didn't expect that somebody who I had had a, you know, 16-year relationship to backstab or to just not even tell me that they were not going to support what I was doing. You know, I thought I'd get a little more than that. And so, actually, coming down here was like starting all over again, and taking the knowledge that I had in Washington, and working in an environment of Washington, D.C. and coming down here. It's not easy, with several million dollars. So, you know, I did have the opportunity to come here well-prepared. Story_ID: 67117 Speaker 1: After that debacle, were your investors, were they pretty much intact? You know, or were they just... You know, they were counting on-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. I--Marion ruined what I thought would have been a great relationship I had with Starwood Capital, which is a subsidiary of Starwood Hotels and Resorts, I think the largest or the second largest hotel company in the world. It would have given me unlimited access to capital. And I assured them that we were, you know, that the mayor would keep his word, because he told me he was going to support it. And so, it ruined that relationship. And so, I had to start all over again in terms of finding capital. Story_ID: 67118 Speaker 1: And it's a city that at the time Marion was running it, it was 70-something odd percent black. You know, there's a whole different ballgame there. He had the political power and the will of the voters to stand up and make real profound changes, and not just be. It was great to create access to jobs, but then what? Something else: You know, the city deserved better, in such economic times where there was such wealth created in that city. It deserved something better. You know, the public school system, you know, the young people in that city deserved something better. And I think, you know, the media disliked him so much that they just disrupted the entire system to get him. And then they got him, and he had no shame. So, he continued. Speaker 2: That's true, he doesn't have much shame. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But you know, I do think he's a bright man. I have to admit-- Speaker 1: Oh, sure he is. Speaker 2: And he was--because I was... I had read a lot of stuff. Okay, I read the file and I was like, oh, my God. And I don't want to be judgmental on these interviews... and you know, he's a bright man. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: He is at fault, you know, in all of that. Speaker 1: He is a bright--you know, he is a bright man. Story_ID: 67119 Speaker 1: So you came here, though, and people are sort of--and you had, you hit the ground running here, though. Because how long did it take you to get that lease holding? Speaker 2: I won the, we bid on it in April of '96 [1996], and in June we were selected. So, it was quick. Now, I wasn't expected to win. There was, it was supposed to be given to someone else. But I came in and rocked the boat, because they underestimated me, and I knew business well, but I also understood politics. And so I went out--and while the other bidder who was supposed to win this kind of left it to the powers that be--I went out and started reaching out to the community, and building a coalition of support, brick by brick. And so, when it came time for the Commission to make a decision, I had gained enough support and developed and made my case to enough people in the community, including the Miami Herald and other business publications that, you know, I had enough support to help sway the political process a bit. Speaker 1: Now, did your wife at any time... was she saying to you, "Well just slow down and let's relax for a little bit? Speaker 2: Yeah. But she, you know, I, I, I think she recognized the importance of making--you know, after coming off of a disappointment of what happened in Washington, that we needed to get things back on the winning track, and we needed another project to do. Story_ID: 67120 Speaker 1: So, you came in. Who was the--tell the story, though. Who was the other person who was the, you know, the competition? Speaker 2: It was Hyatt Hotels. They teamed up with an African-American businessperson, Eugene Jackson, out of Atlanta. And Hyatt had bid on the Loews project next door to the Royal Palm, and they lost; and this was to be their consolation prize. And so, they had a sense of arrogance, so they offered very little return to the city. They didn't go out and try to buy the Shorecrest Hotel, yet they proposed a hotel that sat on both the city's property and the Shorecrest Hotel. But they didn't own it, or have any contract to buy it. So, they went through the process and kind of, you know, I think they underestimated me. In fact, the night before the City Commission vote, Gene Jackson called me and congratulated me on being a worthy opponent, and was hopeful that after he won the following day that he would--that we'd be able to work together and work out a deal on the Shorecrest property so that they could include it in their development, and that I was welcome to be an investor on his team. And I remember telling him, "Well, if I should be so lucky to win, then you're welcome to be an investor, you know, on my team." And he said, "Oh, yeah, yeah," and blew me off. And I'd already known I'd beaten him. I knew--you know, the whole thing about politics is that it normally isn't a surprise. And so, I knew that I had him beaten. I knew he couldn't--mathematically, he didn't have the support to beat me. And so, I kind of laughed and told my wife I got a call, you know, from the losing bidder who's offering me an opportunity to be on his team and be an investor in his project after he wins tomorrow--which he's going to lose. And the next day we're walking in and he comes in, and you know, I say, "Good luck." He says, "Good luck, and don't forget what I told you." I said, "Don't worry, I won't." And I said, "Remember, my offer's still good, too." And after the vote came up and he lost, he wouldn't shake my hand. He told me he was going to tell all of our mutual friends what I did to him down here, and left. And he's been bad-mouthing me ever since, you know. But I think that just like in our business, and the development business, it's a business of problems. And so, it's easy, you know, for a developer to do the right thing and stick to a project when everything goes well. But if things go wrong, you know, you learn the character of the businessperson. Because they're going to stick it out and finish it, or they're going to walk away from it, or they're going to come up with an excuse. And the same thing about winning and losing. It's easy to be a good sport, you know, be honorable when you win. But the test is, you know, what happens, you know, when you lose? The guys who beat me in Washington, D.C. unfairly on my leases, I'm not out bad-mouthing them. And you know, they didn't do it to me, Marion did. And so, I don't have any problem with them either. And business is business. Story_ID: 67121 Speaker 1: That was my--that was the beginning of the process here. And then afterwards what was interesting about that process is that the City Commission at the time--it was seven Anglo commissioners, all Jewish, who were selecting an African-American developer to build this hotel. And the mayor was a presiding member of the Commission. He voted against me, as did two other commissioners. And the mayor got the chance to appoint the chief negotiator. What the city did is they had a citizen selection committee to go through the RFP [Request For Proposal] process and make a recommendation--to hear the presentations, narrow them down to three. And then those three make a presentation to the City Commission, and then the City Commission makes a decision. Well, the chairman of the citizen selection committee was a retired banker, Arthur Courshon. He voted against me at the selection committee, because he was very close with the Hyatt family, the Pritzkers. And so, he went and lobbied the commissioners to vote against me. And after we won, the mayor was in such shock when the clerk passed him the vote so he could read it--because they wrote it in writing. And after he chuckled a bit, he nominated this guy, Arthur Courshon, to be the city's chief negotiator. So, that made my life quite difficult. And it was interesting. My first meeting with Arthur Courshon, I had to go to his bank office. And we sat down in his office and, you know, it was just him and I. And I said, "You know, I have to ask you something." He said, "Sure." I said, "You know, can you explain to me how you could have supported Gene Jackson over me? I'm a developer, he's not. I've built buildings, he hadn't. The papers turned out that he had $4 million of tax liens and other problems. I had three financing commitments when I submitted the RFP, and I owned the Shorecrest. How could you pick him over me?" He said, "That wasn't about you or Jackson. It was about the Hyatt family. We were buying the Loews Hotel with the Tisches. And then next door we were going to have the Hyatt, you know, with the Pritzker family, a very prominent Jewish family. And we thought it would be good for the community to have them." I said, "But this is an African-American owned hotel, and you should be making the decision based on the African-American businessperson. And I thought I was keeping with the spirit of the process when I had a 100 percent African American owned team. And the person in charge, the developer, was going to be an African American--not a white developer in partnership with an African-American cable television executive." And he said, no, it didn't make a difference to him. So, that was the induction of this process. And so, but you know, I saw it coming, so I was prepared for it. And the system here doesn't want that anymore, and the media is distrustful of it because of the past history here. And the business community cannot afford to have that kind of conduct be publicized because of the tourism boycott of the past, and the economic consequences that are associated with that. And that's a major concern. Story_ID: 67122 Speaker 1: I think it would be short-cutting this part of the interview if you didn't tell what was happening, why there was a boycott. What was, were the...? You've told this story a million times... but the circumstances leading up to the fact that there was a requirement, or a need to have a black owned hotel. Speaker 2: Before I got here, there was a tourism boycott of Miami, and Miami and Dade County from African Americans. The African American community locally had organized a national boycott, discouraging conventions and groups and businesses from coming to Miami Dade to do business, or for tourism. What caused that is that this community, the number one economic engine is tourism. And African-Americans have been excluded from the economic mainstream of the tourism and hospitality industry. And so, that had been an issue for quite some time. And what had been happening is that the community had been really responding to the emerging Hispanic community, at the detriment of the African-American community. And so, when Nelson Mandela came here after being released from South African prison, he was at a ceremony that was to be attended by the mayor of Miami and Miami Beach and the county, and he was snubbed. And they did not come there for him, because he had spoken positively about [Yasser] Arafat and [Fidel] Castro, who were supportive of him during his imprisonment. And the African-American community basically felt that that was enough, and the straw that broke the camel's back. The disrespect that was given to a world black leader by this community was intolerable. And so, that began the boycott, which the estimates I've heard publicized were about $50 million in economic impact to the community. I would think that given my experience in the hospitality industry--and I'm vice chairman of the Convention and Visitors' Bureau--I would think that that's a very conservative estimate. And I would measure the economic impact in the hundreds of millions of dollars. And so when that boycott was settled by an ad-hoc group of business leaders and community leaders called the "Partners for Progress," one of the, there was a number of settlement points. One of them was that the city of Miami Beach was going to spend $60 million dollars to subsidize a convention center hotel to support its convention center and bring more tourism to Miami Beach, and that $10 million of that $60 million would be set aside for an African American owned hotel. That's how the opportunity began. Speaker 1: And the hotel that we speak of is just about to open, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it's been completed and it's in the process of being opened by the operator now. Story_ID: 67123 Speaker 1: And so this really... what... this has been a five year process. You didn't anticipate that it would... no, no, four. Speaker 2: It's been, well I guess let's say it's been five years since we were selected. And so, it's been a long process, much longer than I anticipated. You know, what's interesting to note is that the opportunity--that I wasn't the first developer selected. After the boycott was settled, the city went through an RFP [Request For Proposal] process and selected a group of African-American businesspeople from this community to build the hotel at the same time they selected the Loews Corporation to build the Loews Hotel. And what happened is that the city subsidized the Loews Hotel with $60 million of public subsidy for 800 rooms, which is $75,000 per room. And they were offering the African-American developers $23,600 per room in the subsidy. And so in an environment where financing hotels was very, very difficult. And so, you took two properties side by side, one having three times the subsidy of the other. And the one with the big subsidy had one of the top 100 corporations in America as its owner, versus a, you know, small business group trying to build a hotel with one-third of the public subsidy. In fact I think the subsidies, of course, should have been reversed. And so, I think that project and the concept from the inception was destined, I think, to fail. And so, unfortunately that group couldn't pull a rabbit out of a hat and, you know, and get it financed. So, the city went through the RFP [Request For Proposal] process again in a better financial market after, you know, having this other group work on the project for over a year. In fact, what they should have done is they should have said, "We're going to treat you equally with the... the same as we're going to treat the hotel next door. And we're going to give you $75,000 per room with a subsidy, and now go out and see if you can finance it." And I believe they would have financed it under those circumstances. But what happened is that they, the city, you know, started all over again. And it took an outsider to build it, because the community had not fostered minority businesses that would be at the level to build an $80 million hotel. And that's, we got involved. And given the hypocrisy of the process, it took us longer. In fact, we did not sign a non-binding Letter of Intent with the city until March of 1997. So, we got selected June 5th of 1996, and it took us, you know, nine months to sign a non-binding Letter of Intent. We didn't even get the first draft from the city until December. And so, and then it took us until August of 1998 to get possession of the property. So, it was a long process. And I think similarly to what the first group was exposed to--which is to make the process so lengthy that inevitably either things fall apart, or it can't be done. And ironically, the same person who was the chief negotiator and the chairman of the selection committee, was the chairman of the selection committee and the chief negotiator the first time around. And that group couldn't, he couldn't make it with that group, the previous group, and was having problems with us, too. And I think it wasn't the project, and it wasn't the African-American businesspeople that were trying to build it--two sets of us--it was the person who the city had empowered to negotiate with us that was the problem. And I think if he had been extracted from the process, the hotel would have been built a lot sooner. In fact, if he had been extracted from it, I don't believe I would have built the hotel. I think this other group would have built it. Speaker 1: Now, that person, that's... what's his name? Speaker 2: Peter Callen. Speaker 1: Okay, that's right. Now, with... let me ask you. Do you think that you would have repeated the process, if you knew it would have taken this long? Do you think... are you--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would have done it. Story_ID: 67124 Speaker 1: Okay. You know this... what is interesting to me is that this was really--while you knew the real estate industry, and you had done large projects before--this was not only a large project, but it was also a hospitality project. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And in an industry that has its own unique set of things-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to go along with it. And I'm wondering what things you have learned, sort of along the way? I'm sure that learning process will continue. But what things were different about this that, you know, you saw immediately? Or, you know, along the way that, "Oh, this is, this is, this is different?" Speaker 2: Having a large--I think one of the differences... the difference in terms of being a developer, the product that I develop is really no different. I'm building on land, I'm building ground-up construction, whether it's an office building, a condo, or a hotel. There really is no significant difference. However, with a hotel, you're also furnishing it and putting the fixtures and equipment in the hotel as well. And so, that gives you broader responsibilities and, you know, small tedious areas of responsibility, where things can go wrong. But I would think the biggest difference was the--in a hotel you have to have a major international hotel chain to operate the hotel. In an office building, there's no big corporation that your operator... that the product's success is relying upon. And also, that you have to build to their standards, and know they have a significant amount of authority and power. And so the biggest difference for me was having to work with a large, you know, multi-national corporation that had its own bureaucracy. And I was accustomed to doing business with other entrepreneurs who were decision makers. And so, I think that was... to get, working with the corporate culture, was a different, it was a unique experience, a bit different. Speaker 1: And this was the Crowne... was it the Crowne Plaza? Speaker 2: Crowne Plaza, yes. Story_ID: 67125 Speaker 1: The other thing though what is happening, is you also are--from the time you have won the bid, you became a symbol for the black community, and in many ways nationwide. Because the ownership of hotels is not something that--you know, we've not had that presence in a significant way. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so, and that's something, you know, that has been talked about. But at the same time there's the reality of the situation... And I've seen even in press that you're saying that, "We are a mainstream hotel. We're not, do not refer to us as the black hotel." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, the reason why--our hotel, what's important about the symbolism of the hotel and what we're doing, is that we're breaking a barrier; a barrier--doing something that hasn't been done. And so, we're breaking a barrier. And the optimism and the expectation of what comes with breaking of the barrier is that there is a broader opportunity for more people, not just for me, to become successful, or more successful, and make money. It's to break a barrier, and break that barrier to create more opportunities for others, and to make it not an unusual circumstance in the future. So that when I break the barrier, then it's easier for the next person to walk through it. And so, what you distinguish--our hotel should be... I have a responsibility to make it an economic success. And at the same hand, it should be a facility that provides limitless opportunity for those who work in it, and that we create opportunities for African-American men and women to gain knowledge and experience in the hospitality industry where they can advance their careers and become general managers of hotels--go and work for these major corporations, or become hotel owners and developers. And so, by breaking that barrier, that's what my responsibility is. And so, we accomplished that by bringing some of the best and brightest, most talented people within the industry to our hotel, and to create a culture of equal opportunity within our hotel. But also excelling within the industry--reaching the broad market throughout the world, and attracting and maintaining our customer base by giving them a superior product, the best location in Miami Beach, and service as second to none. And that's how we'll keep our business, and that's how our hotel will prosper. And that in itself will create more opportunities for other businesspeople like myself to come into this industry and build other hotels. And it will dispel the perception that this is not an area that we as black businesspeople can be competitive in. And so, at the same hand, I think by labeling our hotel a black hotel, it gives a false perception that that's our client base. And it's not our client base, any more than the white owned hotels are saying that they're only white owned. We're in business to be successful, and we're going to reach and we're going to meet the needs of all our guests. And what my hope is, is ten years from now that this is not going to be an unusual occurrence--that there are going to be many other African-American owned hotels just like ours; and that that won't be an unusual circumstance, and the expectation is that there's no differential between the quality of the two products and the services and amenities. And I think otherwise, you know, I think what happens too much is that the media likes to classify black businesspeople and put us in a particular slot. And you know, we're building a hotel just like any other major developer does. And we've brought an international hotel to come in and run it for us. And that hotel's going to reach everybody. And so, to call it any name other than a first-class luxury resort, is selling it short. And, but I'm proud of its heritage and the fact that we've broken a barrier. But that, the job isn't done yet, you know. It's one step in the process, and now we have to... You know, breaking the barrier and failing, you know, wouldn't be a positive outcome; it would hurt us. And so, the idea is to break the barrier, succeed overwhelmingly, and create new opportunities for others and improve the business climate for other black businesspeople to go out and finance and develop hotels. Story_ID: 67126 Speaker 1: Now, you also want to improve job opportunities. And you've had some press on that, in terms of training and getting other minorities, you know, jobs within the hospitality industry. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Which is lacking. Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, unfortunately, one of the things I've noticed is that through all the major hotel companies that I've had the opportunity to work with, there is a, you know, a void in terms of seeing any African-Americans in any upper management and executive positions. And one of the excuses is that hotel companies are not able to attract these talented people to come into this industry. And so, one of the things we're doing is trying to make sure that we do our part to bring more talented people within the industry and help equip them with the educational skills necessary to succeed--both educationally and experience wise. And so, we've also permanently endowed two scholarships at FIU's [Florida International University] Hospitality Management Program, specifically geared towards African American residents of Dade County. And we're going to expand on that scholarship program, as well. Story_ID: 67127 Speaker 1: Now, what happened right here that didn't happen in Fort Lauderdale with that project there? Speaker 2: I think in Fort Lauderdale, the--one, there was never a commitment, really, to build a minority owned hotel. There was one county commissioner, an African-American woman, who wanted to duplicate what was being done here in Miami. And the county had been working with a white developer for I think about eight years, and they couldn't finance the hotel on that site to get it done. So, the county took--in fact the developer had developed on other pieces of that property. He built the convention center with taxpayer dollars, and built a shopping center that ended up going into bankruptcy. But he gave this piece of land back to the county, because he couldn't get it financed. And the county said, "Okay, well, we'll give..." told this commissioner, Commissioner Porgie, "We'll give you this piece of property, and you can try to get a black-owned hotel owner." So, it was a property and a site that wasn't successful previously. And they were going to build--the County of Broward County had the expectation of building a convention center headquarters hotel with 500 rooms on the inter-coastal waterway at a cruise terminal and commercial tanker port, without a dollar of public money. And you compare that to what the City of Miami Beach invested for the Loews Hotel on the Atlantic Ocean, and one of the hottest destination locations in the world. They put $60 million of a subsidy in. Now, the county was a far inferior location, and a much less attractive financial market. They thought they could do something like that with those limited resources with no public money. And that was just an unrealistic expectation. Story_ID: 67128 Speaker 1: Could we talk about how the Bath Club, you know, how it even came on your radar screen? First, even how you-- Speaker 2: Well, what's interesting is that when we had--my wife and I had an apartment here. We were on the Bay. And she and my son liked going to the beach. And so, they would go to South Beach to go to the beach at the Raleigh Hotel. And we were at 56th and Collins, three blocks south of the Bath Club. So, the architect is a husband and wife team that run the architectural firm that built, that designed the Royal Palm. The daughter--the wife, suggested that we go and look at the Bath Club. Her parents were on the Board of Governors there, etc. So you know, to use a place for my family to go to the beach. So, we went there one evening, got a tour of the place. It looked good, and I said, "Sure, we'll join." And that was that. Then a few weeks later I was in Washington, D.C. and got a call I think from Michelle telling me that the Washington--that the Miami Herald--one of the columnists, Joan Fleischman, wanted to speak to me. And I spoke to, I called her, and she said, "How does it feel to be the first African-American member of the Bath Club?" I was in shock. You know, coming from Washington, D.C., I didn't think that there were clubs in existence at that time, in 1996, that were, didn't allow African Americans as members. And so, you know, I was surprised. And then after a few months or so, I think we ended moving further, we got a house, because we started spending more time... and we, you know, cancelled our membership at the Bath Club. Story_ID: 67129 Speaker 1: And a year or two later, we got a, I got a call from--by a real estate broker who does work for us, Michael Berwick [ph], and his partner Stacey Robbins. And they told me that the Bath Club was available--that they were on the market trying, they were going to put it on the market to sell it. And what had happened is they were having financial problems, and that they had asked that the--they had started selling off properties to stay afloat. And they renovated the club and put it into more debt, and still they were not able to turn things around. And in the process of trying to save money, they had asked the city to reduce the height and density of the site for zoning purposes, so it would reduce their property taxes. And so it was now zoned for 40 feet and height, and a small density in terms of square footage of a building, and, but, you know, it would be a good opportunity if I could get it re-zoned, etc. And I thought about it, and I realized instantly that it was a great opportunity for me, twofold. One, that I felt you know, to go through the re-zoning process is a very political process. And by that time, I had become pretty entrenched here politically in Miami Beach. And secondly, the symbolism of buying the oldest social club in the southeast United States--and the club's first African American member buying it--I knew would send a real strong message and be, you know, widely viewed, and would be newsworthy, and another barrier to break. And so, I worked on putting the deal together, and then ultimately reaching an agreement to acquire the property, and went through the re-zoning process. And also, I had a, I visualized--I thought it was a great piece of property--six acres on the ocean, 540 feet of beach frontage in Miami beach which was becoming even more and more popular. And it would allow me to diversify our company's development activities as well. So, I, we conceived a luxury project there, and then went forward with the development plan. Story_ID: 67130 Speaker 1: And you had opposition there also, right, the Mayor? Speaker 2: You know, every now and then politicians--well, not every now and then--most often politicians look at the politics, as opposed to the merits sometimes. And in this particular--on the Bath Club situation, we were going through the re-zoning process during election time. And the sitting mayor, who had only been in office two years---they run every two years here--the sitting mayor was a friend of mine, who I supported. But his opponent was the person who broke the 3-3 tie on the Royal Palm, in my favor, and was a nice person and was a friend of mine, too. So, I wanted to stay out of the mayor's race. I had been a big fundraiser for the mayor previously; had been a major contributor to his campaign, and raised him tens and tens of thousands of dollars, and helped him assemble his pollster and to put together a very scientific campaign in a small town that only takes five thousand, six thousand votes to become mayor. And so, he wanted me not to be neutral. And I was unwilling to do that. And so, as a result, he wanted to create some leverage by deferring my re-zoning until after the election. And, but he didn't tell me. He, you know, told me he would support it, and then at the last minute, betrayed me. He and Marion [Barry] must know each other. But, he did it by saying that he just didn't think it should be approved at that time, but there was no better developer than me to develop it. His colleagues disagreed with him, and he was the lone "No" vote. But after that, he couldn't leave well enough alone. I was going to, I had made the decision that if he was going to behave like that, I was going to support Marty Shapiro, and not be neutral. And so, I supported Marty Shapiro, and the mayor tried to make my re-zoning a political campaign issue, and sent out a mailer saying that I, you know, basically bought the vote of Marty Shapiro on the Bath Club rezoning by agreeing to support his campaign. And so, I had to set the record straight. So, I ran some ads and wrote a letter to the registered voters of the city of Miami Beach to set the record straight. Interestingly enough, we found out on a Friday afternoon that he had sent this mailer out about me, and that was the Friday afternoon before the election on Tuesday. So, I had Michelle work all evening and all night, and we put together a letter to the registered voters of Miami Beach and got the mailing list for the super voters that vote in most elections. So, we sent out 12,000 or so letters the following morning. So, Monday morning--we sent them by first class mail. So, Monday morning people opened up their mail, and they got my letter, explaining, you know, about my project and the fact that the mayor was trying to politicize it. And then we ran some, we also worked that weekend and then had our PR team and an advertising firm put together a video about the mayor and his conduct with regards to our project, and ran that on the television. We bought, you know, I think 400 spots a day on them. And he went from having--I believe he had a, let's see an 18 point... 17 or 18 point lead before. But by, within three days, he was thrown into a run-off. And then he ended up in the run-off winning, but then a few weeks later he voted for my re-zoning. Story_ID: 67131 Speaker 1: You take no... whatever. Is it called "take no prisoners?" Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You hold them hostage. You won't back down. Speaker 2: No, I have a sense of fair play. And you know, everybody's entitled to have their own opinion. And everybody's entitled to vote their conscience. And in politics, you know, I think public officials should have their own opinion and they should vote their conscience. But when the merits are clear, You know, in that particular instance, I had the recommendation from the Planning Board; I had the recommendation from the City Manager; I had the recommendation from the Planning Director. It was non-controversial. And he wanted to use me for a political opportunity. And that lacks character, and that makes, I think, a person un-fit for office. But certainly, I can't allow someone to do that to me. You know, what's the point in having a few dollars, if I can't fight for what I believe in? I won. It wasn't the point of winning, I'd already won. It was the point that I can't let--I worked very hard for my reputation, and I don't think I, I don't believe in allowing somebody to make un-true statements to damage it. And he wasn't worth spending the time to sue for defamation. So, I figured I would--after talking to our attorneys--that we would let the, you know, the public know the truth. And so, I just believe that if someone is going to have a difference of opinion, that's acceptable and we can move on, and may the best side win or may the most meritorious argument win. But if someone wants to play politics and strong arm me, then they need to be prepared for a fight, because I am going to fight back. Story_ID: 67132 Speaker 1: Now, politically, where do you stand now? Speaker 2: You know, I think in many, most, many regards... In terms of political party, you mean, or...? I'm a Democrat in some regards. I, you know, I vote the person more than, you know, the party. I'm not--I think that the one downside of being a Democrat, is I think the Democratic Party has taken African Americans for granted. I think that the Democratic Party counts on our support, and doesn't feel that they have to earn it. And I think that's wrong. You know, I think that the Democratic Party lacks a commitment as a whole to equal economic opportunities. And I think that that's one of the ways to effectuate social change. And so, I think in many regards, it lost touch. I supported Bill Clinton, had him at my home. And you know, supported him in his first race for the presidency. And then was a big supporter of his while he was in office. But you know, this last time around I didn't think that the Democratic Party deserved the support of the black community; I think that it came up short. And you know, and so I think the Democratic Party is caught in a time warp. They believe that African Americans are concerned with--we're concerned with affirmative action, criminal justice issues, and you know, various social programs. That's what they gear their agenda towards us on, for the most part. I don't think--I think that they underestimate our desire, and our young people's desire, to go out and succeed in a capitalistic world, and succeed economically. And I think that, you know, that in some regards you take a person like President Bush. And I think that he recognizes--doesn't impose limitations. I think that the Democratic Party--say someone like Bill Clinton or someone like Al Gore--see African Americans with some limitations imposed on them. It's almost an innate learned response that Bill Clinton can't necessarily comprehend a strong, wealthy and powerful African-American. And I think he grew into it as President. I know when he came to my house in Washington, D.C. he was so amazed, because he knew he was coming to a fundraiser held by an African-American businessperson, and the guests were going to be primarily African-American. But when he went there, he was in shock that, you know, it was so large and, you know, and impressive I guess. So, he wouldn't have been if he were going to a thousand dollar a person fundraiser for a white business, held by a white businessperson. So, what the surprise was, the house was large and it was owned by an African-American; that was the difference. And I think... you know, look at it. Story_ID: 67133 Speaker 1: George W. Bush appointed Colin Powell as Secretary of State. Ron Brown got to be appointed Secretary of Commerce. Mike Espy [Alphonso Michael Espy], you know, got to be Secretary of Agriculture. And so, Condoleezza Rice is National Security Advisor. I think actions speak louder than words and rhetoric. And I think that, you know, clearly, any, I think it's irresponsible for a black leader or any African American activist to call George W. Bush a racist. It's an oxymoron, it makes no sense. You know, he's done--it was not a Democrat that nominated the First Secretary of State who's African-American, who's representing our country throughout the world. The impact of something like that is so overwhelming. My son could watch on television a press conference where the President-Elect of the United States was introducing an African-American as Secretary of State. And that my son--when I say, "Which one is Colin Powell?" He said, "The one with the glasses." He didn't say the African American, because he's growing up in a world where there are not any limitations, where we're not categorizing people. He's proud of his heritage, but he doesn't see, he doesn't see that as a defining characteristic. And I think that, I don't think the president that we have today sees it as one. He doesn't feel the obligation to placate for political purposes. I think he does what he thinks is right. And naturally, he's going to appoint people that fill his philosophical views. I think Bill Clinton had specific slots and specific quotas that he wanted to have. You know, he recognized that African Americans brought him into office, and that he had to have a certain number of visible positions to be held by African-Americans. And so, he did quantity, not quality, you know. I would have, I would rather have not one single cabinet member, African-American, except one, and have Secretary of State than Commerce, HUD [Housing and Urban Development], HEW, because of the impact that it has throughout the world. And look who's in the Middle East right now representing our country--Colin Powell. And I think that--and who's sitting at the table making policy recommendations and decisions about our country's national security? An African-American woman. I think that that visibility for our young people tells them that there's no limitation, you know, to what can be accomplished. Warren Christopher was the person who was representing us with the Democrats. Story_ID: 67134 Speaker 1: And then, you know, I think also that the African American community ought to, you know, ought to hold the Democratic Party a bit more accountable. Let's look at the--you know, if anybody, if any party should be talking about--should have had a Democrat--an African-American nominee as vice-presidential candidate, at least it should be the Democratic party. Yet, they've broken the barrier for Jewish Americans; they've broken it for women, but they don't see fit to allow us to break it. Are they telling me, or telling us, that there are not any qualified African Americans in Congress or out here in the world that, or in this country rather, that could fill that position? Of course, that's not the case. And you look at a party that's been in power for so long, and yet we don't have one African-American in the United States Senate, not one. We don't have one African-American governor. We've only had one African-American governor in fifty states since Reconstruction, Doug Wilder. We've only had three--no, I'm sorry, two African-American U.S. Senators. And then you have--you look at the House of Representatives--435 members of the Congress. And what, we have less than 40 African-American members of Congress, less than half of the black population in the country. The House of Representatives is not a representative body. Democrats ought to be, you know, breaking their back to help empower African Americans and support African American candidates for other offices. But the problem is white Democrats don't vote for black Democrats. And so, why should black Democrats exclusively vote for, you know, white Democrats? And so, my view here is that George W. Bush earned my support by just, you know, because I looked at the, you looked at ability, not--you take philosophical issues aside, and look at ability, and look at, you know, what's in the person's heart. And you know, and I'd come out better with Bush, because I think there's more in his heart, in terms of what's right. And Al Gore does what's right because I think it's political. And the public didn't buy it. Speaker 2: Well, now, now, now, now, the public felt that the vote--a large part of the public thought that the vote was stolen. Speaker 1: But why should it have boiled down--but why should it have been boiled down to one state? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: He didn't even win his own state. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and, you know, he came--he was riding the crest of the biggest economic expansion in the history of the country. And you know, and I think Al Gore does what's politically correct. And you know, not to say that [George W.] Bush is perfect, and not to say that Bush was the best person for the job; he wasn't. But you had two choices. Story_ID: 67135 Speaker 1: But it seems like you've crossed over to really being a Republican. Speaker 2: No, I haven't. Because, you know, in many regards--for example, you know, if I had a better alternative to his brother here, I'd give it consideration. But, you know, let's be clear. I don't think that Janet Reno's qualified to be governor of the state of Florida. You know and you know, and again, you know, as an alternative, here's a real example here. You have Janet Reno, which half the Democrats in the state, or more, don't want. And then you've got--now to fill that void, you have two alternative candidates right now. You have a former managing partner of a law firm who has almost zero name recognition and is now beginning to grow a little bit, who's white. And then you have a State Senator who's got a military record, has been in the State Senate for two terms--great experience, articulate, well-educated candidate, he's an African-American. And do you know that the person with the zero name recognition is ahead of this candidate who's better qualified? The reason why? Because Democrats, white Democrats, don't vote for black candidates. If you had that, you'd have a black mayor of Chicago. David Dinkins would have been mayor again in New York City. So, why should I blindly trust and vote for Democrats? Then on top of it, I am an affluent person. Taxes are important to me, how they're spent. You know, frankly speaking, I don't, I'm willing to spend my money to educate our young people. I'm willing to spend our money to improve public safety. I'm willing to spend my money to defend my country. But am I willing to go out and spend billions of dollars buying our political favor and, you know, in various countries throughout the world? No, I'm not. Am I willing to, you know, I want my money to be spent, you know, with some accountability. But I think more than that--I'll tell you, what got me is Condoleezza Rice and Colin Powell. There's nothing that--you know, what other action could there be? Bill Clinton had the chance to do it, but he felt he didn't have to. He was able to go to Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition event and insult him in front of all of the attendees, because Bill Clinton wanted to tell the white voters, "Hey, I need the black support, and I'm going to work for it, but I'll stand up to them. I'll stand up to Jesse Jackson as well." And he did it to send a message, because he felt he didn't have to. There was no place to go. And I think there is a place to go. Story_ID: 67136 Speaker 1: Now, what do you think--what kind of new leadership do you think, as a political leader, a black political leader, should be emerging, or would you like to see emerge? Speaker 2: I think one that's a uniter and a conqueror, by uniting, not a divider and conqueror. I think the [Marion] Barrys of the world are dividers, and that's how they conquer. They polarize and perpetuate racial challenges and racial discord, and add it into their own personal political benefit. And that does our entire community a disservice. And so, I think that we need uniters. And I think that's what is going to be the wave of the future. I think Doug Wilder was a uniter. He had a conviction and a belief, but he was a uniter. David Dinkins was a uniter, that's how he got to be mayor of New York City. And I think that we need elected officials who are uniters. And also, I think we have to be multi-partied. There's not as big of an extreme difference, you know, between the parties. You know, you have these fundamental issues of a woman's right to choose. Okay, that's an important issue; it isn't going anywhere. The Constitution--that issue's been settled, it's not going anywhere. Story_ID: 67137 Speaker 1: Affirmative action is meaningless today. It has been so ineffective and so watered down. You know, the reality is as an African-American... I don't... I think affirmative action is ineffective, and it's resented, because of the political process--the compromise, the "get along" theory. Because frankly speaking, I do not believe that white women should be able to receive benefits of affirmative action. I don't believe that Hispanic Americans and Asian Americans and others should be beneficiaries of affirmative action. See, I have a little more of a fundamental belief here. African Americans were brought here by force. African Americans were enslaved by this country. African Americans were denied the right to good education. African Americans were denied the right to housing. African Americans were denied the right to basic public access to services, yet we were sent to fight wars and defend this country, only to come back here and be oppressed and discriminated against. And so, African-Americans, we deserve affirmative action. However, Miami, for example, the Cuban community--wonderful impact to our community. But the gift that America gave the Cuban Americans is the right to come here, and the right to be within our system, and be treated equally as any other American. And I don't know how a politician can go to somewhere like Georgia, Chicago, Alabama, you know, and say to white Anglos, "You know what? You and your children have to take a back seat in terms of educational access opportunities, or job opportunities, to a Cuban American who just got here about eight years ago--or an El Salvadorian who just got here. You know, or, you know, an Asian American who came here. The country hasn't done anything bad to these people. The country's only opened the doors of opportunity, just like it did to Irish Americans, English Americans, French Americans, and all of the other immigrants who came here and made this country the great place that it is. And so, what does America owe them? An opportunity, open the doors of opportunity. That's what it owes, and it's still delivering on that promise. And so, is it fair to say that you can come here and you get these doors of opportunities opened to you--to be on par with every other American here who's been born here and their ancestors have been born here--and then say that... You know what, not only does that happen, but you're going to get a better chance. I don't think that that's right, that's not... And that's why the country--that's a reason, one of the major reasons--that the country in many regards--that the white Americans resent affirmative action, because it's applied too broadly. It's to right a wrong. And the wrong hasn't been done to anybody other than African Americans and Native Americans. Story_ID: 67138 Speaker 1: And what about reparations? Speaker 2: Well, I think that that would have been the preferable approach, but constitutionally, that's not going to happen. And the government's never going to spend that kind of money, I don't believe. While there's an important movement towards it, the realistic goal was affirmative action; it was the right way to do it. It was just the wrong process of watering it down. You go to Miami International Airport, all the affirmative action programs--the vast majority of them--are given to Hispanic Americans who came here. Yeah, it's a great system. You get to come to a new country and they give you... Yeah, you come here, you get all the opportunities. And you know what? They're going to treat you better than their own citizens. It's a, it's ridiculous. And African Americans aren't benefitting from it. And so, I'm not--why are we out here busting our butt politically, and wasting all this political capital fighting for affirmative action, when you look at the effectiveness of it, less than 50 percent of the economic benefits or the educational benefits that come from affirmative action go to African-Americans? Why are we fighting for it? It doesn't make sense. And so, you know, I think that we ought to be looking for some new ideas that work for us. And the old way isn't necessarily the right way. And I think many African-Americans, just like me, became Democrats because our parents told us that's what we were. You know, but those same people who were blocking the doors to vote, George Wallace was a Democrat, for God's sake. And he was blocking the door to letting people come in to go to college or to go and vote. So, what's this great party we're talking about? It's a political party with a history, just like the Republicans. You know, at least the Republicans, in some regards, have Lincoln. Story_ID: 67139 Speaker 1: Your mother was the one really responsible for planting the seed. And I just want you to talk about the industry and the potential you see. You know, because it's an industry that has a very long history in this country--40 acres and a mule it goes back. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Even before that, the founding fathers took the Indians' land. But anyway, we won't go there. But I was just saying, what are your views about the industry and its potential? Speaker 2: I think the real estate industry is one of... it's the most enduring industry in our country, because it's just a, it's a core of business and it's a core need. It's the very foundation of American life and American capitalism. And so, I think that it's as close to a recession-proof industry as there is. It has its fluctuations, but the real estate industry--because after all, it's the old saying that, "I'm not making any more of it," so it's going to continue to endure. I think that there's going to be more opportunities for African-Americans within the industry. I think that we've lost opportunity in the 1980s where we had significant political power in our urban cities, which is where the real estate development boom has been primarily concentrated. And now, although the real estate boom is moving much more into the suburban environment and rural environments, we're out, and African-Americans have made significant in-roads politically into the suburban environment. Look at Prince George's County, Maryland and other counties throughout the country. Even Broward County here in Florida has a significant African-American population. And that's going to continue to be a trend, and so there will be another opportunity for African-Americans to get into this business. Plus, we consume, as African-Americans, a considerable amount of real estate for our housing needs and our growing business needs. Story_ID: 67140 Speaker 1: So, what are your hopes and your concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: I hope that we as a community can work more closely together and embrace each other's dreams, and support our individual desires as well as our collective desires, and hold up success and be proud of success, and recognize success within our community, and encourage thinking out of the box. And also, demanding more from our leaders. I think we need to demand more accountability. We now know what it's like to have political power. We now understand the impact and the power of the ballot and the right to vote, and how precious and important of a right it is. And now we have to, now that we understand that, we have to use it more effectively. And we need to elect leaders that help make our society a better place for our children, and create new opportunities so that we can re-gain the momentum that we had in the late sixties and seventies of upward mobility--an upwardly mobile culture. And you know, African Americans, throughout history, we've been entrepreneurs in this country. You know, even during the epitome of segregation, we were entrepreneurs; we had own small businesses. And so, we need to re-embrace and reconnect with that history, and expand upon it in a society that's now ready for us. Where before, we had those skills and that culture, and the country wasn't ready for us, but now it is ready for us. And so, I'd like to see us embrace more of that. And I'd like to see us in a-- I'd like to see us, you know, in the future when my son's an adult, to where, you know, hotels and other major industries have a high level of diversity, and that also young people can grow up with a realistic dream--young African-American kids can grow up with a realistic dream of being a United States Senator or being a governor, or being President of the United States. And so, that's my hope for our society: that we actually do reach that point of a color-blind society with regards to opportunity, but not a color-blind society when it comes to recognizing our history, and embracing each other, and working together to meet the challenges that we face. And to, you know, work together to improve our lives for our children. Story_ID: 67141 Speaker 1: You said earlier in the beginning of the interview that you want to contemplate a, more of a mood. And I'm wondering what you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: You know, I don't want it to be someone who's made a lot of money. And because... while that's personally... you know, it was personally gratifying to me. I think that, you know, getting beyond the security mode and the self-actualization of being successful in business, you know, there really--I'm not going to change the world by building more condos or--you know, I'll change some small part of it by building more hotels, because it's just been such an oppressive industry. But, you know, I'd like to make a bigger impact on our society. And you know, I don't know how to best do that. Certainly, we're going to continue to step up to our responsibility in terms of being supportive of educational opportunities, and in putting our money back into the community to work. But I think that I'd like to make a bigger impact than that. And probably the way I'll do that is in some form of politics or another. Who knows? Maybe I would have been bringing up the next President of the United States one day. Maybe my son will be President of the United States. One of the things I am working for is to give him the freedom of choice. And my wife is expecting our second child and to give that child freedom of choice and the opportunity to do whatever they want to do, and to go as far their dreams will take them. But I'd like to make a greater impact. And over time as I have matured, and I think evolved as a businessperson, I look back in the past and look at today and see that there's a significant void in leadership in many areas, and probably in--I think one of the biggest impacts I could make is in politics. But not, I wouldn't--I'd be going into politics for such a different reason. I've gotten success. I'm financially secure and set. I don't have anything to prove. I'm prominent. I have good name recognition. I'm very visible. I've gotten as much attention in the media as anybody could ever hope for. So, I'd be only doing it to try to make a change. And I don't need the money, and so I'd have to find something that will make a change and what would, really, to me, where I think--what I find the most disturbing in our society is that we're one of the richest countries in the world. We can afford to send billions of dollars to places like Israel and other countries throughout the world, but yet we can't provide decent housing for, you know, our people, especially, you know, African-Americans who live in urban environments or rural environments. And we can't provide our poor Americans who've suffered so much in this country a decent education for the children. I think that is unacceptable failing of our society. And so those of us who think we can change that, ought to get more involved, and that's the area where I'm more interested. And I'm not interested in re-building downtown Miami; I don't think that does much for the big picture. I'm not interested in preserving some historic buildings on Miami Beach, or, for that matter, Washington, D.C., that basically are testaments to segregation anyway. I'm not interested in bringing a General Motors plant to, you know, Florida. What I think we need to--what I would like to do is to change some lives, and give young people who don't really have a chance, to turn, help turn their lives around, and give them a chance to go out and achieve the type of success and satisfaction that I've achieved. And so, whatever I would do would be in that direction. And then actually I think I would have accomplished something. I think making a lot of money is over-rated in many regards. You know, it's not that hard; you set your mind to it, you focus, you get some good breaks; you start off with a decent foundation, some educational experience, and some exposure. And you know, and then if you apply yourself and you're willing to sacrifice and work hard, you can do that. And so, it's not, it's not as hard as it looks. I think finding your way and making a difference to improve the quality of life for other people, that's hard. And that's really what we're here for. You know, I should be here to make other lives differently. And so when I die, I don't want my son to sit over my grave, and at my eulogy say, "My father made $300 million." You know, even if I made $300 million and gave it away, it's not the type of impact that I would like to have; I think I could have a greater impact. And now that I'm not distracted with my own personal ambitions, that's probably the area I'd want to go into. Story_ID: 67142 Speaker 1: That's me at my Aunt Caroline's wedding to her husband, Tony Kramer. I would have been I believe six years old in that picture. And that was his, that was my uncle's niece. Speaker 2: Okay, the bottom photo? Speaker 1: This is me at my high school graduation on Capitol Hill. So, that's me to the left. To the right was my grandfather, Thomas Willoughby, who worked at the Sheraton Washington Hotel as a doorman. Under him, with the glasses is my grandmother, Neva Claighborne. Speaker 2: Can you spell her name? Speaker 1: C-L-A-I-G-H-B-O-R-N-E. Speaker 2: And "Neva?" Speaker 1: Yes, N-E-V-A. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then to the left is my great-grandmother, my maternal great-grandmother, Newsome. And then-- Speaker 2: Her first name? Speaker 1: Oh, Gee-- Speaker 2: Oh, that's alright. Speaker 1: I called her Grandmother Newsome all my life. Speaker 2: Newsome. Speaker 1: I'll get it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And to the left is my cousin, Anthony Kramer. He lives in Florida now, he's an accountant. And cropped out of the picture--to the right is a picture of my mother. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. The woman with the short hair, leaning over me with the lollipop, that's my mother, and that's me with the lollipop. And that's my birthday party. Speaker 2: Okay. Do you know the date? Speaker 1: Yeah, it would have been March 2, 1961, I think. It says on the-- Speaker 2: It says '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Yeah, '61 [1961]. And it was my one year old birthday, and it was in the basement of our house. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. That is me in junior high school in ninth grade, at Alice Deal at the graduation ceremony. To the right of me... I guess the one person over to my left in the picture, if you're facing it to the right, is my Aunt Caroline. To my right--which is the picture's left--with the yellow dress, that's my mother. And further over next to her is her eldest sister, Edith. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My cousin, Carl McIntosh, who was my uncle's son. He's now a physician. And then this is, and I'm next to him. It's at my apartment in Washington. It would have been when he graduated from college. And that would have been, Gee, I don't know... 1980... let's see when he graduated... '85 [1985], I believe. And then the person sitting down is another cousin of ours, James Carroll. Speaker 2: C-A-R-R-O-L-L? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That is my father and mother at their wedding. Speaker 2: Can we get both of their names? Speaker 1: Yvonne... Ruth Yvonne Willoughby, before she was married. And Roy Donahue Peebles, Jr. Speaker 2: Senior. Speaker 1: Senior, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: That's me standing in front of the finished product of the Royal Palm Hotel... in front of the historic Royal Palm. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Oh, the year? Speaker 1: That would have been this year, 2002. Speaker 2: Last month? Speaker 1: Yes. There is me, my wife, David Dinkins... Speaker 2: Your wife's name? Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, Katrina Peebles... Katrina Lee Peebles. Speaker 2: Can you spell it for the camera? Speaker 1: K-A-T-R-I-N-A, L-E-E, Peebles, P-E-E-B-L-E-S; David Dinkins, the former mayor of New York. Then Sharon Pratt Kelly, Mayor of Washington, and her husband, James Kelly. And that would have been in 19... when did... let's see, the mayor's race in New York was just now. So, the race was in, the mayor's race of New York really was in 2001. Then four years back would have been '87 [1987]? Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997]. Speaker 1: Ninety-Seven [1997]. And then four years back from there would have been '93 [1993]. So, that's when that was. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: At my house in Washington, by the way. In the red jacket, City Council chairperson, Linda Cropp, of Washington, D.C., me, governor, then Governor Bill Clinton, Jack Evans, City Council member from Washington, D.C. That was at my home in Washington on Broad Branch Road. That would have been in 1992, yeah, '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: The spelling for Cropp? Speaker 1: C-R-O-P-P. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Democratic nominee, Bill Clinton, my wife and myself at a fundraiser we co-sponsored in September, 1992 at the Corkin Gallery of Art in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: My son, Roy Donahue Peebles, III, at about two years old, and me, off to work. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: That would have been 1996, yeah. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Dr. McGregor, of Johnson and Wales University and me. I'm getting an honorary doctorate in hotel business, from the Hotel Business School. And that would have been in 2000. Speaker 2: Next, please. Speaker 1: My wife and I on our way to Cannes from Monte Carlo by helicopter. That would have been in, let's see, 1993, September, 1993. Speaker 2: And just for the--Cannes is spelled C-A-N-N-E-S? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is Bill Clinton leaving our house, and then me, and then in the background, Katrina. And then cropped out is Mayor Kelly. Actually, he's coming into our house, sorry. Speaker 2: Okay, next please. Speaker 1: Far right, Harry Thomas, Jr.--Harry Thomas, Sr., who was a City Council member from Washington, D.C., Charlene Drew Jarvis, Jack Evans, me, Bill Clinton, and Linda Cropp...