 Story_ID: 565638 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name, and spell it for me? Speaker 2: Gwendolyn Marie Patton [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: G-W-E-N-D, as in David, O-L-Y-N, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Patton, P, as in Peter, A-T-T, as in Tom, O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: October 14th, 1943. Speaker 1: All right, and your place of birth. Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Tell me the location of this interview. Speaker 2: We're at the H. Councill Trenholm State Technical College library-archives [H. Councill Trenholm State Community College]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what city are we in? Speaker 2: Montgomery, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date. Speaker 2: May 19th-- Speaker 1: March. Speaker 2: I'm thinking of Malcolm-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --X, 'cause his birthday is May 19th. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: March 19, 2007 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seven [2007]. Story_ID: 565639 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Ah, red-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and white, my sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] colors. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I like green. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Sea foods: shrimp, lobster, crab. Speaker 1: Okay. When you go on vacation, what is your favorite destination? Speaker 2: Bern, Switzerland because that's where my sister is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she's a jazz professor at Swiss School of Jazz [Swiss Jazz School, Bern, Switzerland], and she herself is a performer, Sandy Patton. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). And when you think of the different seasons, what is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: My own is, ignorance offends me, especially my own. And one that--I don't know who is the author, but I like, "He who knows not, and knows not that he knows not, is a fool--leave him alone." Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 565640 Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna start by talking about your family tree. Now, let's start on your, your father's [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] side of the family, okay? Tell me how far back you can go as far as your ancestry on your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. I should, I should have thought about this. Robert Patton married Janie [Jane Patton]-- Speaker 1: And, and who is Robert Patton? Speaker 2: I have to go--see, I have to go back, let me see. Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. Speaker 2: My great-grandfather, whom I knew, was George Patton, and he died around 1949, and George's father was Robert Patton, Jr., and so--and my great-great-grandfather was Robert Patton, who married Janie. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I can go back six or seven generations there, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother's [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] side, for some reason--and I'm the historian for my daddy's side and I, I know that by heart, but it just slipped me on my mother's side, and the reason why I know this far better is that our family on my mother's side has met every year since 1929-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we have never missed a year, so that makes it--shoot, that makes it what, eighty years if, if you can count it back, and all of my knowing life, conscious life, I've been a part of the family reunion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so on, on, on my mother's side, I could go back to 1835-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that's--Sterling Foster [ph.] married Alice [Alice Foster (ph.)]. I have to, I have to go forward. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. I also knew my great-granddaddy on my mother's side, Leonard [Leonard Foster, Jr.], and his wife, my great-grandmamma, we called her Big Mama, her name was Mary [Mary Foster], and so that's my great-grandfather. And his father was Leonard, Sr. [Leonard Foster, Sr.], which would make him my great-great-grandfather, and then my great-great-great-grandfather was named Sterling, and he married Alice. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I go back. And we have pictures of, of both,--I have pictures both of my great-grandfather and--on both sides, and my great-grandmothers on both sides, and a picture that we think is my great-great-great-grandmother [sic.] Janie, and we had--that's on my daddy's side, and we have our family tree, our children go through the family tree at each reunion. We have reunions on both sides, the Patton side, this would be our tenth year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But--so, we just started the tradition on the Patton side. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 565641 Speaker 1: Was there any talk on either side of your family about slavery? Speaker 2: Yes and no. I knew my great-grandmamma, Carrie [Carrie Miner]. Speaker 1: Okay, and this is which side of the family? Speaker 2: This is on my daddy's [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she lived until she--until the '50s [1950s], so I knew her well-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she lived in north Montgomery [Alabama] and--where, where the Patton side comes, it, it was the country, you know, back then--still is, it's kind of rural. And Great-Grandmamma Carrie had goats, and they had as much romp in the house as the children did and, and she could--would talk about her mama, 'cause when Grandma Carrie died in the '50s [1950s], she was in her nineties, and she could talk about her mama, you know, who was at the tail end of slavery, and then the Civil War. And we had a--her brother, Uncle Charlie, okay, was in World War I [WWI], so he was in, you know, twenty, or--well, in his teens. Speaker 1: Teens. Speaker 2: And this is away from slavery, but it has a lot to do with black white life. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And Uncle Charlie Miner [Charles Miner] went to World War I, he married an English girl and they had three children: Walter [ph.], William [ph.] and Esther [ph.]. Esther just died, I have her on videotape, and Esther was in her nineties. Well, when the war ended, Uncle Charlie--and I didn't know Uncle Charlie, he was--been dead all of my life, but the, the family, you know--stories. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: His wife said she was not coming to the United States, and for him to take the children because she felt that the children would not get a fair shake in London [England]. So, Uncle Charlie got his children and he was in the--he was a mess--on a, on a ship, he was a cook, or whatever they do, and the three children were stowaways. Brought them over to Montgomery--north Montgomery, we had lots of land out in north Montgomery, still do to some extent--and, and raised them in the black community. Now, all of 'em look damn near white, William, my cousin William--and I knew, I knew the children, you know, my cousins. William moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and married the blackest, beautiful, ebony hued Negro woman he could find 'cause he was tired of that who am I? Walter, we lost, we think he passed and went on up north. Esther stayed in Montgomery. Esther never, ever accepted Uncle Charlie as her father, she was convinced that he kidnapped her. And she was white. Now, she's in this all-black community, and when they were children, the rumor at--the family rumor had it that Uncle Charlie would take his children, put 'em in the back seat of the car, he would be in the front, put on his little jitney hat, and drive his children to the white theater, open up the door, took them up to get their tickets, and watch them go in, then he would beat it around the back, go upstairs in the balcony, and the kids would look up to see where their father was, and that went on. And so for some reason, Esther believed that her father was not her father--that he was really a, a butler or a valet, or something, and to this very day, when I--and I interviewed her, I think it was two years ago, she still denied us as her family, but she loved us, and she loved--she married a black man and, you know, and, and had several black boyfriends 'cause she outlived 'em all and--but to this very--to the day she died, and she was like ninety-six, she was white and she was no kin to us. And we just went along with it, what difference did it make? So that's one of the stories that's kind of intertwined with slavery and--or, or the aftermath, you know. Story_ID: 565642 Speaker 1: Rumor has it that the governor of Alabama was named Robert Patton [Robert M. Patton], he was appointed--he was a Republican--after the Civil War. He never owned slaves [sic.], he came out of north Montgomery [Alabama], and I would know the town if I could think of it, but I didn't prepare myself. And rumor has it--folktales--family folktales--that my great-great-great-grandfather Robert Patton [sic. paternal great-great-grandfather, Robert Patton, Jr.] married Janie [Jane Patton], took on that name, and that's the rumor because we don't know of any Pattons who owned slaves, and I've tried to research it and research it going back to South Carolina, whereas on my mother's [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] side, I know we came out of South Carolina and then over to Georgia, and then over to Lowndesboro, Alabama, which is about twenty miles from here. We can go back because on that side, the McCalls was the slave owners-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and what happened was he brought all of his slaves together when he migrated to Alabama, he kept the family, his slave families, together. And in Lowndesboro, in the, the, the, the graveyard, there are some of our ancestors in there with him, okay? And the church--it's a Methodist church, and I don't know how this works out, but McCall--that's his name, his, his surname--was big, had--owned lots of land and so forth and so on, and the capital of Alabama was in Cahaba [Alabama] and then it went to Tuscaloosa [Alabama], and then it finally came to Montgomery. Well, when it left Cahaba, they built a whole new capitol building in Tuscaloosa, and then they built a whole new capitol building here in Montgomery which we call Goat Hill. Somehow, McCall got the dome from the old capitol, the golden dome over that, and brought it to Lowndesboro and put it on top of the church. And black--and his slaves went to his church, so as--through the generations, it became an all-black church, and it was a C.M.E., I believe, of--a C.M.E. church, it became that, but it was--started out as a Methodist church, and then it became the Colored Methodist Episcopal [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church and all--and the dome is still there. And so when we have family reunions in Montgomery, we go to Lowndesboro and we do have it on historic register and, and it's being renovated and the slave yard--I mean the graveyard is still there, and some of our--my ancestors--my, my cousins like to go over there, I, I'm not interested in that at all. So, we know a little bit about our history. Story_ID: 565643 Speaker 1: You said that your family owns, you know, a lot of land. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Do you know how they acquired the land? Speaker 2: N- well, I know my [paternal] granddaddy [Samuel Patton, Sr.] owned a lot of land, and I think he purchased it, purchased--my granddaddy was a contractor and, and he built, he built one of those communities out there in north Montgomery [Alabama], and I think he purchased that. We sold all the land either to the city, or to somebody, that's where that came from, so that's a recent acquisition of land. On my grand--maternal side, Great-Granddaddy Leonard [Leonard Foster, Jr.], he didn't own a lot of land, but he owned a stable. He, he, he was a professional, (gesture) and I have pictures of him, horse rider, what do you call 'em? Jockey. Speaker 1: Jockey. Speaker 2: But he didn't ride the jockey, he did the, the--but he was in the Kentucky Derby with the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's not the chariot, but that--it was a trot, trot- a trotter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, a trot- a trotter, and I have pictures of him with--on it--and he owned enough land to house his horses and build his stable and, and we're from Lowndes County [Alabama] like I told you, on my mama's [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] side, and he owned--where Carver High School [George Washington Carver High School] is now in Montgomery, that used to be Foster property, and that was where our horse farm was. So, through s- I don't know how we lost the land or how--or if he sold it to the city--and that was as recent as, let's say at least 1930, '35 [1935]. Story_ID: 565644 Speaker 1: One thing I have to say, both sides of my family, given, you know, the horrible conditions that black people were forced to, to, to live, to survive, they were very strong, and what you would call, relatively speaking, well to do people. My granddaddy on my daddy's side [Samuel Patton, Sr.] only went to the third grade, but he was a master carpenter--master, and could do math in his head like I don't know what. And, you know, to be a carpenter--and then he moved and branched out to become a contractor, and then he hired forty people and paid them, which was considered a big firm in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s]. And he built the first black hotel--the first and only black hotel in Montgomery [Alabama] and it still stands, the Ben Moore Hotel, and it's on the historic register. And the Ben Moore, as you also very well know, was the first integrated hotel because when our white friends from the North would come down to help us in the--particularly during the Montgomery Bus Boycott, they stayed at the Ben Moore, and so it was the first integrated hotel. And my granddaddy built what we would call the first mini mall, where you had retail shops connected to each other. Over here, on this side of town on Day Street, he built, as well as I can say it, the, the school which was on Jeff Davis [Jefferson Davis Avenue], I can't recall the name of the school, but it was a school for girls--for women to learn bookkeeping and typing, and that kind of stuff. And so on my daddy's [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] side we were very entrepreneurial in, in our outlook. Story_ID: 565645 Speaker 1: On my mother's [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] side, even though Granddaddy--Great-Granddaddy Leonard [Leonard Foster, Jr.] was this horse trotter [sic.], he raised all of--he, he built the, the family house, which is still standing, around--circa 1900, two stories, sun porch; it was considered like the top of the line during the period. His children, especially his girls, went to college, and so they're more into that professional vein. My Aunt (Unclear) graduated from college, and I have pictures of her, around 1910. But you have to remember what college was, they went to the eighth grade, then they could teach, and then they went to the high school, and then they could teach, and then they--you know, then they went on to college. But still that, that thought process. So I would be considered the third generation quote unquote educated, and part of--this is on my mother's side, and part of the philosophy was that--my grand aunt was an elementary school teacher, and see they helped raise me because my mother died. Her daughter was a high school teacher, so I had to become a college teacher; we were not to, to, to run in the same tread, if you will, as the previous generation, I mean we were raised that way. And, so I had to become a college professor and I'm an archivist. And then we had lawyers and doctors, and so forth. It's something about--you're, you're supposed to evolve from the previous generation, that was instilled in us--otherwise, you're not making progress for the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we've been very, very family oriented, and also very race--we were race people on both sides. Story_ID: 565646 Speaker 1: Let's talk about, about your mother. You said that she died when you were very young? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How old--well, first tell me her name. Speaker 2: Her name is--was--Jeanetta Bolden Patton. Speaker 1: And spell it for me, please. Speaker 2: Jeanetta, J-E-A-N-E-T-T, Tom, A, Bolden, B as in Baby, O-L-D, as in David, E-N, Patton. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Now, I need to go back to my Great-Grandfather Leonard [Leonard Foster, Jr.]--that would be her granddaddy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When his girls got married, he built them houses for their wedding presents, and so he built my grandmamma, who was very, very dear to me, Mommy, and she also had a hand in raising me. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Juanita Foster Bolden [Juanita Foster Washington], and she was a magnificent woman. I mean absolutely, she's almost indescri- I love her dearly, and I call her Mommy and she was--they called her the peculiar one. She was eccentric, and they say I have a lot of her ways, but Mommy--. We also come from a family that the men are to provide, and women are to take care of the children, okay? And if you married a husband who could not provide, then you go to college or you go to school, or you do something. Well, Mommy got pregnant early as far as I'm concerned, she was sixteen, but that was the going age during that time in the '20s [1920s], and, and, and, and Great-Granddaddy Leontar- Leonard built that--built them a home for the wedding present, right up the street from the home house, but my granddaddy, Nathaniel [Nathaniel Bolden, Sr.], drank, and my grandmother did not drink except during the holidays, and that's when we would have her homemade sherry or her plum brandy 'cause that's how she called it. And so, my mother was born in 1922. My--Mommy put her husband out of the house, probably around 1928, she had three kids, and she had gone, I guess, to the sixth grade, or whatever the level that they're allowed. You know, black people couldn't get a high school education up until the '50s [1950s], you know, it's--tenth grade was enough in the public school system. And Mommy decided she had to work to take care of her three kids--single mother, we're talking about 1929, middle of the Depression [Great Depression], but she was very clear as to what kind of--'course it was day work, she had to work in some white woman's kitchen--but she made it very clear that she was gonna be a nurse, which was a nanny, and take care of the child 'cause she had a suckling baby, okay? My Uncle Nathaniel [Nathaniel Bolden, Jr.], whom I never met--and that's a story in itself. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 565647 Speaker 1: So she did. And her ward was Patty [ph.], I have pictures of Patty, and Mommy [Patton's maternal grandmother, Juanita Foster Washington] wore the, the nurse's cape, you know, the blue cape and all of that and the white s- dress and the white shoes and the white stockings and all of that, and she was stunning. But she was weird because, you know, the saying was that a piece of man was better than no man, especially back during those days. But Mommy was not gonna be bothered with a drunk [Patton's maternal grandfather, Nathaniel Bolden, Sr.], that was the end of that, you know. And so that's what she did, so as a consequence, working for white--this white family--she only worked for one white family, and the child--the infant was her ward. She went on all of the trips 'cause she had to take care of the baby, she did do the tea parties, you know, for the family or the, or the dinners, you know, the--whatever they would have, 'cause she had to babysit the child. And, still with her own background, you know, we--I, I knew the--I know the finest cuts of meat, I know how to make pinwheel sandwiches, I can make my own cheese straws, the, the best (unclear), they don't even make that anymore. I know, I know the difference between a (unclear) glass, I know the difference between a sherry glass, you know, everybody knows a brandy glass, you know. Mommy was just--she was just very exquisite, she was so ladylike, so dainty, and I learned how to tat, to make lace with shuttles. Of course, embroidery was just given, given. She was just a--I don't know how to explain it, she was just--what do you call that, that--she was just divine, she was just so eloquent, so ladylike, so dainty, she was a little lady, too. And so she instilled that in her daughters and in her granddaughter--I'm the only granddaughter, and so I have a lot of those airs, if you will. I mean I still have tea parties, I have demitasses, you know, and, and I have different kinds of demitasses for different types of tea parties. You will not drink apple cider out of, out of one set of demitasse from another, you know. I--all of that distinction--centerpiece at all times on my table, fresh flowers every day in my home. Story_ID: 565648 Speaker 1: All right. We were talking about your grandmother [Juanita Foster Washington], and you were telling me about her (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lil-- Speaker 1: So, now, you said she had three children, one of them was your mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You have to remember, too, that every summer I came to Montgomery [Alabama]. My mother-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: My mother was a little woman, they called her Dot because she was so petite. She wore size four shoe, and they didn't make fours for grown women, so she would have to get a four and a half, that was a small. And the reason why I know is because I did a lot of my mother's shopping. My grandmother instilled in her daughters that they had to go to college, unlike what was instilled in her as a result of her experience with the alcoholic husband [Patton's grandfather, Nathaniel Bolden, Sr.]. So, Mother was the first graduating high school class at Loveless [Loveless High School, Montgomery, Alabama] in 1940, and I have pictures of all of that. And, and she was to go to Lewis Business College [Lewis College of Business] in Detroit, Michigan. Her sister, my Auntie--we call her--I call her Auntie, but everybody called her Sister, her name was Nathalie [Nathalie Bolden], went to Alabama A and M [The State Agricultural and Mechanical Institute for Negroes; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama], she was to be a schoolteacher. Mother was to be a businesswoman. So, while my mother was in high school in Montgomery at Loveless, which is named after a black undertaker [H.A. Loveless]--'cause we know our history. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And the first graduating--I'm talking about twelfth grade graduating class ever in 1940 here in Montgomery. Montgomery was a little bit more progressive around public education for black people than let's say the surrounding rural counties where they thought tenth grade was enough--the state, the powers to be. Story_ID: 565649 Speaker 1: Meanwhile, my father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] lived across town. Montgomery [Alabama] had two distinct communities, we still call it the west side, and crosstown was the east side. Well, my father lived near the college [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], so the east side has always been the east side, like (pronunciation) east side, New York [New York]; it was always a step up because the college was located over there. And my father was rambunctious, debonair, suave, urb- urb- what do you say? Urbane, and he came from the Pattons, you know, where they had quote unquote money. Now, my granddaddy never smoked in his life, never had a drink of alcohol in his life, and ladies did not whistle, it was a sin for a woman to whistle--hens do not crow, so when you're in Granddaddy's house--Granddaddy Patton [Samuel Patton, Sr.], in that house, I couldn't whistle. So, my father was the complete opposite of his daddy, but he worshipped his father, and Granddaddy wanted Daddy to take over the business, but my father had no--not an inkling, not a desire, not the thought of staying here in Montgomery, he was convinced he would kill a white man--convinced. And he got a job which he begged to have 'cause he could work with Granddaddy. But he got a job from--for E.J. [ph.], who was the little corner grocer in the neighborhood, neigh- neigh- neighborhood. And Granddaddy bought him a bike, and that meant Daddy could travel, go across town and do all kinds of stuff--go downtown, and he would, you know, deliver groceries, and then he went to the drugstore and said, "I got a bike, I can deliver the medicines," and that took him all over, it was his freedom. And so he met my mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton]--he's a year younger than my mother. And then later on--but that, that was it--at some school dance, or a sock hop or whatever. And then later on, Granddaddy let Daddy have the car, you know, and my granddad always drove a Chevrolet, it looked like it was always green, and he bought it every two years. He was, he was a frugal man though we didn't suffer for anything. You know Ma Dear [Patton's grandmother, Mary Patton] had her fur coats and her diamond earrings and all that business. Story_ID: 565650 Speaker 1: Daddy [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] met Mother again at a school dance, he's in eleventh grade, she's in the twelfth grade [at Loveless High School, Montgomery, Alabama], and he liked her 'cause she had long hair like yours (points), and she was little and petite. But Mother also had been trained by my--her mother, my grandmother [Juanita Foster Washington]: you don't let a man touch you, you must remain prim and proper at all times, because her mama had them three babies by the time she was seventeen or eighteen or nineteen years old. And so that was that, and Daddy didn't have to be bothered 'cause he can go find somebody else, you know, he was dashing, as they said. And then one summer, during the summer, he came by, he was on his bike, and he came by my grandmother's house--my mother's house, and asked my grandmother where was Dot [Jeanetta Bolden Patton]? And that's when she said he--she was in Detroit [Michigan] in college, Lewis Business College [Lewis College of Business]. Well, now my father sure enough wanna get to Detroit. And besides, he had a sister who lived in Detroit--his older sister, and the older of--the oldest of the clan. My daddy had--well, they came in three sets. It was Samella [Samella Patton]--my Aunt Samella who's still living, my father who has since passed, his sister Edith [Edith Patton] who has since passed, and Bea [Beatrice Patton] who has since passed; that was the first set, four children. Then there came Junior [Samuel Patton, Jr.] and Carrie [Carrie Patton], and then I have two uncles, one who is a year older than I, and another who is a year younger than I, tore my father to smithereens, he just simply could not understand how his mother [Mary Patton] could be having children while he was having children. And it never occurred to him that they had to have the--what do you call, what do you call--they had to be doodling around, Granddaddy [Samuel Patton, Sr.] and Ma Dear--we called her Ma Dear, to get him, but he had this feeling--I, I guess boys, I don't know, think that after they have come into the world there's nothing going on, no more hanky panky going on. And he was--I mean for the long time he, he found it difficult to accept his two younger brothers (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Younger brothers. Speaker 1: He, he wanted them to call him Uncle Bob, but fortunately, they called him Brother 'cause we--that's his name. Down South, you call brother, Brother, and sister, Sister, and all of that. So, anyway, Mother meets Daddy--again--by happenstance, this is the story. Detroit, even though that was supposedly the land of the free, and the factories were buzzing and Daddy got him a job, I mean he committed class suicide. Instead of him carrying on a construction business with forty people working and making that kind of money, he committed suicide and went up north and became part of the working class, which is all right. And he liked it anyway, 'cause that--because he had that gusto about him. And there was one movie house--what, what we call movie houses down south, and my auntie [Nathalie Bolden] calls it the talking pictures (laughter), that the black transplants migrated, you know, that's where they went, that was their watering hole. And I know the name of it, but I can't remember 'cause they saw Cab Calloway there. But anyway, coming out of the movie house, there is Dot on one side and my daddy on the other, and my father began, begins to call her, and finally they meet up and make eye contact, and my mother fell deeply in love, and soon afterwards, they got married and had a house wedding, it was in the paper, in the local black folks paper and all of that business, and that happened. Story_ID: 565651 Speaker 1: And now she's pregnant with me, and in September, my auntie [Nathalie Bolden], my mother's sister, calls my mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] to tell her that their brother had been shot and killed by the police--Nathaniel [Nathaniel Bolden, Jr.]. As I understand the story--put my mother to bed, she already couldn't do too much walking with size four feet, and carrying me, and I'm, you know--was, was kind of big for her. They say that hearing the death of her brother had such an impact on her that it impacted me in the womb and, and the story is--and we called him Brother, too, at least his sisters called him Brother--that he had been drafted in World War II [WWII] and he was not going, period. And Mommy [Patton's maternal grandmother, Juanita Foster Washington], being a single mother, tried to convince him to go in, you know, maybe something will happen, something for the better, and he absolutely refused. He was a laborer, okay, just--he hadn't even graduated from high school, he was getting ready to graduate from high school--that, that was his senior year. And his mind was he was gonna go steal money because see, the stores during that time--and, and a lot of them were owned by the Jewish people, and they lived in the stores--they lived behind the stores. And the family folklore has it that Brother was gonna rob, get the money, buy him a car, a used car, and motor to California, or to get the bus to go out to Los Angeles [California]. Now, how somebody from Montgomery, Alabama could--during that time--I'm talking about 1943 now can go--can have the vision to go to California still baffles me. But the owner of the store--and I know where the store is, the building is still there but it's been transformed into something else, and--called the police, and the police came and shot him point blank dead. Now, folklore has it when the police came, this is in my book, to tell my grandmother, Mommy, that her son had been shot, Mommy opened up the door just a crack--'cause they announced that they were the police, and my grandmother said, "If he is hurt, take him to the infirmary, if he's dead, take him to the morgue," and closed the door. So, the story has it that when I came into the world, I screamed, "Freedom," and so my movement activities since I was a child, given I do come from a race family, has always been sanctioned and expected by my family. Story_ID: 565652 Speaker 1: When the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] came to visit--you know, when COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program]--moving--fast forward in the '70s [1970s]--visit my relatives thinking that--and I have my FOIA [Freedom of Information Act of 1967] report, I got it when President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president because I knew when the Republicans got in we weren't gonna be able to get anything. And so I did order it and the, the, the comments that the agents made when they interviewed my family were hilarious. My father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] said, "Well, I raised her to be a, a, a radical, she's doing what I taught her to be," you know. And Mommy [Patton's maternal grandmother, Juanita Foster Washington], being eccentric as she ever--you know, as always, she wouldn't even talk to 'em, she just, just glared at 'em and said--you know, 'cause she told me the story 'cause there's no write up of her comments like it is with my father. She said, "I wasn't about to entertain those, those hoojies." I said, "Ma Dear, were--"--"Mommy, were they black or white?" She said, "They were both." Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I said--and then for Daddy, the FBI agent was black. But down south, I guess, they would send a black and white agent thinking that black folks will be afraid of white folks, you know, in terms of authority. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she said, "I just glared at 'em, told 'em to get off my porch." Story_ID: 565653 Speaker 1: Okay, so now, you're born in Detroit [Michigan], and how long did you live in Detroit? Speaker 2: Well, every summer I came to Montgomery [Alabama]. My mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] would pack my brother [C. Robert Patton, Jr.] and I in a footlocker, to use a metaphor, when school was out in June, and we stayed until September. And I always loved Montgomery because of the tea parties and the petticoats. I mean, you know, all of that--you know, it wasn't just white girls who were belles, you know, blacks girls--I don't know if it was an imitation or what, but we had our own little etiquette. I mean--and church was just fab- I love church today--southern church, I went to church in New York [New York], too. You know, church was like the whole--not only the spiritual oasis, it was the social haven, you know, with the, the little tea parties for the seasons and, and the tea parties for the birthday--May birthday girls and, and I was in the Little Red Circle Girls [ph.] and, you know, and--oh, it was just fabulous, you know. And, and, and I'm a teenager, you know, young teen, twelve, thirteen, and just--petticoat parties, we would go over to each other's house just to starch our petticoats. And we made our own starch (gesture), you know, you know. You could make it with flour, or you could buy some of that Argo starch, and you cooked it and all of that. I mean it was just--I loved it, my brother hated it. He hates it to this day. But I just love the South, so every summer I was here, every summer. Story_ID: 565654 Speaker 1: I had just turned fifteen. Well, this summer when we came home-- Speaker 2: Well, let's--before we get to your teenage years, tell me about your elementary school years, and what school was like for you-- Speaker 1: Oh, I loved school. Speaker 2: --in, in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Now I went--we lived in Inkster [Michigan]. Speaker 2: In Inkster. Speaker 1: Yeah, which is about fifteen, twenty miles outside of Detroit. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] was not about to let us live in Detroit. Detroit was hell-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in 1943. People lived stacked up, you know, and we just--our backgrounds--see, that's where that, that so called black bourgeoisie came through my father, yeah, he was gonna be working class, but his upbringing was he had his own bedroom, you know, as a child, you know, and his sisters slept in the same room, you know, the three girls, but he had his own bedroom. He wasn't about to live in a family flat that was meant for two that had eight people in it, you know; he, he couldn't tolerate it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then there were riots going on in Detroit, and oh, just--you know--so he moved to Inkster, and moved into the projects-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but he didn't live in, in no--those flats, those--what do you call those--what--the, the apartments are attached to one another? Two family flats, they had those. He moved 'em to a bungalow, his own house, own front yard, own, you know, backyard. And I remember that house, you know, and--you had coal, you had, you had--it was a coal furnace, and the milk man would run every day or once a week, however you arranged it, and leave the milk in the milk chute, um-hm, and you put your empty bottles there. I went to kindergarten--because I was born in October, I can go to school when I was four 'cause I would turn five that October. And I was a teacher's pet, and my teacher lived across the street from me, she lived in the projects, too. And so I loved school. Speaker 2: What was the makeup of the school? Speaker 1: It was all-black. Inkster was an all-black town, our si- I didn't even know there were white people in Inkster 'til I got to be a teenager, okay? I didn't even know there were white people, we lived in all-black community, everything was black--church, businesses, everything, okay? Which was what my father preferred. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was a race man. Speaker 2: Were there--businesses owned by blacks? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Retail clothing, grocery stores, TV, now we had to go downtown, you know, what we called--Detroit, called that downtown--to buy big stuff, but we had furniture stores, and it was a very self-contained, but not--we wouldn't buy any furniture there, you know, my--you know, 'cause all--see, my father was in constant conflict--class conflict with himself. But what happened, my father was a welder, worked for Cadillac [Cadillac Motor Car Division], had to be trained for that; he didn't like that 'cause they almost got into a fight and he didn't like the blow torch business. And then he became a painter--a car painter and, and then he progressed, he became a, a committeeman, which meant he had his own office. He was in a union-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so he, he, he'd still parlay his lifestyle as to how he envisioned himself within the working class, okay? Story_ID: 565655 Speaker 1: He hit the numbers for thirty thousand dollars, I remember that well. We were in the project less than a year, and thirty thousand dollars in 1947 was a lot of money. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: So we be- my father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] became the godfather in the black community. And we moved and, you know--and all of that. And he paid people's bills and, you know, and bought groceries, and he became a banker in the number business and had his own crew, and I was a princess and, and I grew up like that. Speaker 2: So, your father bought a home. Speaker 1: Yes, bought a home. Speaker 2: Was it in Inkster [Michigan] also? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was his turf, that was his, that was his territory, you know, and he got our city incorporated as a city, and he didn't wanna be a politician but he wanted to be in control of who was gonna be the politicians 'cause we were handling--got our streets paved, got street lights. I mean he was, he was, he was the godfather; he was Mr. City. He was president of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] at one time because he was--he stressed education. And he was a godfather, I mean truly the godfather. Speaker 2: Did he continue to work in the car industry? Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no. Speaker 2: Oh, he left. Speaker 1: He left that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, he took a leave (laughter) 'cause he didn't know how long this would last. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so he, he, he returned back to the factory [Cadillac Motor Car Division], but he returned as a committeeman, he--in fact, he was on the line for a second, ran for the committeeman and got elected. And I went up there to help him in his first campaign because of the politics and that I was in the movement and stuff, yeah. So, we, we, we, we, we had two cars and a two car garage, and our house was stoned and--you know, stone from Italy and awnings on every window and, and all of that. Story_ID: 565656 Speaker 1: So, you said you liked school. Speaker 2: Loved it. Speaker 1: Tell me about school. You have a favorite teacher? Speaker 2: This--all of this is in my book, I go from grade to grade to grade. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, well we, we don't have to go through each grade, but tell me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Let me tell you the--two teachers had the most profound impact on me in elementary school. My fourth grade teacher, Mrs. Reid [ph.], who brought her little bitty black and white portable television to class, and we watched the debates of Adlai Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II], and I can't ever remember--I knew eventually that Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was elected-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but I liked Adlai Stevenson, we called him an egghead because he was smart and I identify with smart people, and so that's my fourth grade. And then, my sixth grade teacher--because she reminded me of my [maternal] grandmother [Juanita Foster Washington]--she divorced, too. In fact, Frances, she's my dear friend now, first name basis, had three or four husbands until she got it right. And she talked about black history all year long, with emphasis on Black History Week [Negro History Week; Black History Month], but all year long she talked about black history. And she introduced me to Mary McLeod Bethune and to George Washington Carver, and I remember that very, very well. And my first research paper, or essay, or whatever you call it, was on George Washington Carver, and I won the prize for the sixth grade division, and I had to present--had to present my little paper, and all of that was under the influence of Frances Webb--her name now is Webb, and her daughter, Carol [ph.]--the one I said, "Why is she sending me this silly email" became my neigh- neighborhood best friend. My father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] raised us not to scorn anybody, okay? Everybody had value, and so I was friends with all of the various cliques. My best neighbor--my neigh- neighborhood friends, if you wanna deal with something, were basically all high yellow people, you know, Creole types, and they were what I would call square, but I liked them and we had fun together. Then I had sanctified friends, and I used to go to church with them, and I was just--. The first time I went to sanctified church--they all pray out loud, individual prayers, so it was just like a whole (makes sounds), plus they talk in tongues, I was fascinated by that. And so when my sanctified friends would come and visit me, I would not allow any records to be played, I would not wear lipstick--whatever was to make them comfortable. They were the best jack players, you know, they can play jacks (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jacks. Speaker 2: And, and then I had friends who would, would be considered street people, and--you know, so I had all kinds of friends. Story_ID: 565657 Speaker 1: And my father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] also--because--he grew up in a very strict, religious home. My granddaddy [Samuel Patton, Sr.]--when I came back home to stay and I claimed Montgomery [Alabama] as home in 1977, my granddaddy was still superintendent of Sunday school. And I say, "Granddaddy, please, your children are grown, your grandchildren are grown, and your great-grandchildren are big teenagers." So, anyway, Daddy grew up in that, and he did not--and, and he, he--and he was--he's a Christian and, and he belonged to church all of his life. But he did not want to impose a religion on me and my brother [C. Robert Patton, Jr.], so we had Muslim teachings, we had Jehovah Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses] teachings, we had Seven-day Advan- Adventist [Seventh-day Adventist] teachings, I went to the Catholic church to see what that was about, I went to the Episcopalian church to see what that was about, and the Methodist church--my mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] was a Methodist, my daddy was a Baptist, but Baptist resonated with me in terms of the culture and the--you know, and the rhythm and, you know, and I liked the preachers, I don't care how much education anybody--if you are not moved by the homiletics, (makes sounds)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --I love it. And I love seeing my people sway, you know, in rhythm and in unison, you know. I love it. Story_ID: 565658 Speaker 1: I think when we left off, you were probably in the sixth grade, is that right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Meanwhile, like I said, my father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] was dashing. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: My mother did not work, she was Mrs. Patton [Jeanetta Bolden Patton]. And my father was a ladies' man, and my mother could tolerate that, and I think it has a lot to do with the fact that she didn't have a father, so she went--reverted back to a piece of man is better than no man, not that my daddy was a piece of man because he was a great provider-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and gave her the status, with the mink coats and the diamond earrings and the Bulova watch, you know, that was the big watch then. And, you know, and the, the little fox things--the little--ooh, those things used to scare me, you know, I forgot what they call 'em--and the capes, the fur capes and the Persian coats, you know, Persian was a big thing back then, you know, with the little Persian lamb and the cashmere and all of that. And my father was a very sporty dresser, and so my mother had to--. And so she could tolerate my father having other women. And one of his ladies, he had a daughter named Sandy [Sandy Patton], and I've known my sister all of her life, and my mother tolerated that, and every Sunday my mother would go pick up Sandy and bring her to the house so that she could play with her brother and her sister. My father paid--my brother [C. Robert Patton, Jr.] and Sandy had the same babysitter, and they, you know--not that the babysitter came to the house, but they would take the children to the sitter so my mother can be free to do whatever. And so I've known Sandy all of her life. Whatever I got for Christmas, Sandy got for Christmas. One Christmas, we were shopping downtown, my mother and I, and there were--it was one tea set that had the silver sugar bowl, and the creamer, and the little teapot, and then the rest of the stuff was pink, you know, pink plastic. So, of course, we bought two, you know, everything I got, she got, so we would wrap Sandy's presents. I've never believed in Santa Claus, my father made it very clear that he was Santa Claus, so we didn't have to wrap our presents. Sandy believed in Santa Claus 'cause her mother was from a different world, and so we would wrap Sandy's presents. So, I commenced to wrap the all-pink plastic set, and my mother said, "Oh, no, no, no, no, that's your tea set." I said, "But--," in my own little way, "but I'm the princess, you know, I have the silver servers." And my mother, I'll never forget, said that "Sandy doesn't have a daddy every day like you have a daddy every day and every night, and Sandy is your sister," and Sandy really didn't come from, as far as we were concerned, a family of means, "and so she should get the tea set and you can get something special later." I'll never forget it, but it, it had an impact on me--two. One, there's no such thing as in laws, out laws, ex laws, stepsisters, half-sisters--no, no such thing; we're all family. And number two, I would never love a man as deep as my mother loved my father--never. So--so, I--and I love my sister, I've always loved her and she truly loves me, her big sister. In fact, she doesn't even wanna go anywhere without me, we rendezvous--I'm going to New York [New York], she's gonna be performing at--down at the Tribeca jazz center, and--a concert, and so I'm going up there, and then we go to Miami [Florida] for the su- you know, for the winter 'cause she sings in all of the jazz clubs down there. She lived in Miami for a while, and especially the Van Dyke [Van Dyke Cafe, Miami, Florida], which is like the jazz club and en (unclear), as she calls it. Story_ID: 565659 Speaker 1: My brother is a very reserved person. Speaker 2: Your brother's name? Speaker 1: His name is Clarence Robert Patton, Jr. [C. Robert Patton, Jr.], he's named after my father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.], and we call him Bob, and for a long time it was Big Bob, that's my daddy, and Little Bob, that's my brother. My mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] called my daddy Robert, and could say it like nobody else could say it. And my brother grew up a man; my brother was never a child, never a boy, never. And my father would take my brother with him. Wherever my daddy went, my brother went. My father was a great gambler, and I'm a good gambler too, I can play poker--I can play poker with the best of them, and--but my father liked dice, which I don't like because it's too much of a chance, there's no mental need for that. And--but Bob would be right there with Daddy. I don't ever remember my brother wearing short pants after he was five years old, and so he's extremely matured, a man of very little words, and he talks a lot of times in parables, I mean everything has a, a lesson, you know--there's a message and all. And for a long time, he was very angry with me because I left Inkster [Michigan] when my mother died and, and that's because when Mother died, she died Halloween night, 1958, I was in the tenth grade [at Inkster High School, Inkster, Michigan]. And that summer before she passed, which would be the summer of '58 [1958], I was in Michigan--I mean I was--you know, I came down south [to Montgomery, Alabama], and when we got back home we would--instead of coming back home in September, we came back home in August 'cause Mother was in the hospital, and that's when she told me she had cancer. Well, in 1958, cancer was the big dreaded C, and somehow, it seems like only women got cancer, you very seldom heard about men having cancer. And somehow the, the reasoning was you brought it on yourself some kind of way, you know. And I have to be very frank and honest about this. After my brother was born, December 29th, 1944--he was born in Inkster, and Mother had a hysterectomy; she didn't want any more children, to my father's consternation, and could have been one of the reasons why my mother tolerated and loved Sandy [Sandy Patton], 'cause by that time, Mother couldn't have any children anyway, okay? So it could have been a guilt thing, but also that showed a sense of independence, I mean, "I control this, and I'm not having any more children, Robert," you know. I can even see her doing that, probably not in that tone 'cause she was a little bit more meek towards my father. But anyway, somehow, the hysterectomy got tied up with how you get cancer. The, the wives' tale was that women are gonna produce milk in the breast--I don't know, but I--as a child, as a young teenager, I could hear all of these various rationalizations. That was in August, and the doctor had given her three months to live, and they told you that, they used to give you these little death sentences. And one of the--she was at the University of Michigan hospital [University of Michigan Medical Center] in Ann Arbor [Michigan], which was like (air quotes) the best, and they were still doing a lot of experimentation and still are. And one experiment was to remove the pituitary gland, and the notion was--which sounds just as wild, you know, as a wives' tale, and the theory was that if you remove the pituitary gland, it would stop the growth of the tumor. Well, from my little eighth grade biology class, I always thought the pituitary gland had something to do with height, and that if you cut it out--this is my reasoning and I told my mother this--you're gonna grow wide 'cause you won't have the gland to stabilize the height. And true enough, she did swell up, and her skin broke--her, her, her skin could not contain whatever--that's under this, you know, the tissues or whatever. And so she did pass, it was Halloween, never forget it. Story_ID: 565660 Speaker 1: And my brother [C. Robert Patton, Jr.], you know, he slept upstairs, he had his own quarters, you know, not only his own bedroom but also his own sitting room 'cause he was a man. He could entertain girls, my brother been entertaining girls since he was about eight or nine. And, and I had a princess room downstairs with the, with the poster bed and all of that business. So, I knew not to tell my brother 'cause my brother loved our mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton], he loved her. He loved her beyond. I mean this whole thing about mothers and their sons, I mean he loved her beyond motherhood. I don't think it was incestuous, but he just loved--he adored her. He fixed her coffee for her in the morning, you know, nobody could make the cheese toast like my brother could for his mother. He (unclear) all the time. When I went to the eighth grade prom, my mother took me, okay? I did have on one of those real cute--the dress--I can remember the dress just as well. It was a strapless, but the whole dress was covered with--I forgot what you call that now--chiffon, you know, up to the neck, and I had on her turquoise--real turquoise and, and diamond clip on earrings--it was little (unclear) things--and all. But my mother took me to the prom. When my brother went to the eighth grade prom, or seventh--no, seventh grade prom 'cause he was in the eighth grade when Mother died. Seventh grade prom he had a date, he bought his girl a corsage, orchids, I'll never forget it, and Mother took him and his date to the prom. Now, I have to be fair with my mother because my first date I was in the sixth grade, and it was James Talley [ph.], and what had happened, James had moved from Detroit [Michigan] from downtown to Inkster [Michigan], and his sister, to live with their grandparents. Well, James' father killed his mother and he was in the penitentiary. Now, I didn't know all of this until it came time for the execution of his father, and it was in the Jet magazine. And I knew James was always in fights, he always just stayed in fights. And when I read about it in Jet 'cause Jet was--Ebony, Jet, Look magazine, Life magazine--required reading, 'cause we had constant, especially with Daddy [C. Robert Patton, Sr.], current events discussions at, at breakfast or at dinner. And when I learned that James' daddy was gonna be executed--now, here he has no mother, and he's about to execute his--about to have no daddy, he was being taunted. I asked my mother if I could take James to the, to the movie, movie house--to the show, we used to call it the show. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And my mother and father must have discussed it and they said, yes, and that was my first date. And Mother took me over to James, I picked James up, took us to the movies, and we always had plenty of money. My daddy would even--when we were smaller, Daddy would pay somebody to take us to the movies. And, and after--it was an afternoon--two o'clock after--it was on a Sunday after church, and then Mother came and picked us up. James had dinner with us 'cause his daddy was being electrocuted the next day, and took James home. I walked James to his door, he didn't kiss me, I didn't kiss him 'cause it was, it was more of a platonic relationship, but it was a date nonetheless. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So Mother was fair, but I think she saw that date a little bit different than if I went to a date in the eighth grade at thirteen with a guy. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But that's just to show the relationship between my mother and my brother. Story_ID: 565661 Speaker 1: So, when I got the telephone message that Mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] had passed, I didn't tell my brother, I waited 'til he was gonna come downstairs. He always prepared breakfast; he's a breakfast person. And when he came down, I told him, and he looked at me, and he went back to his room upstairs and he did not come downstairs until the day of the funeral. And he has never been right until up--until here recently about that. Could not discuss Mother. I bought Mother her last pair of shoes, they were mules with straps, they were gorgeous--four and a half. And I had saved them, and so when my brother had his two daughters and they were getting up in--you know, young teenagers or preteens, I showed the shoes to Bob [C. Robert Patton, Jr.] and said, "Bob, I wanna give these to you for the girls." My brother had a natural fit, a natural fit. "Why you saving that? You always thinking about the past." I mean it was awful. So-- Speaker 2: When your mother died--you said your, your brother was mad at you because you moved, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but after that-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Sandy's mother-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Lois [ph.], got pregnant for Daddy [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] again and had our brother Frank [Frank Patton], he's a doctor over in Atlanta [Georgia] now. In fact, he's an anesthesiologist. And, and Daddy wanted to know what should he do, and he talked to me and my brother. My brother didn't have--wanna have anything to do with it. I told Daddy that he should marry Lois to make the family whole. And Mother died in October '58 [1958]. Daddy married Lois that spring, '59 [1959] while I was staying with Daddy's real heartthrob, his girlfriend Edith Mae [ph.] in River Rouge [Michigan] whom I loved. And, and, and Edith Mae and I talked, I'll never forget, she bought me the most beautiful mohair suit. Oh, it was beautiful, from Zwieback's [Zwieback-Hartmans Co., Detroit, Michigan]. But anyway, I told Edith Mae that I thought this was the right thing to do to make the family whole, that's--now my little brother is coming in the world, I already had my little sister [Sandy Patton], and, "You can continue to be Daddy's girlfriend, you know? I mean nothing's gonna change." And so that happened. Well, Lois could not be a wife, okay? 'Cause she could not tolerate Daddy having other girlfriends, he never had a whole bunch of 'em, he always had another woman. He was of the notion that you have a wife, you have another woman, and Lois couldn't tolerate it, and so they battled physically, you know. She--and she was Canadian, half white or whatever, you know what I'm saying? And, and she really thought she was Robert's gift from heaven, you know what I'm saying? And, you know, and she just could not be a wife the way that--I mean--so it was, it was just, it was just pure hell. And she hated me. Just like mothers and their sons? There's also daughters and their fathers, and we had no restrictions, you know, my father trusted me. If I, if I were, were having--going--doing hanky panky in the living room and my father walked through, or through our den or down in our basement, he would know that's not Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton]; he absolutely trusted me and my brother. We had no curfews, you know? We had none. And Daddy say, "What time you plan on being home tonight?" I say, "Well, you know, the ballroom doesn't close until 2." He say, "Okay, be here at 2:30 or quarter to 3," you know--whatever the leeway time. It was just complete trust. And we did our own shopping, you know? And she just didn't fit. Story_ID: 565662 Speaker 1: She didn't fit. And when she took me shopping at a, at a department store, I'll never forget it, called Crowleys [Crowley Milner and Company]--I never been in Crowleys in my life. And it's those department stores where you have that taf- it's not taffeta--that rayon or whatever that kind of--that flimsy material, and all of them look alike, and look like they all were paisley print. I almost had a heart attack in there, I did have a panic attack. I never been in anything like that. And see, it was her--it was--and, and I came home from school one day--and this is no offense, but I'm just telling you what I--what, what, what I was accustomed to. She had spray painted these oval paper plates, she had spray painted them gold and put some flowers in there to--packed up some flowers in the, in the middle of that, and put them on our living room wall. I say, I'm getting out of here, you know. So, it wasn't only just the taste, she was also very mean to me, very mean. She tried to convince my father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] to put me in reform school, you know. She was just very, very mean to me. She wasn't mean to Bob [Patton's brother, C. Robert Patton, Jr.] 'cause see, Bob did whatever he wanted to do, you know, he really raised himself, you know. And, and he was a boy, so he had far more liberty from her point of view. So I said, "I'm getting out of here," and I wrote my--. And then she got pregnant, which really blew my mind 'cause see I, I almost got into my daddy's mindset. Now you already have had two children, how do you get pregnant again? You know what I'm saying? And first of all, I wanna know how did you get pregnant with my first brother, you know, Frank [Frank Patton] at thirty-six years old? Now, how do you do that? You know, I--it was just baffling to me. So she was not--and I tried my best to get along with Lois [ph.], but it became so horrible that all of her children--she had three children, Sandy [Sandy Patton], Frank, and Jeff [Jeffrey Patton]--sided with our father to get a divorce, that's how, how, you know, whatever her need was to be the woman, you know. And then she said my mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] haunted the house. And we lived in what you would call a very nice house and, you know, it was--she was just--it was awful. So, anyway, bless her heart, you know, we reconciled later, you know, but it, it was just no way for us to live in the same house. Well, my brother got angry because she also mistreated him, you know. Lois--Daddy gave Lois some money for some--to buy some Easter clothes, and she bought me a red umbrella, she didn't buy Bob anything, and she bought Sandy an Easter outfit, cheap, but still--and the little--our little brother Frank, that's how petty she was. And so she mistreated Bob, but Bob didn't wanna come to Alabama--he didn't wanna come to Montgomery [Alabama], but he wanted me to stay up there [in Inkster, Michigan], and I felt like Daddy, if I stayed up there, I would have killed Lois, or she would have killed me. And besides, it wasn't--she--it wasn't on my--her style, her, her taste was so different from mine. Speaker 2: Right. So you wrote to your [maternal] grandmother [Juanita Foster Washington]? Speaker 1: Wrote my aunts, my grandmother (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your aunt, okay. Speaker 1: And they said, "Come on home." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: "Come on home." Story_ID: 565663 Speaker 1: Now, you had been visiting the South every summer. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about the difference from being in Michigan, and then coming to the South? Did you know the difference between--you know, when you got to the South, it was so segregated. Were there any instances that you can remember about coming south and anything that might have happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, you know, Detroit [Michigan] was racist, okay? I mean we had a place called Dearborn [Michigan] that black folks couldn't live in, you know? Speaker 1: Right, but I, I mean--but the difference from Detroit to Alabama, did you have any-- Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I didn't know that the buses were, were segregated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay? As a child, nine years old, eight, seven, I didn't know we couldn't sit in the front of the bus. Every Sunday after church, Mommy [Juanita Foster Washington]--this is my mother's mother-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --would put me, my brother [C. Robert Patton, Jr.], and my first cousin Al [ph.], whom I considered a brother too, on the bus on Sunday, ride to the end of the line and ride back. She would get on the bus first, and I don't know why she got on the bus, I just assumed that she got on the bus to pay the fare, but we had our own little fifty cents, you know, our little--whatever. I noticed the money was different, you know, fifty cents, now, in Detroit, that would be five dollars. My daddy [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] would--you know, it would just--. But anyway--and she told us to ride on the back seat of the bus, and look out the big window, you know, on our knees, get on our knees, look out the big window, and see the scenery going backwards. Nothing could be more fascinating than that kind of bus ride. Well, I didn't know that we couldn't sit in the front of the bus, so that was her way of, of, of what do you--protecting us. Well, one Sunday, 'cause I'm the elder, and I decided we would stop downtown to get us an ice cream cone at the square, okay? That used to be the slave auction block, okay? I knew that, see, I knew, I knew all these things. And it was Liggetts drugstore [Montgomery, Alabama], and we went in to go buy our ice cream cones, and I wanted a glass of water, I've been a water drinker all of my life; I love water. I even put water in my beer, that's how much I like water, and my beer is light. I wanted some water, and it cost three cents for a paper cone shape cup, and I gave the soda, soda jerk my three cents, got my cup of water, and I sat on the stool, I was nine years old. And she called me a pickaninny. I never heard that word before, but I knew it was a ugly word and it was a racist word. So, I looked at her--dead in the eye--and poured the cup of water on the counter, got up and say, "Let's go," to my brother and my cousin, and left. And I told my grandmother what had happened, and my grandmother said, "You're the most beautiful child in the world. When the Lord made you, he made you and he threw away the pattern." Well, through--rest of my life, a lot of folks said they are very glad (laughter) he threw away the pattern, the world didn't need another one of me. So, anyway--and then that's when Mommy began to tell me about Jim Crow. Story_ID: 565664 Speaker 1: The first time I heard the name Jim Crow, you know, and we couldn't sit in the front of the bus, and we couldn't do this, and we couldn't do that, and da, da, da, da, da. And couldn't go to the parks, and all of that kind of business. And I vowed that at nine years old--and of course you have to remember Emmett Till had had an impact on me, too, because that was in Jet. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I vowed then I would be a freedom fighter. But you have to understand, my grandmother on my mother's side [Juanita Foster Washington] was the block captain, okay? We, we were organized in blocks in Montgomery [Alabama] under Rufus Lewis, who was one of my mentors. I have his papers in the archives, they're fabulous--for voting rights. And Mommy would encourage people on her block to go downtown to attempt to register--fill out the literacy test, and to go to citizenship schools. Across town at my paternal grandparents' [Mary Patton and Samuel Patton, Sr.] home was one of the citizenship schools. So, as a child, I taught real school, I didn't play school, I did school--helping folks learn how to fill out the literacy test, helped them learn how to read and recite parts of the [U.S.] Constitution, the preamble, or whatever, 'cause all of that was part of the so called literacy test, the barrier. So, I had been primed, if you will, I was--first of all, I was born a freedom fighter, but I had also been primed to be a permanent freedom fighter--freedom organizer. Story_ID: 565665 Speaker 1: Well, before we get to 1960, 'cause you were getting ready to talk about the Alabama Democratic Conference, but then you said about the boycotts-- Speaker 2: Yeah--let's--yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so let's go back to the bus boycott-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in Montgomery [Alabama], tell me about what you know about that. Speaker 2: Okay, I was here the summer of 1956. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think I'm in the eighth grade, and the bus boycott is, is in its height. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: The unity was just incredible, and everybody was in it, I mean there were so many heroes and sheroes--everybody. We had less fights on Saturday nights, we had more people going to church, people were extremely civil and warm to one another. I was a kid--I was thirteen, or maybe I was twelve and would soon be thirteen, and I was the kid to--, "Go get me, go bring me, go fetch me." And they had the MIA office, the Montgomery Improvement [Montgomery Improvement Association] office was on the west side where Mommy [Patton's maternal grandmother, Juanita Foster Washington]--on the same side of town where Mommy lived, and I would walk back and forth, you know, to the, to the MIA office, and all of the ladies would take me under their wing, they all helped raise me, and Hazel Gregory who was Girl Friday to Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the secretary, and Idessa Redden, who became my dear, dear friend, and Bertha Smith--all of these ladies, because we still had ladies and men, you know, that thing. And I just loved it, and I was thrilled that Jo Ann Robinson even mentioned me in her book, the bus--'The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started It' 'cause I was twelve years old, but I probably made a impression. 'Cause I remember a lot of times--'cause, you know, I wa- we were the feet, I--my--I wasn't crippled then, and we were the legs, and let's say I, I was to take leaflets to, to the church, you know, to put in the bulletin or something, about what's gonna happen at the mass meeting and whatever, whatever. And here is--Mount Zion [Mount Zion A.M.E. Zion Church, Montgomery, Alabama] is on one corner, which--where the MIA was founded, and Holt Street is at the next corner where we had the first mass meeting, and my relatives belonged to both of those churches--I have relatives all over. And they would send me with a message to go to Mount Zion, right? And I'd come back to the MIA office, and they say, "Oh, Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], you need to take something up to Holt Street." Well, I would become livid. "I was just up there, ma'am, y'all could of--I could of done 'em both at the--." So I'm sure they remembered me, (laughter) and why Jo Ann Robinson mentioned me and my other little tight friend, Viola Bradford, she was a little younger than I, but she was a, a go getter, too. And, and I enjoyed that. Story_ID: 565666 Speaker 1: And so, of course, our family on both sides were very much involved with the Montgomery Bus Boycott. Family members who had cars, you know, we would do the shopping, I would get the list over the telephone what the groceries were, or whatever. Crosstown at my paternal grandparents' home, Granddaddy [Samuel Patton, Sr.] was part of the consulting--advisory board because all of the black businessmen--. You know, we really underwrote our own boycott in the beginning, before we got all of this money from everywhere else. It was the local black businessmen--the contractors, the, the retailers, you know, the dry cleaning people and all of--the cab drivers, you know, and so forth, and the beauty parlor people. And, and I loved going to mass meetings, and I remember this lady, a heavyset, ebony, beautiful woman, later I learned was--she had a club called Club Out of Nowhere [sic. Club from Nowhere], and I--that just fascinated me, just the name of the--Club Out of Nowhere--Mrs. Gilmore, Georgia Gilmore. And she could raise more money, you know--and the beauty parlor ladies. Because, see, these were the independent folk; they didn't have to work for white folk. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they had their own--and the market was black, even though the market was, was drying up, because people were, you know, being reprimanded. But they also suffered reprimands 'cause my grandfather couldn't get a line of credit at the bank anymore. You know, when you got a, a job, you know, you go to the bank, you know. Rich people don't spend their money, you know, and people who understand money don't spend their money, you know. You go to the bank, you get a line of credit, you got enough collateral, you got a, a business plan, and do-dot-da-do-dot-do, and that's how you buy your lumber and your nails, or whatever you need, and all, but Granddaddy couldn't get a line of credit anymore. Dry cleaners couldn't get the fluid anymore 'cause who are the distributors? Okay? I mean, you know, there were many, many subtle, very devastating consequences, reprisals that folks don't understand and, and people like certain folks, I won't call their names, get on my nerves 'cause they do not understand the totality of what I call an anatomy of the movement, they really don't. They were on--all over the world now, you know, but they don't understand the anatomy of the people's movement. So, anyway--and then folks up north were sending money--relatives, my daddy [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] was sending money, you know. We would send shoes. People don't--see, people don't even talk about that. You know, when I do a museum, I'm a have--just like--you know, in the Holocaust museum [United States Holocaust Memorial Museum] in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you see all these shoes, well, we have shoes. People wore out their shoes walking for 382 days, you know, and putting cardboard in it. So we would send shoes as well as money. People had to have their insurances paid. I mean just a totality of how do you sustain an infrastructure when the, the institutional infrastructure has been wiped out and all. So I was cognizant of all of that, and my Granddaddy was part of that advisory, and he would take me, sometimes I would be the only child in, in these, these high level business type meetings, you know, "What's, what's, what's the cost?" I mean, you know, "How are we gonna underwrite this?" and do-do-do. So, but the mass meetings on Monday night were the most inspirational. Girl, they--we could sing to high heaven, so. And I loved it. Story_ID: 565667 Speaker 1: Many, many years later--I didn't know Mrs. Parks, I did not know her, 'cause in '56 [1956] I think she was gone, she might have been here and I might have seen her, but I really did not know her. But many years later, many years, let's say 1980, if we can fast forward. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: A dear, dear friend of mine in--from Birmingham [Alabama] and I would work with young people up at Tuskegee--what we called the twenty-first youth leadership camp, Tuskegee Institute University [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. And she was asked to go pick up Mrs. Rosa Parks from the airport 'cause she was gonna speak to the youth, and she absolutely refused, she just refused, her name was Gloria Laster. And I was gonna ride with Gloria. And I could not understand. I thought she was just being mean. And we were roommates in, in, in the dormitory as, as counsellors--mentors. And then she started crying, and I just let her cry, I listened, you know, just was quiet. And I say, "Please tell me, Gloria, this has upset you so, I have to know what, what is it?" And that's when she told me about her sister, Claudette Colvin. And when she told me about Claudette, and when she told me that Claudette was a member of Mrs. Parks' NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth group and Mrs. Parks knew her, I cried, I cried, I just could not, for the life of me, why she had not been lifted up. Speaker 2: Well, tell us about Claudette. Speaker 1: Claudette was fifteen years old, she was in the tenth grade at Booker--Booker T. Washington High School [Booker T. Washington Magnet High School, Montgomery, Alabama], same school that my daddy [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] went to. Claudette lived--I guess it would have to be at least four miles, in a--King Hill community [Montgomery, Alabama], that's four miles at least, maybe five, to where her public school was. Claudette lived in what you call the outskirts of Montgomery [Alabama], even though it was a part of the city limit. And if you look at any southern black community, and I've looked at a lot of 'em, you always have pockets of black communities around rich white folks' enclaves, so they can get to--what, go to work, cut the grass, you know, take care of the babies, clean up the house or whatever. And that's where she lived. And we didn't have public school buses then, and Claudette had to take the public bus or sometimes walk. Now imagine, a lot of people don't talk about--the children walked too, okay? It wasn't just grown folks walking, children walked too, and that's why I got mad with [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg for making that movie 'The Long Walk Home,' okay? You know, because it wasn't no white women en, en, en, en masse who were supporting the boycott; they went and got their maids 'cause they didn't wanna clean up their homes and take care of them children, it wasn't no sentiment there, you understand. And I wrote Whoopi 'cause Whoopi's been to Montgomery, she got relatives in Montgomery and I wrote her. I wrote a piece--I think it might be on the Internet, you know, 'Tramping on our History' [ph.]. But anyway, children walked. And Claudette, one time, on the bus--and Claudette was a precocious kid, she was into black consciousness at fifteen, we're talking about fifty what--five--March, 1955. And you have to understand, in the black schools, we were black conscious. I mean Negro history was taught, you know, north and south, all year long, with emphasis on Negro History Week [Black History Month]. They--people don't understand that, we knew about Drew [Charles R. Drew], we knew--you know, we just know these things. And Claudette was very conscious, plus she was in the NAACP youth group, and you know we always had the little educational piece about Mary McLeod Bethune and, you know, all of that. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And she refused to get out of her seat for a white man. Well, they beat Claudette 'cause she was a fifteen year old child, probably had a very defiant look, as most teenagers do, and they beat her, beat her to a pulp. And it was Claudette's case--listen to me good--the lawsuit. Claudette's father [C.P. Colvin] agreed to sign onto a lawsuit [Browder v. Gayle, 1956]. Story_ID: 565668 Speaker 1: Soon after that was Mary Louise Smith, okay? Who was arrested, she was a young--well, she was a late teenager. She was eighteen years old, she was working in a white woman's house, and I'll give you her name to--you know--but I don't know if they can talk three hours--Claudette [Claudette Colvin] can. There was Ms. Aurelia Browder who was a professional--black woman--and belonged to my daddy's church. Claudette belonged to my daddy's church, which is my church too. When I come down south, I had to go to both--three or four churches. And another woman named Susie McDonald, who was a white woman, a Hungarian, I believe, you know. And she married a, a, a black man or something, I don't know, but she ended up in the white--in the black community. But she is definitely a white woman, McDonald, but that's not--that's her married name. They filed a lawsuit [Browder v. Gayle, 1956]. If it had not been for a lawsuit, we still might be walking, or sitting on the back of the bus. A movement. Again, that's why I say people don't have a deep sense of understanding a movement. A movement has to have at least two components: street heat, which is the walking, and a legal strategy to change the policy, to change structurally the law. And so it's Claudette and, and, and, and Ms. Browder, and Mary Louise and Ms. McDonald, Susie, who made that possible, and they're overlooked. I was--and I--and again, probably from the upbringing from my daddy [C. Robert Patton, Sr.], you don't scorn people, you just don't do that. Everybody has worth, and everybody should be recognized for the contributions they make for the good of the order. And I was just horrified, I was--and then I got mad. See, that's my, that's my, my, my style. I got mad, I got furious, I had to reanalyze Rosa Parks. So it wasn't the beginning, she wasn't the spark, she was the last straw to break Jim Crow's back, okay? Enough is enough. Not taking anything away from her, but you can't put everything on one person and take away from another. And then when I started doing research, the leaflet that Jo Ann Robinson, whom I did know, the college professor, you know, who had me, "Go get me, go fetch me, go bring me," made it very clear in the leaflet: "Another woman has been arrested." We've already had the situation of Claudette Colvin mentioned in the leaflet, so the, the, the, the facts are there, and it's left up to people with integrity to continue those facts. And even if your ego is of such that you have to be egocentric, after all these years, pray tell, lift her up, Jesus. And when I began to inquire how come, and why not, they said she was pregnant. I couldn't believe it. She did get pregnant the following year, but she wasn't pregnant then. I mean what is this need that you have got to be the only one? You know what is this need that I was the first black--? What is that? So I have to deal even deeper with the psychology of it. Well, anyway, I called up my friends, "See y'all gotta write a book about Claudette Colvin." Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And somebody took the bite--bait. Ellen Levine came down here and wrote a wonderful book, and she spread it to 'Freedom's Children' ['Freedom's Children: Young Civil Rights Activists Tell Their Own Stories'], so it's not just about Claudette, but there are other children in the book, you know, including me. But that was not my intent; I wanted her to write about Claudette. I began to trot Claudette out on the circuit, I became her number--her one, one man--what do you call--PR [public relations] lady. Speaker 2: P--yes. Speaker 1: I brought her down here, had a, a day of absolution for this community to apologize for her and to give her some roses, a whole host of things. And now she's, she's just--and she, she's a year older than I, and she has a--two years--and she has the sweetest little voice. So, her lawyer was Fred Gray, who was also Mrs. Parks' lawyer. I confronted Fred, Fred wrote me the sweetest letter, he hung his head, hung his head. He wrote me a sweet, short letter saying that he was so happy, and now he cannot keep her out of his mouth, you know, at all of the bar associations and so forth, you know, because there's a lot to talk about reconciliation and redemption. You know it cleanse the soul, you know it cleansed the heart, and so I'm very pleased-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about that. Story_ID: 565669 Speaker 1: All right. Let's go back to 1960. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: ADC [Alabama Democratic Conference]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, talk about the, the black political wing of the Democratic Party. Speaker 2: All right. It was interesting that black people were, were Democrats, I found that interesting-- Speaker 1: Tell me why. Speaker 2: --in the South. Because of the Dixiecrats and--but anyway, be that as it were, Rufus Lewis is the father of the voting rights movement in Montgomery [Alabama] and central Alabama. He and my [paternal] grandfather [Samuel Patton, Sr.] were friends, they're both businessmen. He had his Citizens Club, and the only way you could be a member of the Citizens Club is that you had to be a registered voter. Now, of course, my daddy's [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] people were registered voters, okay? His sisters and (unclear)--and, and, and they were members of the Citizens Club, and I see their signatures are in the book 'cause I have the, the membership book. And he wanted to have a black caucus within the Democratic Party, and all of the community, they trusted him, he was a wise businessman, his wife had ownership in the--one of the most prominent funeral parlor businesses. Clayton--his wife was a Clayton [Jule Clayton Lewis], and so my folks were a part of whatever Rufus was about. Speaker 1: Prior to that, were they Democrats or Republicans, your family? Speaker 2: I know my granddaddy was a Republican until after Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], but a lot of them had become Democrats because of Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. But you have to remember, those of us who didn't suffer during the Depression [Great Depression]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --did not identify with Roosevelt. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, the party of [President] Abraham Lincoln--they were still, there was that, that, that radical edge to it. So, anyway, because I hung out with grown people most of the time, MIA [Montgomery Improvement Association] and all of that, I became the youth wing of the Alabama Democratic Conference, so when they formed, I'm on the bus with all them grown folks going down--I think that I had to go to Mobile [Alabama] and--with my grandmother on my mama's side [Juanita Foster Washington], and we had went down to Dothan [Alabama], what we call congressional district number two, and all, and I was just---became a part of that and, and, and Coach Lewis--we called him Coach, and he had his degree from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], and it was in business, but he also had a lot of library science courses 'cause he was a librarian for a minute at Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama]. And he was the most organized man I ever met in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had a form for everything, and part of my job was to help organize the forms and the data on the forms. We had a citizenship school, and we had a voters' clinic and, you know, we had block captains, and then we had field organizers, and we had beat captains, and I was a part of all of that as a child-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --so it was just a natural-- Story_ID: 565670 Speaker 1: And so when I came home in 1960--when I say home, I'm talking when I came to Montgomery [Alabama]. When I left Inkster [Michigan] from what--a situation I just knew was destined for failure. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I came here, then I was full, full fledged in the movement, or whatever, the political organizing, and I enrolled at--my, my family enrolled me at George Washington Carver High School [Montgomery, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay. And you graduated there in 1961 with honors, is that right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And two stories about that. One, they wanted me to go to University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], right? I was gonna desegregate a--we didn't so--you know, I use the word desegregate, they use the word, integrate, they're fundamentally two different concepts. But anyway, I couldn't understand why--why would I wanna go to the University of Alabama? I--you know, maybe being in the North and, and--but I lived--grew up in an all-black town, you know, and all blacks were ahead of everything, and in high school, the whites and the blacks got together 'cause we had one high school on our side of town, but we had very few whites on our side of town. But ours didn't--you know, we had white cheerleaders but we were the captains, you know. We had some white football players, and they did make the white boy the quarterback--I never, never could understand that. But the white kids imitated the black kids, especially the Italians and the blacks, they had the pompadours, and black boys had the doos [doo rag], or whatever they call that, you know. So, you know, I didn't see the significance of going--you know, why should I go to University of Alabama? What have--how have they distinguished themselves, you know? I mean I'm going to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. There's George Washington Carver, there's Booker T. Washington. I mean why--and then they say, "Well, Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], they got a great--," I'll never forget this, "they got a great football team." I said, "Can I be a cheerleader?" 'Cause I've been a cheerleader all my life, until I broke my foot. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then they wanted to trivi-- Speaker 2: Trivialize (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) trivialize what I was saying. And so I said, "No, I'm not gonna go." I told 'em I didn't have the right disposition, and I was going to Tuskegee Institute. Story_ID: 565671 Speaker 1: That's one story, the other story was when I came to Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Montgomery, Alabama], I kicked off who would have been the salutatorian, okay? My grades from, from Inkster [Inkster High School, Inkster, Michigan], and my grades here, who would have been the salutatorian if I had not come, got bumped to third place, and she was mad and furious with me. And one thing I, I learned about southern behavior, and I don't wanna stereotype, they do more pouting, or internalize a lot of pain or hurt, whereas I'm vocal, if I'm angry, I'm gonna tell you, "I'm mad, I didn't like that," and so forth. So I finally coaxed her, to find out why was she mad with me, 'cause we were buddies, you know, we were little young scholars together. We worked on the school paper and, yeah, I was a cheerleader and she wasn't 'cause she was more of a bookworm. I've always had this outgoing personality, but I was disturbed, you know. "What's, what's--why are you not talking to me?" And then she finally told me. Well, I went to the principal and said, "Look, we'll just have to have two salutatorians, simple as that." And that's what happened. So we had two salutatorians. Story_ID: 565672 Speaker 1: You said that your father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] gave you a lot of freedom and you didn't have curfews and that type of thing. What kept you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Early on--yeah, I'm sorry. Let me just say early on though, before I got--let's say when I was a young teenager like twelve, thirteen, fourteen, my brother would have to walk me home from parties. We used to have a lot of basement parties 'cause we had basements, and we were an insulated--insular community--we walked everywhere. And my brother--if I had a date--I could have a date, but my brother would have to walk behind me and my date 'til I got to the door, and then my brother could go out and stay 'til five o'clock in the morning, but I had to be in. I think my curfew then was at twelve--midnight. Speaker 1: My question is--you actually were a very good student. How did you--or was your father a stickler about your grades? Speaker 2: Yes, my father helped us with our homework. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ever since I was a child, my father did the, did the spelling bee list, helped us with the math, you know. In the tenth grade I'm still in Inkster [Michigan]. Mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton], I think, is still living. Early on in the tenth grade, I wrote a paper, 'The Balance of Terror Has Died,' it was on John Foster Dulles who was secretary of state, and I called him the balance of terror. I--you know, and my father would help me with those papers. We read the, the Free Press--the Detroit Free Press and the Detroit Times and the Michigan Chronicle and the Inkster Ledger [Inkster Ledger Star], and all of these magazines and, and all, and my brother, because he was reserved, really didn't have any--too much interest in school, even though he said he paid attention. I had to stop my father from making comparisons--I, I remember that early on. "Daddy, Bob [C. Robert Patton, Jr.] is Bob and I, I am who I am, and we're each different and separate people, so don't make comparisons," you know. But I've always--see, I used to (unclear) a lot of punishment, too, for talking back. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, let's, let's talk a--let's change the tape and we'll talk about that. Speaker 2: Which, when I had to go to the library, was my only privilege (laughter). Story_ID: 565683 Speaker 1: So, in 1961, you go to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and you make this transition to college life, and you coin the phrase, scholar-activist. Tell me what, what that is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I've always loved school, and when I say I love school, I don't mean just the socializing, even though I was a cheerleader. I love studying. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I love research, I love reading, I love history, I love political politics, or what we now call political science, but I was more on the ideological, theoretical side in high school [George Washington Carver High School, Montgomery, Alabama], but I was also an activist there for whatever little thing that I thought we should--our freedom had been assaulted or some kind of way. And also, I might have been an acquired scholar because I used to be on punishment all the time. My father did not believe in whippings, my brother [C. Robert Patton, Jr.] never got a whipping, never, and I got one attempted whipping, and that's because I ran away. My father had angered me, Mother [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] was still living, and I ran away, and then I came back 'cause it got cold, and I sat in my mama's car, not my daddy's car, 'cause I was furious with my daddy. It got cold in Mama's car, and then I came through the back door into the den, and for some reason--that's where my piano and all my little stuff was, and for some reason, my mother came in the den for something, and then she called, "Robert [C. Robert Patton, Sr.], Gwen's [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton] in the den!" And my father came with a strap--oh, I guess I was about thirteen or so--with a strap in his hand. I was like, oh, no, he ain't about to assault me, abuse me. And he raised that strap and I fainted (laughter). Plum--flat out. I've always been theatrical; they used to call me Olivia de Havilland. And I was in a lot of school plays, from elementary school all the way through, and through college. So, that was my almost whipping. But I--things had to be reasonable to me, you know, they had--you just could not tell me, "Sit down." How come? Why? You know. "And if I don't, then what?" It was the consequence. So, you know, it was called sassing down south, it was called talk back. And my father bought me this record, I'll never forget it, 'Yakety Yak.' You remember that record? Speaker 1: "Don't talk back." Speaker 2: "Don't talk back." And so I would stay on permanent punishment, and my only privilege was to go to the, to the library, so I read books and, and I read the encyclopedia. We had 'World Book Encyclopedia,' I found that fascinating 'cause it had lots of colored pictures in it. 'Cause I was confined to my room (laughter), you know, for like--and my punishments would be a week, and sometimes I have those what I call a sentence of two weeks, you know, but I could still do my cheerleading 'cause I would completely run away from home if I was gonna be, you know, punished for not doing my cheerleading. But I've always studied and I've always found studying fascinating. Story_ID: 565684 Speaker 1: And Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], to me, was a citadel of intelligentsia, okay. And my professors were brilliant, most of them, all of them were brilliant and--but you had to do something to change your condition, you know what I mean? I, I've been an activist. I mean I, I think if, if we didn't have the movement, I would have created something, you know. And fairness--I don't know--I, I don't believe in astrology, even though I did have my chart read and all of that, and I'm a Libra, but I believe in fairness, I believe in justice, I believe in--things have to be rational. And so I, I, I, I, I guess--again, I'm a born freedom fighter, I don't know, but there were things that were not just at Tuskegee that I found absolutely horrendous. One, the working class and the poor children swam in the Negro pool on Monday and Wednesdays, and the college professors and the VA hospital professionals' children swam in the same Negro pool on Tuesdays and Thursdays; that did not make sense to me, none whatsoever. Wha- what is this? And we weren't into skin color at Tuskegee, okay? Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, even though Dr. Foster [Luther Foster, Jr.] was very, very light, but Dr. Moton [Robert Russa Moton], you know, two presidents before him, was very, very dark. We were into the educated elite, your skin color didn't matter as long as you had at least a master's [degree], now a B.- a bachelor's [degree] didn't count, but at least a master's and beyond; that was the class distinction. So, working class and poor kids--working-class people who--'cause see, when we went to Tuskegee, another reason I went to Tuskegee, 'cause they did your laundry (laughter), you know, that was right up my alley being Miss Princess, you know, 'cause my Mommy [Juanita Foster Washington] waited on me hand and foot. My [maternal] grandmother, Mommy, served me meals in courses, in the bed with my bed jacket. But anyway--so I didn't like that, so we had to break that down, that didn't make sense. And then, then Dr. Foster and I became very close friends. We have a Christmas party for the laundry and the cafeteria workers on one day, and a Christmas party for the faculty and the professors on another. I didn't like that. You know, we need to--'cause again, going back to my--don't scorn anybody. Why are you doing this? Why are you reinforcing this? So I would have had--it didn't have to be a civil rights movement, I was gonna have a movement and I was determined to break down those class distinctions at Tuskegee before SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] came on, on the yard, as we would say. Story_ID: 565685 Speaker 1: And a- far as I'm concerned, I had to help raise SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] because SNCC wanted kids--'cause we had a movement, we had a movement before SNCC came. We had our own organization, we were independent, we had our own citizenship--I took the citizenship school concept with me. Now, how am I gonna be in Tuskegee [Alabama] and folks in Little Texas [Alabama] and the country, and the rural part of Macon County [Alabama] couldn't vote? So we had to have a citizenship school out there, this is before SNCC, before S- SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] wasn't even into political activity then, they were still into integration and marching, you know. So, so SNCC comes on campus [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], they see that we're extremely organized in a sense of organizational structure--had our own office, had two lines on the telephone. I mean, you know--and they wanted Tuskegee kids to quit college to join them to become full-time organizers. I fought that tooth and nail. I said, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no. No." Revolutionaries cannot be dumb, you know. We are going to--you know, the, the revolution was around the corner. You know, we were gonna eventually inherit, you know, whatever it is that we're, we're, we're fighting for, this freedom. Who's gonna manage it? Who's gonna run it? Ignorant people can't do that. And that's where I got the term, scholar-activist, okay? And it just--out of, out of, out of necessity, out of an argument that I had mainly with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]. And Stokely had quit school but had gone back and gotten his degree at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], but he was still--see 'cause he quit to go to Mississippi, so--but he was still using the paradigm that you can quit school for a year, you know, or two years, and then return and make this full commitment to the movement. I did not accept that because to, to me, the movement was not separate from the everyday existence, and number two, you couldn't be stupid and dumb and be in the movement. And, and, and, and--it was another point. An organization can determine. So, when we were downtown picketing--let's say the registrar's office 'cause they would close up anytime they felt like it, or we were picketing the, the white establishments because they wouldn't hire us, you know, for some jobs, I organized pickets every hour on the hour so students would not have to cut class, you know, we'd just get the cars together, you know and, and, and all, and, and we can, we can process that out, we can--I learned that from Rufus Lewis as a child, as a twelve, thirteen year old child, that we can process this. It's not an either-or proposition; it can all be done, and done well. And it guaranteed greater participation, so you wouldn't have a permanent picket marcher all day long-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --they could have a relief, and then you'd bring in--so--yeah. Story_ID: 565686 Speaker 1: And Dr. Foster [Luther Foster, Jr.] was so furious with me because when we got into this real big argument--'cause I was a part of those meetings with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--some of those strategy meetings. Speaker 2: Well, well, your [maternal] grandmother [Juanita Foster Washington] had a rental house that was the Freedom House, is that right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was the SCLC's Freedom House where Reverend James Orange and [HistoryMaker] Reverend James Bevel stayed. I knew Bevel--I was in high school [George Washington Carver High School, Montgomery, Alabama] then, and all, but--and I was in SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and I helped organize Montgomery kids--youth, you know. In fact, I had to stop Montgomery kids from picketing their mommies and daddies. They would get their little picket signs, "I wanna join the movement, I wanna join the movement," and picket--I organized the picket (laughter)--and would march up and down the little sidewalk, and then talk to the parents. And I was youth day speaker here, and churches, and so--. And that's before SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], okay? Now, the sit-ins had happened in 1960, okay? But SCLC was before then, SCLC was in '57 [1957], you know, and so forth. So-- Speaker 2: You were saying that you were in the meetings with Dr. King (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dr. King as a student leader at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and Jim Forman [HistoryMaker James Forman] with SNCC, and Bevel and others. And at one meeting, it had been decided that we were gonna march--you know, after Jimmie Lee Jackson had been murdered, you know, at a voting rights meeting--rally in Marion [Alabama]--Perry County, Alabama, which is about ten miles, fourteen miles on the other side of Selma [Alabama]--Dallas County [Alabama]. And, and it had been decided we were gonna have this march from Selma to Montgomery for voting rights [Selma to Montgomery March], I don't need to go through all of the details. And it was decided that we're gonna have the--that's the west black belt, okay? And the black belt means majority black population, slave plantation geography, and thus, you had more black people. And then we have a black belt on the east side, which Macon County [Alabama] was 88 percent black, Bullock County [Alabama] was up there, you know, that's--was the east black belt, and it was to be a convergence of the west black belt and the east black belt to Montgomery [Alabama], okay? And I was given the organizing task, along with my peers, to do--to organize that. Well--and the date had been set and everything 'cause they were gonna kick off that Sunday, which became Bloody Sunday, and we were all looking at TV watching the kick off 'cause see, we didn't--'cause I--we had organized a march caravan. We weren't gonna do the actual walking, but we were gonna have cars and we got buses, and we raised money, we stopped everybody went through Campus Avenue, which was the main thoroughfare [at Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], they had to stop and put money in a bucket, you know, and all of that. And Tuskegee [Alabama] had--you know, was a very upper middle-class black community, those kids went to prep schools up north, you know. Kathleen Cleaver's folks, Neal [Ernest E. Neal]--folks were in, in the state department [United States Agency for International Development], you know, as underling ambassadors, and all that kind of carrying on. So we knew how to raise money, and we knew people who had money, and so that was what we had decided, we were gonna have this caravan, and then some people would get out so you would not violate the integrity of the march. Like, let's say you in car five, okay? You, you will get out and walk, and by the time car fifteen, you know--then the pickup, you know, it had that kind of rotating (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Right. Okay. Speaker 1: --I've always liked this rotation thing, I must have a, a fixture about that, so we wouldn't violate the integrity of the walk. Story_ID: 565687 Speaker 1: We look at TV on Sunday, that Sunday--[HistoryMaker] John Lewis, you know, we knew John. Bob Mance [Robert W. Mance, Jr.], who's right behind John, we knew Hosea [Hosea Williams], Hosea was a friend of mine, the only person I knew who could drink scotch with Coke. I don't drink whiskey, but he would drink scotch and Coke. We knew Hosea, Hosea had an affinity with the youth 'cause we didn't like the lawyers. You know lawyers would get, would get into the pattern of telling you what you could do, you know. You're not, you're not supposed to give us a strategy, no, no, no, no; tell us what will ge- land us in jail, you know, and we will determine what the strategy is gonna be. And Hosea hated the lawyers 'cause they always wanna become--they wanna become your surrogates. And I don't like lawyers to this day, I really don't, I don't like them as a class of people because they have yet to understand--to distinguish between surrogacy and advocacy. I pay you, you know, you are my advocate, you're not my sur- you don't tell me. You tell me what the consequences will be if we take this or--. So, anyway, Hosea and all of them--and we--and Ms. Amelia Boynton, who's now Mrs. Robinson [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson], beaten right before our eyes on the television set--beaten, and--that was Sunday, and our march was to start, I think, that Wednesday. They--we had thought they would be in Montgomery [Alabama], which showed we didn't plan real good. But if we had done it the way we had originally done it, they would've been in Montgomery in three days 'cause we didn't have all of this other stuff, that's--you know, now, now we got this whole hoopla. And we were to meet them in Montgomery, I believe, that Wednesday or Thursday, I have to check my notes to make certain, and we were gonna do that, we were gonna do that. Story_ID: 565688 Speaker 1: King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--the second day, or the second march, the Turnaround Tuesday--I think that was that Tuesday, so we must was gonna--they were gon- we were gonna meet them that Thursday in Montgomery [Alabama]. At Turnaround Tuesday, when King got to the end of the bridge [Edmund Pettus Bridge, Selma, Alabama], Dr. King, knelt down and prayed, and went back to Brown's Chapel [Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church, Selma, Alabama], we were too done, we were too done. And again, it was the whole question, I guess, in our naivete, you know, our purity as youngsters, you don't have a meeting on this, you know, we didn't vote for this, you know, we--participatory democracy. I mean we were all--you know--especially SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] kids, we were sticklers about that, and Tuskegee kids, too. And we were just too done that he had done that. Then, Judge Frank Johnson [Frank Minis Johnson, Jr.], a wonderful judge, with stroke of the pen, was like a mighty sword, he broke down a many desegregation--segregation racist laws as, as a federal judge--Fifth Circuit [sic. U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Alabama] at that time--issued an injunction that there was not to be a march. I think I'm student body--no, I'm not even study body president yet, I got elected later--I don't know, maybe I was, I don't know. But anyway, Dr. Foster [Luther Foster, Jr.], the president of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], has the injunction duplicated, three thousand, 'cause there were about 2800 of us at school, and placed in our chairs in the dining hall. I think I was student body president--had just gotten elected. And--to tell us that we had to call off our caravan walk. Well, he sent for me, and see, he and I had some little interesting interactions prior. So he sent for me and said, "Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], as student body leader, you're gonna have to call off the march to Washington [sic.]--the caravan march to Washington." I said, "Well, I don't think I can do that, and I think you overestimate my leadership. I only represent the students, they have made this decision, and I can't carte blanche dictatorially stand up anywhere and say it's off. I'm not that kind of organizer." He passed the injunction over there to me, I had already read the injunction. I said, "Sir, it doesn't matter." He say, "But you're gonna violate the injunction." I say, "I don't think so." He say, "Gwen, why do you say that?" "It says you cannot march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery, it doesn't say anything about marching from Tuskegee [Alabama] to Montgomery, and you ain't got time enough to get a new injunction; the march will go on." It was--'cause it was the next morning. And he just knew not to deal--he called up to Inkster [Michigan] 'cause the librarian at Inkster High School [Inkster, Michigan] went to Tuskegee, said, "Don't y'all ever send another one down here like her." (Laughter) "Don't send her." Mrs. Belcher [ph.]. And the march went on. Story_ID: 565689 Speaker 1: And King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was in court during that time, around the injunction, and was fined because somehow the local authorities said that if the line was right here, King had stepped a foot over the line. You know, silliness. But I am convinced if Tuskegee students had not marched caravan to Tuskegee--from Tuskegee [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama], we might not have ever had a march with Selma [Alabama], okay? Because the, the drama of it all, you know, we stayed overnight, they mistreated us, they beat us, they put us in jail, these highfalutin Negroes here in Montgomery locked the church on us, cut the heat off, cut the--you know, it was a tremendous, horrendous--. SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] panicked, they didn't know what to do with us, the horses stampeded us, we had organized the students from Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], horses trampling us, you know, on the street. It just created all of the hoopla, almost equivalent to Bloody Sunday, okay? And I am convinced, possibly, that the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] would have been done fait accompli; that the heads, the powers to be, could have signed the thing, and it would not have ever been a demonstration of the people's struggle for the right to vote, it would have been a done deal. When King turned around--I was convinced when King turned around, I say, "He and Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] already worked it out." I say, "I'll be damned--not from where I sit." And I--and that might not be, but that was the thinking of me at that time, and why that march had to go forward--the people's march. Speaker 2: Okay. What year--this was in, this was in sixty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 2: --five [1965]. Story_ID: 565690 Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit about your first year in college [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. You personally--well, the years '61 [1961] through '63 [1963], before we get to '65 [1965], you had a bout with tuberculosis. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You wanna talk about that? Speaker 2: I was a cheerleader--my favorite pastime, and I knew I'd--when I got soaking wet, cheering--I'll never forget it--Columbus, Georgia. We were playing Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I got soaking wet, it was a horrible game. I was so furious with the Golden Tigers [Tuskegee Golden Tigers]. We beat the Morehouse Maroon Tigers 64 to 6. I was furious. I thought that was poor sportsmanship. Wasn't no need in beating anybody that bad (laughter), you know, it just didn't, it just didn't--it wasn't no need. So, anyway--but it rained cats and dogs, and I got soaking wet and I came down with a cold that I could not shake, and I was to go to Michigan that Christmas and I couldn't, I just couldn't. And I was with Mommy [Patton's maternal grandmother, Juanita Foster Washington], and I went to school after Christmas break, and I was still very, very, very sick. So we had a hospital on campus, John Andrews [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama]. I went in the hospital, and after all of the series of whatevers, I was diagnosed with tuberculosis. Now, that's interesting because see, I thought tuberculosis was a man's disease, whereas I thought cancer was a woman's disease. So anyway--and that was bad, too, the big TB, you know. I knew cancer wasn't contagious, but I knew TB was, and so I had to sort through that. But anyway, I go to this sanatorium in--we don't say LaFayette--(pronunciation) LaFayette, Alabama, Batson's Memorial Sanatorium [Batson Memorial Sanatorium]. And I go through the back door--talking about experiencing Jim Crow. Rickety wooden steps, no rod--I'm weak--no, no, no rods or rails, intake in the little vestibule. Go down the hallway, women down this hallway, men down this, beds in the hallway. We had one, two, three rooms, one was like a ward, had about eight beds in it, another one had about six beds, and they put me in a room with three beds. Again, this is distinction, you follow me? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And a little portable TV at the end of the hallway--black and white. I later learned that they had moved a person out of the three room elite for me, the college student--that I would--but soon as I was strong enough--I was mad, and I went to--'cause two older ladies told me, and I went to the, the, the--I can't recall her name, and I told her, I say, "You can have your bed back." And she was so thrilled by that, she said, "Oh, that's okay, Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton]." All right, you know, it's a fresh air camp because it's cold--they keep the windows up, that's why--I feel that's why they call it fresh air. And I guess for the first three months or so, I'm so weak, and you take shots every day, streptomycin I had and--build up your stamina. And I noticed that we cleaned up our own area, and I thought it was a part of the regimen, you know, to get strength or whatever, um-hm. I'm good and strong now, it was about six months I'm up in there. And I notice that all of our food is the boil up food. You know what I mean by boil up? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Either we had fried, fried chicken--fried foods, or boil up. I don't know what--how else to explain it--cabbage, green--boil up food that--no baked food, no broiled food, no seafood, all right? I'm strong now, I'm about to become Gwen Patton up in here. Story_ID: 565691 Speaker 1: So, my mind told me one day--. Meanwhile, a mother and her little child--she was nine years old, Peggy [ph.], came in, they both had TB [tuberculosis]. Well, Peggy became my ward. I had to teach her to read and write and, you know, all of that--and read poetry, she had to read poetry and the Bible and all of that, and I had plenty of books and I did a lot of--you know, I already knew how to tat and crochet, and knit, and all of that--teach her crafts, paint by color, paint by numbers and stuff. But my first problem was with this food business, so I walked to the kitchen, they liked to have a heart attack in there--the white dietician, I reckon. They say, "You're not supposed to be up in here. What are you doing up in here?" I say, "I wanna see what y'all cooking." And they made--somehow, the white folks were having oyster stew. I say, "You never serve black folks oyster--," I think we're Negroes, "You never serve Negroes oysters." "Well, we didn't know you people liked that." I say, "Well, I do." I say, "Better yet, I wanna see the menus, you know. Post the menus so we know what it is that we're gonna eat, and everything that you're serving." They were so stunned. And then I turned around and went on back to my room. Now, I got this child, Peggy, and I ain't got no more books, and there's got to be something in here. And they had this little trolley that they would bring magazines and stuff to, to the ward--the black folks' side. And I asked, I said, "Do y'all have a library?" "Oh, yes." I says, "Okay." Now, I think Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] has done his I Have a Dream speech, I think this like in--up in August. And I couldn't be there 'cause I would of been there if I had not been in the sanatorium [Batson Memorial Sanatorium, LaFayette, Alabama], so I have to have my own symbolic march on something, so I marched down-- Story_ID: 565692 Speaker 1: All right, so you were tell--you were talking about the library at the sanatorium [Batson Memorial Sanatorium, LaFayette, Alabama] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Two things--one, because of Peggy [ph.], whom I felt was my ward, my charge, and then why didn't we have a library anyway--access? So, I march down this long glistening hallway, you know, and white patients are coming out the doors as if I was some kind of ghost, you know, apparition or something, you know? I mean they couldn't believe it. I go straight up to the lobby at--where they had their parlor, with a baby grand piano, I didn't tell you I play piano, took music--classical music. I was just incensed, but my mission was to go to the library, so the library--I went in there, I saw books, I saw magazines, they were current, the--everything. And that created a real big problem in the hospital. So I was sent to the administrator as if I was to be reprimanded or whipped, or maybe incarce- put in prison or something, and she tried to explain to me about Jim Crow, and what the mores were, and I said, "But none of that makes sense, none of it, you know. Either you gonna put me outta here, I'm gonna get me a lawyer, I'm gonna do something." And so we worked out that the Negro patients could visit the library on Tuesdays and Thursdays, and the white folks would come in on Monday, Wednesdays, and Fridays--some kind of arrangement. But, but me and Peggy were the only ones who ever went to the library, the other patients just dared not, but they loved me, you know? I became their little leader, I became their little, you know, confidant, and they would talk to me and stuff like that. So, but I did that as part of being a part of the March on Washington 'cause that, that was in August. Story_ID: 565693 Speaker 1: And then in November, John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is assassinated, we see it on our little bitty TV, and then it blacks out because see, Alabama controlled a lot of the stations, you know, the mindset, and they would black out stuff, you know, and all of that. And I said what--and that was my--I was through with America, absolute- it's, it's, it's just unredeemable, okay? Because Kennedy had represented a certain kind of progression--of, of, of progress, of progressive thinking, even though he really wasn't, we had many fights with Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] afterwards. You know, in Lowndes County [Alabama], when we organized a Black Panther Party, and Bobby Kennedy who was U.S. attorney general wanted us to join the, the, the, the state Democratic Party [Alabama Democratic Party], which we were just not gonna do. That was George Wallace's party, you know, and the party with the white rooster, the party for the white--the right and the white, and all, we simply were not gonna do that, and we didn't care who was running for, for governor, considered progressive. And that's when we knew then that the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was to put black voters in the pocket of the Democrats. So, in Lowndes County, those strong independent militant folks up in that rural county, which is about--right on that adjacent county line, 90 percent black, formed and organized the first Black Panther Party in this country, okay? Before Oakland [California]. What's his name? Speaker 2: Bobby Seale? Speaker 1: Eldridge Cleaver-- Speaker 2: Eldridge Cleave- Cleaver. Speaker 1: --came out here to observe the Black Panther Party, and couldn't believe the militancy of the, the rural blacks and people of very few words, people who were quick say, "Let me study that, I'm study--I gotta study that." When people say I, I, I'm reddish, you know. Eldridge's eyes got this big (gesture) when he saw long guns on the front porch, you know, not only in terms of self-defense, which we were clear on, but also to hunt our food. We didn't sensationalize, that's how we got the rabbit--that's how we got the meat on the table, simple as that. We eat squirrel too, you know--and possum, and coon [raccoon], yes we do, along with deer. And--but Eldridge was just fascinated, and women had guns in, in their bags, oh, yes. But, see, Lowndes County--parts, parts of Lowndes County have a history of militancy going way back during the sharecropper days, you know, when you still had an overseer to come out and see what you're doing. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, whether or not you're picking the, the, the fustian of the cotton, or whatever, and if the overseer had a long gun across his horse, when he came back the next day, the workers, the field hands had they shotguns in they bibs. I mean, you know, Alabama Negroes are interesting, and not that others are not, but because Alabama--see, I--that's why I get carried away (laughter) because Alabama had a multifaceted economy. Like in Mississippi, all they did was agrarian stuff, while in Alabama we had CIO [Congress of Industrial Organizations; American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)] workers, industrial workers outta Birmingham [Alabama], in Mobile [Alabama] we had dock workers, you know, on the ships, familiar with the dock workers' union, the international longshoremen [International Longshore and Warehouse Union], and--as well as agrarian, and so you have a different kind of mindset. One time some folks says, "It's not that we didn't wanna go somewhere else in the South because we thought the white folks were more racist. We stayed in Alabama 'cause we knew the Negroes were more dangerous in terms of self-defense." So, anyway, that's on the Kennedy brothers--I digressed a little bit. Story_ID: 565694 Speaker 1: So, you go back to school [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University; Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 2: I go back to school. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I try to be a cheerleader, I can't do it--I don't have enough stamina, the breath, and then all of what I've talked about--the, the movement's going on, we got out own movement going on in Tuskegee [Alabama], the march from Selma to Montgomery [Selma to Montgomery March], the march from Tuskegee to Montgomery, all of that happens, I'm elected student body president, I'm still making good grades, and I decide I'm going to go to graduate school, and the students wanted to elect me president again, student body president, but I couldn't because you had to be in undergraduate school and was--we had set that already up in the constitution. But it didn't say anything about the vice president, so the students elected me vice president of student government, and then I left. SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] wanted me to join it full time 'cause I was very close to SNCC, I adored SNCC women--they had a lot of spunk. Muriel Tillinghast, Fay Bellamy [Fay Bellamy Powell], Ruby Doris [Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson], I can just name 'em, they--Gwen Robinson [Gwendolyn Zoharah Simmons]--they had a lot of spunk. But, I couldn't tolerate the possibility of being poor, okay? And my folks didn't send me to school to make seventy-five dollars a week, I mean that just was an anathema to me, and I could not be in a setting where if I went to the bathroom there was no toilet paper, that would--I mean that would just be the pits. So I told 'em I could not join, but what I would do, I would write--help write proposals, and somehow I got Field's Foundation [Field Foundation of New York, New York, New York], Leslie Dunbar, we had a proposal for the southern student human relations council [Southern Student Human Relations Project]. Black power had been espoused or, or, or bellowed, if you will, which is not original. Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] talked about black power in Harlem [New York, New York], I think it--was it Richard Wright talked about black power in, in, in Harlem in the '40s [1940s] before he went to Paris [France], and--but anyway, it had a new currency, it was bellowed, you know, coming from Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and Mukasa Willie Ricks [Willie Ricks; Mukasa Dada]. Story_ID: 565695 Speaker 1: And I had written a piece called 'Pro-Black, Not Anti-White' [Gwendolyn Patton Woods] and it was published in some university publication, you know, national, state universities, or something, and somebody got a, got ahold of it and they thought that I would be a good organizer for the South to talk about black power from a positive point of view, and they hired me, and then of course I wrote a--re- sub- sub-wrote the proposal to hire SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] folks as consultants, provide transportation for them to fly here and there to be on panels, and so forth, but I lived with SNCC people. And I had a SNCC boyfriend, and I also had my home boyfriend [Jerry Woods], you know, whom I later married, but he was in, in Alabama. But anyway--and I had a job [with the Southern Student Human Relations Project], and I wore leather clothes, you know, leather was in then, miniskirts, and we were living in a dormitory, which I could not abide. We were living in, in a, in a--not a dormitory, dormitory like setting--a collective. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, the Mennonites had donated us this house and all, on Houston Street, and they had been living like that for years. Well, I didn't go to college--I didn't stay in the dormitory in college [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I lived in a trailer which was like, you know, privacy and all. I, I tried to abide that, I couldn't abide it, next thing I know we had apartments, you know, which, you know--okay. My first roommate was--roommate was Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]. Never had a relationship with Stokely, Stokely and I were good friends, we were never lovers, and I never knew who set up who stayed with whom, but I figured because I did a lot of reading and Stokely did a lot of traveling, and I'm a great storyteller, that I would read and then tell story--tell the story to Stokely of the facts or the history, like a one on one tutoring session. Well, I bought all of the furniture-- Speaker 2: And where, where was this now? Speaker 1: This is in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Okay, so you moved--this was in 1966? Speaker 1: Yeah, 1966. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I bought all the furniture, bought all--you know, the--you know, the whatever--the necessities for a home-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --apartment. We had a refrigerator, and I told Stokely to get us a stove. I bought the towels, the sheets, you understand--everything--and I asked Stokely to find us a stove. Well, Stokely came home with a two eye hot plate. I like to have died. I said this urban New York [New York] ghetto child. I packed up everything, left him one pot, one pan, one bowl, one plate, one knife, one fork, one set of sheets, whatever, and packed up everything and moved to another apartment. He never--he--I have--he, he teased me until the day he died, I have wonderful pictures with him. He said, "Gwen Patton [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], you're the only woman I know who left me and we weren't even going together" (laughter). Story_ID: 565696 Speaker 1: You know, I, I missed the part about you leaving Alabama (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Southern-- Speaker 1: --to go to, to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Southern--okay, Southern Student Human Relations Project-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was based in Atlanta, and so instead of going to SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], I went there 'cause that, that gave me a sal- salary, and plus some freedom where I can get monies to help some of--SNCC people. Speaker 1: Who was it--who told you that you wouldn't be able to get a job in, in, in Alabama? Speaker 2: Oh, going back, yeah, yeah, that's--that--okay, we're back at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and I think it must be--it's either '65 [1965] or '66 [1966]. There'd been an ongoing struggle in Tuskegee [Alabama] around the public schools. Not only were we the student scholar-activists battling the white folks, we were battling the educated elite, and see, the public high school--the all-white public high school, was downtown. Well, you know what black folks lived downtown--poor and working class so they can what? Walk-- Speaker 1: Walk. Speaker 2: --to the places of where they did their, their labor. So we had to battle that, you know, 'cause, 'cause the black elite wanted all of their children to go to the white folks' school who lived way out in their own little enclaves, you know, rich, highfalutin, you know, had to be transported all way--you know, when these young little black kids, working-class, poor black kids could walk to the school, it would have been a neighborhood school for them. So, anyway, that battle was going on and on and on and on. And meanwhile, the white folks had organized Macon Academy [Tuskegee, Alabama], which is the all--the, the, the all-white private school--taking public school money now, in a county [Macon County, Alabama] that's 88 percent black, with a high influx of professional tax paying folks. See, things like--don't come to me about nothing, you know, I mean if you can't get the depth of that, you know, don't--please, I can't deal with surface stuff. So anyway, we're picketing Macon Academy on these principles, you know, not because we think they're the--I don't give a shit. They can have their own white school, I could care less, but you're not gonna use taxpayers' money in an 88 percent bla- and I told this as much to Wallace [George Wallace], he was the little graduation speaker, so that had to be in '66 [1966], May '66 [1966]. He was a short man. And he turned around and looked at me 'cause I had--I, I was already on, on whatever, you know, a sovereignty commission and all that. Little B pointed his finger at me: "Little girl, you'll never get a job in Alabama." He scared me, it did frighten me, it did frighten me. And so I said, "Well, I better get the hell out of Alabama." And I went on to Atlanta. Story_ID: 565697 Speaker 1: That was in nineteen six--okay, 1967-- Speaker 2: Right, still working with Southern Human Relations Con- Project [Southern Student Human Relations Project], trying to explain that black power does not mean we're gonna get your mama, that black power is simply an affirmation of black humanity. But we had more schools in the North who wanted me to come and talk, and have these little small workshops and discussions than schools in the South. So, I decided that we needed to have a black power conference in the South because there was still not a, a, a united concept around--within the black community, movement community--what black power meant. Now, I had worked in Lowndes County [Alabama], I worked in the Benton community of Lowndes County [Benton, Alabama] so--but we needed to have some sense--there was this whole thrust towards nationalism, this black power which I would never accept, because it, it dis- it dismisses the real class question within the black community, I've experienced that at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. You gonna tell me now all of us gonna hang together when I know some black folks don't like other black folks based on economic status? Oh, no, no, no, we've got to come to--no, we've got to have a class analysis of the black community as well. And I was of that ilk, I was of that school of thought. And then there were others who were just black folks, everything is super, you know, but I knew some black jivers, you know, some black--but, but the word was being called lumpenproletariat, but hustlers, you know? And, and folks who don't ever wanna work? Come on, let--we're gonna have to be real on this. So I decided we're gonna have a black power conference, and that it should be held at Tuskegee, this was the first black power conference in the country. It was not in Newark [New Jersey] where the little black capitalists, and Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] and those folks took it on. Story_ID: 565698 Speaker 1: And my [maternal] grandmamma, Mommy [Juanita Foster Washington], okay? Her home had become a refuge for black--or it could be white, too--draftees who were gonna escape to Canada. I had hooked up the whole apparatus, they'd stay over at Mommy's, either they'll take the bus to Atlanta [Georgia], or if I could work it out, they'll get a plane ticket in Montgomery [Alabama] and they can fly, you know, from Montgomery to Atlanta to Canada. And I was taking--Leon Ellerby [ph.] was his name, to, to layover at Mommy's before going up to Canada, and there was this strange car accident. And the car--I never saw it, but my relatives said the car split in half. What do you call that? Axle rod; split right down the middle, okay? And so the car imploded, and as a consequence, my whole left side, you know, from face all the way down. And I thought I saw death, I saw stars and all of that, and I don't ever remember how to get to the--how I got in the hospital. And then there--it was a compound fracture. But I've never lamented it because there were people who were killed, you know, and I was physically wounded, we have a lot of folks who were mentally wounded, what we call walking wounded, and it took three years for this to get well. And I was in the black hospital, at John Andrew's at Tuskegee [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama], and Dr. Hume [John F. Hume]--bless his heart, has since passed--hated me, absolutely hated me. Not only was he the educated elite, he was also high yellow, so he really thought he was big stuff, okay? And hated me--not just me personally, but we--Tuskegee [Alabama] had, had marked itself as the model community, 87 percent black, and you ain't even got a black city councilman. You crazy. See, things like that don't make sense to me--a model community. See, these would be the struggles I would have over there, just based on logic. 'Cause they would send for me, you know, they knew about my granddaddy [Patton's paternal grandfather, Samuel Patton, Sr.] and all of that. Eighty-seven percent black, and you ain't even got a black sheriff. What, what are you talking about? You're crazy, I don't even wanna talk to you. Y'all need to go be committed. You need to go get papers and say you're certified, then I might--can reason with you, and I'm through with that. So Dr. Hume hated me--hated me. So he told me that he had to amputate, and he said, "I would have amputated that night, but you have to write a permission." And so I said, "Well, have you talked to any other doctors?" "That's what's wrong with you, you know you just think--you know, I'm the doctor!" I say, "But this is my leg." So I say, "You come back to- and talk to me in a minute." And I called my grandmother, my grandmamma, Mommy, called my other grandmamma [Mary Patton] who's very much like me in personality. I got both their personalities. They called my cousin Carnell [ph.], and he comes up and gets me out of that hospital. I AWOLed [Absent Without Official Leave] the hospital, leave the piece of paper right there. And here I am, my leg's stinking, it's sore, it's pitiful. And I say, now, what am I gonna do? Because I knew they were gonna amputate it--not whether it needed to be amputated or not, I just felt that the internal motivation, the drive, the hatred, was so deep that they would do it for spite. So I say, well, I guess I gotta call in my ducks now. Story_ID: 565699 Speaker 1: So, I called Patina Abdecker [ph.]. I remember the doctors for human rights committee [Medical Committee for Human Rights] who came in from, many from New York [New York], during the Selma to Montgomery March when we had the, the extravaganza, and I said, let me call them. And I called them, they sent me a ticket the next day, and I flew up to New York to Dr. Feldstein [ph.]--he was an internist, and then he told me about Dr. Herman Robbins, who was an orthopedic specialist. You say you're from New York? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. He was chief of staff at the hospital for bone and joint disease [Hospital for Joint Diseases; NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital], okay, right over--across from Mount Morris Park [New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And he looked at me, he say, "Lord have mercy," he say, "your leg gonna fall off." He say, "I need to put you in the hospital right now." I say, "Oh, no, you can't do it right now." It was in June, I'll never forget it. So, I broke the leg in February, and so now, it's the end of June--oh, in the middle of June, and I say, "No, I have to go back home." He say, "For what?" I say, "I got to go get my books." And I went back home, got my footlocker, packed 'em full of books, and just nighties, you know, and a couple of--pair of slacks or something, and I went up there and he put me in the hospital about the middle of June, 'cause I was there for 4th of July, '67 [1967], and I didn't get outta that hospital until October. And so, the hospital became my home, and I organized the hospital, I organized 1199 [SEIU Healthcare 1199] up in there and, and, and then about after--and, and I learned how to play poker up in here, went down on the floor, I got all of the interns away from me, the only thing they could do was to play chess because they came and told me that they wanted to take--I was on a ward, I was a welfare patient, you know, I didn't have no insurance, and they was talking about taking a bone out the hip to put in the leg that they set. And see that didn't--see that--it's not logical. It's like--would you just be simple, you know, it doesn't--you don't have to be a brain surgeon, you know, or a rocket scientist. Why would the Lord put the hip bone in the hip, and you're gonna take it out the hip and put it in the leg? If the Lord wanted the hip bone to be in the leg, he would have done that in the first place. Now, let's not talk no more on this--I'm through. And I want you to find out how all these interns around me and residents--. I told Herman, my doctor, "Don't you send no more--don't send them no more again, ever." And I said, "Now, pretend I am Mrs. Happy Rockefeller. Now, let's, let's all sit down and go (hums). What would you do for her?" And they huffed outta there, "I ain't--can't do nothing with her." Story_ID: 565700 Speaker 1: And I told Herm- and so when Dr. Robbins [Herman Robbins]--I called--we had become real good friends, he pierced my ears, gave me my first pair of gold earrings--real gold--don't, don't send me no cheap nothing. And when Herman--Dr. Robbins came, he said, "Well, Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], there is--." I said, "No, we're not gonna discuss that. Now, you are supposed to--you're chief doctor, right? Chief doc, right? It seems to me if there's an eye bank, ear bank, there ought to be a bone bank, and just logic--just be simple." And sure enough, there is, it's owned by the [U.S.] Navy, it's in Bethesda, Maryland [National Naval Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center]. I say, "Well, we have to get some bone." And the doctor said, "Well, Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], I've already went that route 'cause if--that's why I came back with the hip bone. And the bone is being--it's, it's, it's allocated, it has priority for the Vietnam [Vietnam War] casualties." Oh, I'm through, now--I'm through. I'm already in the anti-war movement, I'm already in the--oh, I'm through--called all my troops, had a press conference outside that hospital, get this bone from the, from the Navy, I'm a casualty of the racist war and the freedom struggle. You hear me? Have a rally at Mount Morris Park [New York, New York], had my room, had my--I was in the war--had my bed moved over to the window, and had a rally over there at Mount Morris Park: "Gwen Patton needs bone!" (Laughter) They say, "Oh, what we gonna do with her?" (Laughter) You gotta have humor in this thing called life. Honey, they, they let me outta the hospital [Hospital for Joint Diseases; NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital, New York, New York], I got on a train, went to Bethesda to the Navy hospital, went through an admissions--through, you know, emergency admissions, sat down, they said, (laughter) "Ma'am, what are you doing in here? Are you--? We know you're not in the Navy." I said, "I need some bone, and y'all got it. Now, what do I need to do to get some of it?" And they were so stunned, and Herman was so stunned. I got back on the train, went back up to New York [New York], and I had the names of folks I talked to, they were underlings, you know, bureaucrats, functionaries. And I don't know what happened, but I got the bone, two jars of it, looks like cornmeal, just crushed up, and then they mesh it. And then I prayed hard that the bone would take 'cause, you know, your kidneys--you know--and you, you get kidneys, and if it doesn't--if your system cannot take it, you know, then you have to throw it out, so I prayed, and the Lord made it fit. That's how I got this leg, I'm walking on my own two feet. And as soon as I walked on my own two feet, I came to Tuskegee [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama] and went to Dr. Hume [John F. Hume] and said, "Now, you don't have faith in yourself, and you allow hatred to control you." And I said, "I will accept your apology." And we went to have pancakes together. Story_ID: 565715 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, and Scott Stearns is the videographer, and this is a continuation of your interview. Today is September 5th, 2007. State your name for us again. Speaker 2: Gwendolyn Marie Patton [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton]. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 565716 Speaker 1: Let's start by talking about your--you had just finished actually telling us about your accident, and all the things that you went through after the accident, so let's pick up there. Speaker 2: If you don't mind, I'd like to go back to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--the Selma to Montgomery voting rights march [Selma to Montgomery March] had--was concluded, was a tremendous success in spite of all of the struggles that students went through at Tuskegee, but we persevered and we won the day, as well as joined with the students from Alabama State University [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], and that was March, 1965. And that school term ended pretty much on a even keel; students had gotten their dignity and their respect, and they were treated not like children anymore, they were treated like really young adults who were gonna make a change in this world, and definitely were gonna have an impact. Well, when September came, my lord, I was student body president, all hell broke loose. The students really felt emboldened after that spring 1965 movement--the height of the movement, and so everything broke lose; the guys burned down the barracks as unfit dormitories, the football players went on strike because the insurances were not up to snuff, the students who were on financial aid had held the financial aid officer hostage in his office, would not let him out of his office, there was--there were complaints about the food, and I mean--. And here I was student body president with this tremendous responsibility, and trying to deal with all of the ills. And so we worked them out, students were not expelled, a new dormitory was built, and they all worked out, and we were pretty much going about campus life in a very organized fashion. We were still doing movement work, you know, going on picket lines every hour on the hour, you know, downtown to press for jobs, and getting people registered to vote, and citizenship schools, and so it was like--it was routine. Movement work and class work complimented each other. Story_ID: 565717 Speaker 1: And then we had the Christmas holiday, and when we returned on January 3rd, 1966--I'll never forget it as long as I live--all of the movement people got together, some of the student leaders got together. We had a little social to discuss what we gonna do, you know, for the--well, what we call it the spring quarter, even though it's June--spring semester, even though it's January, we were going into the spring semester. And Sammy Younge [Sammy Younge, Jr.], who was very, very active in the movement, active in the Tuskegee advancement league [Tuskegee Institute Advancement League], very close to SNCC, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, and worked closely with me in student government because Sammy was having problems with his classwork, and we had coined the phrase scholar-activist, and that you had to really be bright to be in the movement; the movement could not handle people who were not sharp, you know, you had to be smart to be a revolutionary, was like the, the, the code word. And so Sammy was going through tutorials, and I was helping him with his writing--I was an English major and all, and so I was very, very close--close to Sammy. Somehow, while we were at this--at the social, planning for the rest of the school term, we ran out of mayonnaise, and you have to have mayonnaise to go with bologna and white bread, and Sammy had this souped up VW--Volkswagen--could outrun any police car, especially in the rural, and so Sammy dispatched himself to go get the mayonnaise, I guess it was around 9, 9:30. Well, about maybe an hour passed, and Sammy had not returned. Well, I needed to go to the dorm to get my rest because I knew the next day was gonna be hectic, especially with registration. And while I was in my dorm, around midnight, I get a call from dean of students, Dr. Phillips [P. Bertrand Phillips], to tell me that Sammy had been shot and was dead, and I simply lay the phone on the, on the desk--it was in the main office in the dormitory, went back to my room, went back to sleep 'cause I knew I needed sleep 'cause I knew it was gonna be a long, hot day for that cold January, and it was. And so we had a whole series of demonstrations. We went downtown, it was just, you know, so devastating. And Sammy will forever be revered by students. And Forman, [HistoryMaker] James Forman, wrote a book, 'The First Black College Student to Die in the Liberation Struggle' [sic. 'Sammy Younge, Jr.: The First Black College Student to Die in the Liberation Movement']. And I would urge people to please read that book about the life and times, and the death--the murder--of Sammy Younge, Jr. There is a dormitory named after Sammy on the campus at Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Story_ID: 565718 Speaker 1: Fast forward, we're now, I guess, around '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], you formed a national antiwar anti-draft (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Anti-draft union, and that was important. We called it NBAWADU. While at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University; Tuskegee, Alabama], I had done a lot of discussions, we had group discussions, panel discussions, on the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War]. What did that war have to do with black people? A lot of contradictions were just on the horizon: black soldiers returning from Vietnam being unable to register to vote in Alabama; a black soldier killed in Vietnam, unable to be buried in the white cemetery. All of the plots in the black cemetery were taken, and the family decided that he should be entered in the white cemetery, that created a whole lotta controversy, so so many contradictions. And Muhammad Ali also was going through his struggles around the draft and being the heavyweight champion of the world, being stripped of his belt, and he coined the phrase that resonated with young black people, inner city as well as rural: "No Vietnamese ever called me nigger." And that had a lot of credence and--a clarion call. So we had draft counseling centers, and I was not just about opposing the war from a conscientious point of view, I was about opposing that war from a political point of view, from an imperialistic--anti-imperialistic point of view. People ought to have the right to resolve their own civil wars. I mean after all, the United States had its own war, and no outside interference, you know, in terms of what you would call official--France did not officially come and take a side, England did not officially come and take a side, so people have a right--different cultures have a right to struggle as to det- as to determine--or what we call self-determination, we were using those terms at that time. So we formed a National Black Antiwar Antidraft Union, NBAWADU, and it had a tremendous impact on the black youth in this country. Of course, you know, many refused to go to the war and went to jail, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] guys, Donald P. Stone comes to mind very clearly, he went for political reasons--he refused to go to Vietnam for political reasons, there were others who refused to go for conscientious reasons, and so that moved on. Story_ID: 565719 Speaker 1: And then there was a lot of clamor of black students across this country, particularly black students who were going to the predominantly white schools as a result of the ten year, eighteen year, fourteen year Brown versus Topeka, Kansas [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and they were having conflict. There were struggles around forming black student unions, and black student associations and, you know, and, and integrating the cultural programs and, you know, just the whole campus life, they were having struggles. But little do people know, and I wrote a piece on this, that black students at white college campuses had more freedom than black students at black college campuses [HBCUs] because the black administrators would use their blackness, if you will, to keep the black students in check, so you had struggles going on--particularly at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--going on at black campuses. So there was a need, I thought, to form the National Association of Black Students, and that was in 1969. Story_ID: 565720 Speaker 1: Before we go forward, let me ask you whether you feel that you were targeted by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] because you formed this group [National Association of Black Students]? Speaker 2: Oh, I was targeted by the FBI when I was student body president at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], you know, as far back as '64 [1964], '65 [1965], and I have the FOIA--FOIPA [Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts] papers from the FBI and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] to, to give it--to prove it. But I've always been targeted, and I think--and probably when I was a teenager, you know, in Montgomery [Alabama], working with the movement at age fourteen, fifteen, sixteen. I've always been what they call, quote unquote, the radical, and at the same time I always carried myself ladylike, so it always seemed like a disconnect to the powers to be. And they would go and interview my daddy [C. Robert Patton, Sr.] or my [maternal] grandmother [Juanita Foster Washington], thinking that they will have some kind of--put some pressure on me to be whatever they thought was a lady, but my family supported me wholeheartedly, so they always confounded the FBI and, and the CIA. And many, what you would call, quote unquote, upstanding white people in the community, who considered themselves liberals, even though they were not: "Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], why--you know you come from this kind of family and you're, you're smart and you--." And I kept saying, "You know, freedom is the very essence of my life." Story_ID: 565721 Speaker 1: In 1972, you go to Antioch University [Antioch College; Antioch University]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, interesting. I had known about Antioch for some time, and I had worked out an arrangement with--formed the National Association of Black Students, it really takes hold, becomes very, very popular in the country, I'm all over the country giving speeches, pulling together black student unions, pulling them together in a consortium. Meanwhile, I bought, bought a home. You know, that--at that time, we lived in collectives--a huge home. I did not know that the home was owned initially, by this man called Valeo [Francis R. Valeo], and Valeo was a secretary to the Senate, and so--but I didn't know I--the bank--you know, I got, I got the money, I was married at the time [to Jerry Woods], and we got the mortgage, and there it was. And, again, I know that really hit a high point with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], here I am buying this home, you know, it was a lovely home. And--so NABS is going--we call that NABS--and we needed work study students, so I worked out a deal with several colleges, including Antioch, that their students could do internships, working at the NABS headquarters in Washington, D.C., and I considered that just as important as the kids going abroad to study, you know, for them to work, in communities--based movements, to work with their peers, and to do the kind of research--we had a, a newspaper, editorial, photographers, and all of that, and so that's how I knew Antioch, and--years back. And then I decided that I would go to Antioch. Antioch was, was extremely progressive, and they were very, very sincere about diversity, at that time, we called it racial composition--at that time--and a lot of kids--'cause Antioch is extremely expensive. A lot of students, young people particularly from the inner city like New York [New York], could not come to Yellow Springs [Ohio], plus they didn't particularly wanna come to this kind of school, like they didn't wanna come to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] because it's so isolated. So Antioch, and the white kids there, decided well, if Mohammed can't come to the mountain, we'll take the mountain to Mohammed. So, we set up schools in Washington, D.C., inner city, it was a graduate school as well as an undergraduate school. We set up a school in Vermont for in the, in the rural--you know, up at Putney [Vermont], we set up a school for, for whites basically, 'cause Vermont is almost 99 percent white. Then we set up a school in Texas in Crystal [ph.], for the Latinos and the Latinas--they don't prefer the word, Hispanics, not the progressives. And so we had all these schools. So, I decided to enroll in graduate school in Washington, D.C. because that's--was where NABS was headquarters, and I earned my master's in education as well as my master's in the art of teaching, and I worked with Local 800, which is kind of like an arm to COPE, Committee On Political Education, my thesis was on the Taft-Hartley Act [Labor Management Relations Act of 1947]. Story_ID: 565722 Speaker 1: You were talking about Antioch [Antioch College; Antioch University], and that you got your master's [degree] there. Okay, and continue (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was working with the labor unions, the--mainly Local 800, which is an affiliate of COPE, Committee On Political Education, for union workers and, and I thought about unionizing domestic workers coming from the South, you know, maids and housekeepers and so forth. And had a workshop, was able to find out who--the domestic workers because they have to register, and to get a nice targeted group, and convince Local 800 to get on with whatever; the beverage folks, or whatever the unions, you know, housekeeping unions or whatever, to pull in the domestic workers. And I never know--I never knew what came out of that. I know we had a tremendous workshop, mainly women--in fact, they were all women--were very enthusiastic about being unionized and, and they learned a lot about bargaining and negotiations, and, you know, to make certain that they were getting their benefits--even if they weren't unions--how to negotiate with their one on one employers, or how to negotiate with a hiring hall, you know, 'cause, you know, maids, too, have a--like a hiring hall like day laborers? You know, what they would call people. And I had some understanding of that coming from the South where, even at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], where we had students on the five year plan, they had to work an extra year, and sometimes they would sign up with the--some kind of outfit or firm in New York [New York], to go do live in maid work, or day work. So, I thought that that should be done, at least to, to enlighten these ladies, normally in their twenties and thirties. Speaker 1: Okay. You said the five year plan. Tell me a little more about that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Tuskegee, if you had financial need--and this might be before, when we had financial aid, you know, back in the '40s [1940s]? You can enroll in Tuskegee for five years instead of the normal four years, and a full year, though you don't work straight out a full year, but within that, within that formula, you're working a full year, and making money so that you could pay for your room and board and your tuition and the like. And that's how I knew about domestic workers, you know, going to New York, mainly, but also to Washington, D.C. to earn money so they could pay their fees at Tuskegee Institute. So that's always had an impact on me, plus, going all the way back to the Montgomery Bus Boycott, you know, the bulk of the walkers were maids, housekeepers and nannies, and of course yardmen, black men were the yardmen, but the bulk were, were women--black women. Story_ID: 565723 Speaker 1: Now, all of this took place in Washington, D.C. I think we missed a year that you left Alabama. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Well, I left Alabama to see about my foot, okay? 'Cause they wanted, they wanted to amputate my foot in Alabama [at the John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Right, you went to New York [to the Hospital for Joint Diseases; NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: I went to New York [New York]. Now, I left D.C. NABS was just flourishing, and there was, there was this white businessman named J. Patrick Rooney, who owned an insurance company, the Golden Rule-- Speaker 1: This is in D.C.? Speaker 2: Well, I met him at various conferences and, and he was impressed with NABS, National Association of Black Students. I was interested in, in students becoming--the association becoming independent. You know, though I wrote proposals and we got some proposals, it was hard as a dickens to receive proposals because NABS, for some reason, was seen, was seen as extremely progressive. There was another student movement called the students of black unity, SOBU [Student Organization for Black Unity], and they were very nationalist in their politics and, you know, culture--black culture and, you know, blackness, black is beautiful, and all of that, which I concurred with, but I saw race as one positive, as well as an inhibitor because of racism in this country, but I also saw class, and SOBU did not see a class analysis. Well, coming all the way back from Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] where poor, working-class kids swam in the Negro pool on Monday and Wednesdays, and bougie, middle-class professional kids swam in that same Negro pool on Tuesdays and Thursdays. So, I saw the inherent class distinction within the race, and I was not gonna let that go unabated. And so, seeing class and race with the same lens, particularly by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], and some black nationalists, was just too far out, so it was hard as a dickens to get grants because of that, that, that analysis. So I was interested in economic development and pulled together Students Economic Development Corporation, called SEDCO [ph.], and I worked out writers with a Queens booking agency out of New York, that--where black artists appeared, you know, 'cause they had the stable of black artists as well as with Stax Records. I can't think of--in Memphis, Tennessee--that if black student unions, or a black college [HBCU], invited those entertainers, those performers, that NABS was gonna get 5 percent of the, of the purse, oh yes. And we had a writer, and so--and Patrick Rooney, president and CEO of Golden Rule Insurance Company, was just fascinated (laughter), and, we're gonna do the posters, you know, we're gonna do the buttons, we're gonna do the t-shirts, you know, we're talking about 1969, 1970, 1971. We had a speakers bureau, and the, and the fee in 1970, the cheapest you could get a NABS speaker was five hundred dollars plus expenses. And depending on who you were asking for, like Dr. Nathan Hare [HistoryMaker Nathan Hare] that was two thousand. I'm talking 'bout 1970, I've always thought in those kinds of terms, but it was so that black students can be independent and can, can underwrite their own programs, their own struggles, you know, their own strategies. I was even looking at how we can get an endowment for progressive professors, you know. Story_ID: 565724 Speaker 1: Patrick [J. Patrick Rooney] hired me to work for him, he set up a consulting company, and of course he was interested in, again, the racial composition of private businesses--corporations, which we call--which we now use the term, diversity. And so we had this incredible--we would invite black students majoring in business, I was concerned with that, particularly those who were getting the M.B.A. 'cause I was concerned philosophically of this whole notion (air quotes) maximization of profits by any means necessary, which was always--which is built-in exploitation. And I was concerned that young black--mainly men at that time, in the business programs, were gonna really lose their soul, you know, by trying to become a carbon copy white businessman, you know, the ruthlessness. You know I studied Rockefeller [John D. Rockefeller], I mean he was a stone baron--a robber baron, all of 'em--I mean the Mellons, all of 'em. And so I had a, an interest in that. Pat had an interest because he wanted to see the workplace, Corporate America, diversified by race, and we would charge these extraordinary registration fees, like a thousand dollars, for corporations to become a part, and they would have to pay for a--the scholarship for a black student to attend, right? And so we made tons of money, and of course NABS [National Association of Black Students] got a percentage of that money, you know, since I was the founder of NABS, I was no longer the coordinator--they--all the kids were running that in Washington [D.C.], I was in a place called Lawrenceville, Illinois. Well, we made substantial money, and the corporations would send their vice president for personnel, and I was not deceived, I knew it was nothing but a high level--what do you call--recruitment, but at the same time I had a, a, a--we did a, a slide presentation called A Race to Revolution [ph.] that sensitized white Corporate America about the struggle, and which included all of the rebellions and what they call the riots and so forth. To sensitize them, we played a game called Star Power [ph.], and I don't wanna get into the ran- the details of that, but what happens, the rules are then set by whoever is the winner. You know, you have three different groups, the haves, the middles and the have nots, and we always stacked it that the haves would win, and when the haves won, they got to set the rules; they locked out everybody else and went to lunch. I mean just to show--and then we would talk about that. What does power mean to you? How do you use power? And so it was something that I didn't find a contradiction with. And we also had--then I saw a lot of black students going into journalism, and that worried me. Now, I'm talking about '71 [1971], '72 [1972] now, and that worried me, you know. Is, is black really beautiful? Essence, I think, had come out, but they were going into Red Circle magazines and, you know, various mainstream type magazines. So I worked with the Magazine Publishers Association [MPA - The Association of Magazine Media], which is in New York [New York] on Lexington Avenue, downtown, and I had these conferences with publishers of magazines, and students, black students majoring in journalism, you know, again, to sensitize, you know, to make certain that--, "Now, you're all going up there, you know, you broke through this little ceiling here, you're getting ready to take a leap, but don't lose your soul, you know, write about the black experience, you know. Don't lose your color." So, that was very, very successful, but at this time now--we're talking about '72 [1972], '73 [1973], around this time, COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program] was running wild. J. Edgar Hoover had lost his brain. I don't--you know, I, I don't think he ever had a mind, from my point of view, and--so the movement--and I was being misunderstood: "Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton] meeting with, with white Corporate America, and these black kids majoring in business." And you had a whole--a substantial faction in the black movement who just had total disdain for that. You know, they weren't into what I considered, to some extent, a nihilistic way of looking at, at, at themselves. You know, you gotta function in this world, you know, and how you plan on doing that? You know. And, so COINTELPRO is just wreaking havoc, and everything is falling apart, you know, mainly from provocateurs who were planted inside the, the movement, and then some, of their own volition, you know, so frustrated, that if they weren't paid by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], they should have been paid because they were very disruptive. And so you--now we're about '78 [1978], '77 [1977], '76 [1976], everything has just really fallen apart, so I decide--I went to college [Antioch College; Antioch University], I got a master's [degree], and I went to Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York] to teach. And my dear friend was the dean of School of Contemporary Studies, Carlos Russell, from Brooklyn, New York, and he was a Panamanian, and he helped me get a--even a broader perspective on the black diaspora. Story_ID: 565725 Speaker 1: So, in '73 [1973], you leave D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and go and teach at Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York]. What did you teach at Brooklyn College? Speaker 2: At the School of Contemporary Studies, which was a progressive school, I knew some of the faculty members from the movement, such as Dr. Colin Greer who was over--and still is--over at the New World Foundation, so I had connections with him through writing proposals. And there was Robert Greenblatt, who was very much involved in the antiwar movement back in the '60s [1960s], and there were others, and particularly Carlos [Carlos Russell], who was the dean of the, of the college, and he's from Panama as I stated, and a tremendous worldview--somewhat nationalist in orientation, but a--just a fantastic, delightful person with so much humor and pizazz, and was extremely creative--a poet and a playwright. And so that was a, a, a really nice experience at Brooklyn College. I taught communication skills. It was a school mainly for mature students. Even though it was a day college, we also had night classes, and Carlos asked me if I would be the director of the night school, which I was, which was equivalent to being dean of the night college. And taught debate, you know, how to argue, the structure of debate, taught logic, you know, syllogisms and all of that, taught political rhetoric where we would look at Church Winston--Sir Winston Churchill's speeches and analyze it as, as political rhetoric. It was just a fabulous experience. I taught independent studies where the students would write on independent--they have, they have seven sources, including a primary source that they could get at, which meant that they had to go to the archives to get a leaflet or something. I remember one student wrote on Sacco and Vanzetti [Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti], the two Italian militants, I think they were labeled as--oh, I can't think of how they labeled them--anarchists, okay. And--double check, go to the archives to see, you know, what was there and--on that. And so it was just very, very delightful. And then I became director of communication skills, and--during the summer. And then I met this wonderful woman name Edith Chauvet [ph.]. She, she, she was director of communication skills during the year, and I was during the summer, and did a lot of discussion about testing and--'cause that was the rage in New York [New York], and I found that a lot of black people were opposed to testing and I was not, and that created a real problem. I am not opposed to the concept of testing; I wrote many articles about this in New York and then when I came back home to Montgomery [Alabama]. And we shouldn't confuse the concept of testing with the items on a test; that is where your criticism is if they are culturally based, or whatever, but testing is a necessary tool for a teacher. If I don't test my students, how am I gonna determine instruction, you know, and if I don't have great expectations of my students, then my instruction inevitably will be below the level of development of my students, and so--but that created a lot of consternation and I wrote this article called 'A Matter of Mind' [ph.] and--which had a lot of currency during the time. But yes, I believe in testing. Story_ID: 565726 Speaker 1: And of course I come home every year; my family reunion on my mother's [Jeanetta Bolden Patton] side meets annually, and at this taping, we've just had our seventy-eighth family reunion in Baltimore, Maryland--2007. Count--we started in 1929, so whatever t- you know, to 2007, that's--and we never missed a year--never, never. So I was back and forth coming home. The legislature had elected--the--well, the electorate had placed black legislator--black people into the legislature; I was excited about that. And while I was in New York [New York], I was looking at 'The Today Show' ['Today'], and there I saw Johnny Ford, black as coal, beautiful, structured face--almost looks like a carving--with his white wife [Frances Rainer] who was southern, who was mayor of Tuskegee [Alabama]. So I say, oh, lord, we in the land of Canaan, and I said, well, let me go home and see what's going on down there. And before I could do that, Dr. Luther Foster [Luther Foster, Jr.], who was my--president at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], where we had had many tete a tetes, and I told him the best thing he would do with me was to play chess, and not to try to tell me to--not to organize students. He called and asked if I would work on the centennial campaign for Tuskegee Institute, that he felt that nobody from the turbulent '60s [1960s] would be able to get a, a turn up from that class except for someone like me, and of course I was delighted to do so, and most importantly, to be with my grandparents; they were in the autumn of their life, and Mommy--that's my grandmother on my mother's side-- Speaker 2: And what was her real name? Speaker 1: Her name was Juanita Foster Bolden Washington [Juanita Foster Washington], she had two husbands and--the love of my life. And then my daddy's parents, Mr. and Mr. Sam [Samuel Patton, Sr.] and Mary Jane Patton [Mary Patton]--and I call my grandmother, Ma Dear, and called my granddaddy, Granddaddy, and he called me, Granddaughter. And we had a very special relationship. So, I--here I was, wanting to come home, see the lay of the land, what has freedom wrought for my people in my hometown, Montgomery [Alabama], to be with my grandparents in the autumn of their life, and to curry, curry them around, scurry about, and so forth, and, and to--probably to rest 'cause I was tired. Story_ID: 565727 Speaker 1: Let me ask you. You, you said that you got married. When did you get married? Speaker 2: Oh, my lord. Sometime in the '60s [1960s]. My husband--ex-husband (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name? Speaker 2: Jerry Woods. He's from Honduras; well, he's really from Belize, the little small island--he would say seven miles long and three miles wide-- Speaker 1: You said Jerry? Speaker 2: Jerry Woods. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I was kidnapped. We were out in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] visiting my relatives, and we had been out to Santa Fe, New Mexico, I had a speaking engagement, and on our way to the airport, Jerry stopped at the marriage building, okay? We were in a taxi, and I said to myself, what the heck? Why not? I've been with him since I was eighteen, and I was, I guess, about twenty-six, twenty-seven, and I said, why not? A disastrous decision. And I left him during my journey, and he divorced me on abandonment, which was okay with me; as long as I didn't have to pay a dime, it was okay with me. Story_ID: 565728 Speaker 1: So, 1977, you return to Montgomery [Alabama] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Montgomery. And I come home with a leaking bust, fluid was coming out of, out of the nipple, I had had it tested, but whatever you call a--what do you call a--mes- or what do you call--mammogram, and aspirated while I was in New York [New York], got my medical papers, and my doctors at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital [New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] said, "When you--soon as you settle in Montgomery, go to a doctor and find out why your bust is leaking." And I learned--and then I'm working for, for Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], my bust is leaking, I make a prophylactic to go in my bra to keep it from staining my clothes, and I listen to some wives' tales, and one was to get a brick, put it in the oven or put it on fire and get it super, super, super hot, and then wrap it in, in a towel, and place it on your breast, and it supposedly will dry up the fluid. Well, it didn't work, so I finally went to the doctor, and I went to the doctor who went to school with me, Dr. McCorvey, he was a Tuskegee biology major when we were in school together, and he referred me to a surgeon, and indeed they found that it was malignant. And so I, I had a mastectomy and, and I had to take chemotherapy. And then I quit, because every time I would go--that's an outpatient kind of a procedure, and it was at the all-black hospital; I was so thrilled to be in this all-black hospital. We owned the hospital, the doctors were black--we had some white, very few white doctors--but I was thrilled just to be there, even though I was, you know, undergoing this thing called cancer. But I was thrilled; I went up to the psycho ward to see how they were treating the people who had nervous breakdowns, and the maternity ward, and all of that. I was just thrilled to be in, in the hospital that we owned. And--but at the outpatient clinic, all black women, all they would do would talk--they would talk about death, and--, "Why me?" And all of that, you know? And it's interesting, you know, black people live a life of hell, generally speaking, but they don't wanna die, and they talk about death a lot. White people, who wanna live forever, and I'm generalizing, do all kinds of death threatening activities like bungee diving and, you know, gonna climb up the mountain and ten below Celsius, or something, you know, it's so--so interesting. So, I told the women one day, I say, "You know what? Y'all gonna talk y'allselves to death." Story_ID: 565729 Speaker 1: In 1977--we were talking about the fact that you returned to Montgomery [Alabama], and you wrote a, a weekly column for the Montgomery Tuskegee Times, and was a educational TV host, so tell me about those experiences. Speaker 2: Well, the Montgomery Tuskegee Times was a black weekly, and my first columns, borrowing from Langston Hughes, was Jesse B. Semple. And, of course, Jesse B. Semple was a Montgomery man, and he was self taught, very sharp intellectually, though he might have spoken broken English and I wrote in black dialect. And he had a girlfriend named Q.T. Joyce [ph.]--that was my character, she was a schoolteacher. And of course there was this woman who loved him; her name was Serrita [ph.], and it didn't matter whether Jess liked her or not, Serrita had enough love for him and her together. And I would have dialogue between Dr. I.B. Black [ph.] and Dr. I.C. White [ph.], and then I had this dashing, dashing poet called Professor Dizzy Smart [ph.], and then of course I had a street character and, and I can't--Hammerhead [ph.], his name was Hammerhead. And so I took the matter of the day, whatever was the discussion in Montgomery, and at that time was testing. If you thought the teachers in New York [New York]--black teachers in New York were opposed to testing, the black teachers in Montgomery, Alabama were deadly, implacably opposed. And the AA--you know, and all of that. And I just always thought about the children, and that children have to be tested, otherwise, how are we gonna determine instruction. So, I wrote a whole series of articles using these characters, and parents loved it, and just the mainstream black community loved it, and they began to see the validity of testing so they could know where their children stand, and how they should go into the schools, and see about their kids' test scores, and not only in terms of so called standardized tests, but testing period--how the teacher may test. And if your child is on a sixth grade level and, for some reason he's not promoted, you need to find out why, because the teacher should have prepared him to handle seventh grade material and so forth. So, it was a big controversy, and people were really mad with me, especially the bourgeois, but that did not deter me at all. Then I went--got fancy and wrote 'The Epistemological Question' [ph.], a whole series of essays on that, and then 'Excellence Used to be the Standard' [ph.]. I just did a whole host, and more and more, the black middle class would get mad at me and all, but it didn't matter. Story_ID: 565730 Speaker 1: And then I had this television program. My dear childhood friend, Viola Bradford, a journalist major, and she had a TV program called 'Harambee,' and before I returned home, there were three male hosts. And she had been looking for a female, and of course she said I fit the bill, and of course that made everybody in Montgomery [Alabama] angry, you know; I'm just coming in from New York [New York] and, you know, and all of that and, you know, and, and she had to displace one of the male hosts, but fortunately, he didn't get mad with me, he got mad at Viola, so we became very good friends because he knew how to place his anger. You know, a lot of folks have displaced anger. You know, I didn't hire myself. You wanna be mad with somebody, why are you mad with me? So, anyway we, we became very best friends. His name was Stinson Holmes, and his brother was in the, in the state legislature, named Alvin Holmes, and we are very fast, fast friends. I help him with his speeches, and he picks my brain for thoughts and my assessment or my analysis about the matters of the day, and the like. So that rocked on, and I was at Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama]. I left Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--well, before you go on, could you spell the name of the television program? Speaker 1: Harambee, H-A-R-A-M-B-E-E, it's a Swahili word (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the other--what does it mean? Speaker 1: It means together. Story_ID: 565731 Speaker 1: The other thing, when we talked--when you were talking about testing and the standardized test scores, earlier you spoke of the fact that people should not be angry at the testing, but the questions that were on the testing. What was done to look at what questions are placed on these, these standardized tests? Speaker 2: Well, in New York [New York] you had what you call the Metropolitan Achievement Test, MAT, and I was working with an educational group in New York, committee on fair education, or something. And there would be an item: Juan is from Mexico, now lives in New York, and John helped Juan with his homework--so forth and so on. How should Juan feel towards John? And the correct answer was grateful, which I took--I just hit the ceiling. You know, here you are building in right now, paternalism, you know, you, you take--. So, you have to really do an item--a line item analysis. I became very close to Stone--Dr. Stone [HistoryMaker Chuck Stone], he was the advisor and the writer to Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], and he's now with the standardized achievement test, or something, out in Jersey [New Jersey]. As well as I know Stone's first name, I can't think of his first name right now, but you all can find that. He lived in New York, he's a great writer, journalist, and he was in ETS, Educational Testing Service, which was in Jersey, and he visited me in my home, and I think he was here for a speaking engagement, so I would talk to him, you know, that you need a battery of item testers, if you will, to make certain that the items are not condescending, that they're not paternalistic, and that they're not culturally biased. Another example is a, a kid looks at a picture of a man in a suit saying (waves) goodbye to his family, and the correct answer is the man is going off to work. Well, for black folks, the man is going off for where? Church, okay, in the, in the (unclear). So, you gotta be very, very particular, and critical, as you look at the items. And besides, that doesn't have anything to do with learning or reasoning anyway, you know. What does a man wearing--you know, that's not testing really with your cognitive development of problem solving, so I--you know, I'm into education, you know; I'm into all of that, and so that's what I mean by item analysis. But you gotta have a test. I mean kids have to know that two plus two equals four, you know, and if you're gonna speak English--you know, which is another thing I worked out when I was teaching at Brooklyn [Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York]. Because sometimes inner city kids, and not only black kids, but the subject verb agreement--and English is a very difficult language to learn. And I taught 'em if the subject has an S, okay? If the subject has an S, and knew what a subject was, then the verb does not: girls walk, girls are. Now, I'd use a plus minus. And if the subject does not have an S, then the verb does: the girl walks, the girl is. Doesn't even matter when you're using the verb to be, and that would be minus plus. And they can do that, you know, they go through it. So--and I believe a lot of philosophy, a lot of logic, problem solving can be done mathematically, you know, plus minus, minus plus, two minuses, two negatives in a sentence makes a plus, a minus times a minus makes a plus in terms of math, or arithmetic. So, I just try to create all kinds of methodologies to help these youngsters to learn. Story_ID: 565732 Speaker 1: In 1978, now you said you, you left and-- Speaker 2: I left Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Tuskegee. Speaker 2: Right, because I could not tolerate driving east in the morning; Tuskegee is east of Montgomery [Alabama], and driving west back home to Montgomery and the sun is setting in the West, and it would blind me, and I would be driving like, like a bomber, and even the police sometimes would wave at me and say, "There goes the Brown Bomber," 'cause I had a brown Monte Carlo [Chevrolet Monte Carlo] at the time, and I decided that I just simply could not make that trek. New York [New York] had spoiled me with the subway, and to drive forty miles to go to a job just did not make sense; just be simple. So that's when I got the job at Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], and that's when [HistoryMaker] Dr. Levi Watkins was president, and he was very, very happy that I wanted--asked for a job because he remembered me in the '60s [1960s] during the heyday of the movement, when they were having this great protest at Alabama State. I'm student body president at Tuskegee, and they were getting ready to hang him in effigy, and I stopped that--'bout maybe hundreds of students, ASU students, and I stopped that. I say, "He's not the enemy, you know; we have to have a one two punch. You know, what we do on the streets will have leverage of what he does in the suites, you know, and that needs to complement one another, so take that effigy down," and so forth. And he remembered that, 'cause it was right in front of the president's house. So, he hired me almost on the spot, and there I was concerned because they were not concerned with retention, and I was very much concerned with retention. I wrote a piece called 'Dropping Out or Being Dropped' [ph.], you know, you know, they get in but they, they fall through the, through the cracks. And I was friend to Noam Chomsky's, and I had done some book, book reviews--Alexander Astin, you know, about dropping out of college and so forth, and I was concerned about what are we doing to make certain these youngsters get their end degree. And I drew a whole bunch of circles, and squares, and arrows, and so forth--a flow chart--and Dr. Watkins was very, very impressed with that. And so he invited me to a retreat with all of his vice presidents and his deans, and some of his department chairs. Here I am, a lowly instructor; I knew I would be in for the long haul at Alabama State, and I told him, I said, "Dr. Watkins, you best be president for life, 'cause when you retire, they're gonna get rid of me." And that came to pass--talk about self-fulfilling prophecy. So, I left Alabama State in '86 [1986], but I thoroughly enjoyed teaching. I taught orientation, I had something called modules that they had never heard about. I was interested that they didn't have a standard teaching for--you know, all orientation teachers should be teaching the same thing, you know, again, I'm going back to testing, you know, study skills, you know. I always have believed in, in the epistemological question, the values, what is it--you know, what is the value? What is its worth? You know, self-esteem and all of that kind of--school song, school spirit, reading, study habits, and that we should have a standardized teaching strategy. So, that came to pass, and then I th- and anything else would be extra. And I also thought we should have a standardized test, you know? You'd have five orientation teachers, you know. What do--what are, what, what are those outcomes? What do we want the kids to achieve? And then they start talking about minimum competencies and all of that, and that just discouraged me because if you say minimum competencies, you automatically, inherently, you're gonna teach at the bottom of the barrel, you know. So, I had a lot of pulls and--at Alabama State. Story_ID: 565733 Speaker 1: So, anyway, they didn't grant me tenure [at Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama]. I was probably one of the most published writers, at least in that area--faculty members. But it didn't deter me, you know, I mean, well, what's next? So, I worked for myself. And meanwhile, I had run for delegate for Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] in 1984 when he ran as president, and the black politicians in '84 [1984] were not supporting Jesse, and especially whom they call the dean of black politics here in Montgomery, Alabama, Dr. Joe Reed [Joe L. Reed]; we have since become friends, but at that time, he was furious with me, and he told the students not to vote for me 'cause, you know, that's a--what do you call--a block vote. And the kids voted for me. I wasn't even--you know, the kids voted for me and I won; I was the only delegate out of the 2nd Congressional District, which is the district where I reside, to win, and Jesse only achieved nine delegates out of sixty-three, so that brought about a lot of, you know, popularity, and also my detractors were emboldened: "We gotta do something about this little girl." And it was interesting, because when I left Alabama back in the '60s [1960s], it was Governor Wallace [George Wallace] who said, "We gonna do something about this little girl; she'll never work--." Now, here I am with the same predicament, but it's coming from black folks. So I had to figure out how to work with that. So, I worked for myself, oh, I guess from '86 [1986] until '92 [1992]; I traveled, went to Beijing [China], went to Nairobi [Kenya], you know and, and all over here and there--all over the place. And I began to get tired. Story_ID: 565734 Speaker 1: Well tell me about the Alabama New South Coalition. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Wasn't that during that time? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. The long standing black organization is called the Alabama Democratic Conference, it formed in 1960 with me as a youth founding member, okay, in 1960, and my beloved mentor, Coach Rufus A. Lewis--. We have his collection here in the archives [at H. Councill Trenholm State Technical College; H. Councill Trenholm State Community College, Montgomery, Alabama] because when I--. Let me say--I have to kind of backtrack a little bit. When I came back home, all the elders were just so elated, so pleased, 'cause most of my friends were old folk, you know; I was--my grandparents and their peers, you know, and they had saved all their stuff, all of their stuff, and Rufus was--had, had library--librarian courses when he was at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] in the '30s [1930s], so he knew the importance of saving documents, and manuscripts, and posters, and programs, and buttons, and he was also an entrepreneur, he was a businessman. And they saved all their stuff, and when I went to go see them--I might have mentioned this because it had such an impact on me, they said, "It's about time you came home, little girl; now we can give you my stuff." I say, "What am I gonna do with all your stuff?" And I'm--of course I appreciated archival materials, but I had not even an inkling of becoming an archivist, you know, and so they just gave it to me and I took it out--my whole house was full of their stuff. And the more I began to look through it and do inventory on what I had, the more I knew I had a treasure trove that was just absolutely invaluable; I mean letters with Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] original signature on them, you know, from the MIA, Montgomery Improvement Association. So, I got all their stuff, all of the old folks are loving me to death, I'm everybody's child, 'cause they were all a part of the Alabama Democratic Conference, now headed up by Joe Reed [Joe L. Reed]. Initially, it was headed up by Rufus Lewis in Montgomery County [Alabama]; he was the--one of the founding members, now headed up by Dr. Joe Reed, and they did not support Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. Well, I was through. We have to have another organization. And from that, and a whole lot of other developments, especially with Senator Michael Figures [Michael A. Figures]--he has since gone, bless his heart--we pulled together the Alabama New South Coalition. Story_ID: 565749 Speaker 1: So in 1991, after you do all of your traveling, you're chosen as a Aspen Institute fellow. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Right. I had pulled together the GMP Consultants [Montgomery, Alabama], I was able to get a lot of contracts, particularly around education, board development for community grassroots organizations, I had pulled together the Southern Rainbow Education Project, which was very important because I was one of the few grassroots people elected as a delegate for Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] in '84 [1984]. Most of the folks were really politicos, or union people, and I knew a lot of grassroots people around the country, and so they wanted to know, how did I do that. And, of course, I wanted to share, again, learning is replication, you know, and so I shared how to pull together coalitions, how to get in with the union folks if you're coming from a union community like down in Miami, Florida, you know, how you pull these so called disparate groups together--your, your church community, your sorority if you went to that, you know, your social organizations clubs--how you do all that and build a coalition--a base around you, and then fan out and run, and I said run on a platform. Even though you're running for a delegate, what do you represent? You know, people wanna--since you're gonna have a slate, how do you disting- distinguish yourself from others who wanna be a Jesse Jackson delegate? So I did a lot of that between '84 [1984] and '88 [1988] when Jesse was gonna do his second voyage. Story_ID: 565750 Speaker 1: The Rainbow Coalition [National Rainbow Coalition; Rainbow PUSH Coalition]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was on the national board of the Rainbow Coalition, recommended by Senator Michael Figures [Michael A. Figures] whom Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] just absolutely adored and, and he was, I think astounded because he wanted Michael, and Michael says, "The best person is Gwen Patton [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], you know, she knows how to organize, she knows how to build a base, you know, grassroots people love her to death," and so--and, and mutual respect for grassroots people on my--on--for my part. And so I had all these what you would call quote unquote, contacts. And then Shirley Chisolm, the honorable late Shirley Chisolm, considered me her daughter, and I was a part of the National black--Political Conference of Black Women [sic. National Political Congress of Black Women; National Congress of Black Women], I was the one that led the charge to vote for Shirley Chisolm for vice president in 1984: "Alabama, cast nine votes for the--!" And everybody went wild 'cause Alabama was first--the white people went insane, the black politicos went insane, particularly in the Alabama delegation. Shirley took that to heart, and I had known Shirley during my organizing days for the National Association of Black Students, you know, while we were in Washington [D.C.]. And then the great sweetheart C. Delores Tucker, and so they start organizing tours, you know, to come down to Montgomery [Alabama], I would do civil rights tours--Birmingham [Alabama], Selma [Alabama], Lowndes County [Alabama], Montgomery, Tuskegee [Alabama], and then they would end up in Atlanta [Georgia]. So I was making goo gobs of money, you know, and traveling everywhere, but I was getting tired, I was really getting tired. I was spending more time on the road in my car, or in the sky in an airplane than I was spending in my little humble abode. And I'm not the strongest person, you know, physically, and I said, I need to settle down. Plus, I was paying my own insurances. And I got ill during that time and I found out that I still had a tremendous copayment that I had to pay, which was almost sometimes up to 25 to 30 percent, you know, outta my own pocket, so I was thinking about all of those kinds of things. I'm like in my late forties, early fifties--I don't know how old I am at this time--and I said, "Gwen, you gotta settle." Story_ID: 565751 Speaker 1: And I had tried to get a job, nobody would hire me, nobody would hire me because I was blackballed by black people, you know, from Huntsville [Alabama] to Mobile [Alabama]. And I know I'm a good teacher, I know I'm a good teacher, and nobody would hire me because of the politics, you know, being blackballed. So, Trenholm [H. Councill Trenholm State Technical College; H. Councill Trenholm State Community College, Montgomery, Alabama] had advertised, which I did not know anything about. Speaker 2: What is it called? Speaker 1: Trenholm, this college where I am now. The president then was Dr. Thad McClammy, and there was a new congressional representative--state representative seat opening up in Montgomery [Alabama], and everybody thought that I would really go for this position, and I had ran against Al- I had run against Alvin Holmes, my dear, dear, dear friend, in 1986, when ASU [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] would not grant me tenure. He was furious--he was my best friend, and he was furious. And I said, "Why are you so upset? I mean I don't have a job, what am I gonna do?" People offered to buy my house, I had to tell 'em, I say, "You know, my money might not be as long as yours but it's much deeper," if you got my drift, third generation educated black woman here. So--and I take everything really like water off a duck's back, and Alvin was just furious. So I called my father [C. Robert Patton, Sr.], who believes in, you protect the honor of a black woman, and he came down here. He hunted Alvin down in the streets 'til he found him, and say, "Young man, my daughter's not gonna win, why are you acting foolish like this? You know you're one of the most popular black legislators, not only in Alabama, but in this country. Now she's trying to do something--now you protect my daughter." And Alvin was so impressed by my father's relationship to me, now I'm in my late forties. "And I don't know why she wants to stay down in this godforsaken place, but as long as she wants to stay here, she knows she's gonna have help from her father." And from that day--if, if Alvin and I were best friends, we became almost symbiotic brothers and sisters. And he always said, "If I can be as much of a father to my daughter--," he only has one girl, "then I know I would have achieved." And my daddy say, "You already have, okay?" And so of course I lost, Alvin beat my socks off, right (laughter) and all. So now, what do I do? And so--I'm a very spiritual person, I'm a very religious person, and I say, well now, Lord, I'm at my wits' ends, and I know you've given me a lot of creative talent and you gone show me what to do next, and I'm just gone sit here and be cool. The house note is paid for two months, and we'll just see what happens. And then just contracts just started rolling--speaking engagements. I made one year eighty thousand dollars, that's a lot of money, okay? A lot of money. And--at least for Alabama. And--but I was tired, I was real tired. Story_ID: 565752 Speaker 1: And so the seat had opened up to add to, enhance, or to enlarge the Alabama House of Representatives, and everybody assumed that I was gonna run, I had become extremely popular now, and, and Dr. McClammy [Thad McClammy], who was president of Trenholm--H. Councill Trenholm State Technical College [H. Councill Trenholm State Community College, Montgomery, Alabama] called me in and asked me if I wanted a job, and I told him, yes, I was tired. And we talked--it was at night, evening interview, and we talked and he said I had to sign the contract that night because that was at the cycle, and to turn it in the next day, and I signed the contract, and after I signed it, I said, "Are you running for the state legislature?" And he was shocked. I couldn't be in the state legislature, half of those folks up in there are dimwits, you know, and you stay up all night, I go to bed early, even though with all my activism, I still go to bed--I go to bed with the, with the chickens and wake up with the birds. And for me to be up all night with 50 percent dimwits would've killed me dead 'cause I cannot tolerate ignorance, you know, I really can't; ignorance offends me, and especially my own. So if my own ignorance offends me, you know it would be impossible for me--oh, no. So I had no intentions. I would have run if I had no other option, but this job--it only paid me twenty thousand dollars a year, but it was for twenty-four hours a week, and I reasoned, well, that's forty thousand, I'm in Alabama, you know, I'm still gonna do my consulting work and I'm still gonna do thus--and so. And a lot of people will tell you the first time they heard the word (pronunciation) apartheid--or apartheid, they heard it from me, people tell me that right to this day. And going back to the newspaper, the Montgomery Tuskegee Times, the publisher was Reverend Al Dixon [Alvin Dixon], and I was talking, we should have an apartheid movement in Montgomery [Alabama]. I mean we had the Montgomery Bus Boycott, you know, South Africa had a Montgomery Bus Boycott in 1957, patterned after Montgomery, you know, opposing and protesting the, the bus hikes--the rate hikes in South Africa. We must have that. And he was--and then I start writing a whole bunch of series about Africa. And then he was so enamored by that--and he had six children and they all had children, and so I had to have a, a study group with them about Africa. They didn't even know the shape of the continent, you know, they didn't know what minerals and resources and stuff. So we would deal--I dealt mainly with West Africa and South Africa and all. Story_ID: 565753 Speaker 1: So, I got this job, and, again, I was teaching, I was working with mothers on welfare, and I was to encourage them for nontraditional job training which really suited me well, 'cause my granddaddy on my daddy's side [Samuel Patton, Sr.] was a contractor, if you can recall way back, and I helped with the books, and I knew something about contracting, you know, carpentry and plumbing, and I thought this would be super. And I would try to motivate especially the little women. "Girl, you ought to be a plumber, you can get in those crawl spaces." And, you know, things--and a locks- a locks- locksmith, locksmiths make a lot of money, you know. And so I did that, I bought all kinds of overalls, you know--the blue jeans for plumbing, the white for painting, the stripe for carpentry and, and all. I took 'em to all of the different little contracting sites and auto mechanic places, and so forth. I did get one to get a job cleaning bricks with acid, and I got another one to get a job doing roofs, you know, tiles--roof tiles. And so I enjoyed that. And then my dear friend, Representative John Lewis [HistoryMaker John Lewis], and another friend over in Lowndes County [Alabama], Bob Mance [Robert W. Mance, Jr.], finally got the Selma to Montgomery voting rights trail to become a historical national trail. Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] is in office, 1992, he designates it such, and here we are, and this college library [at H. Councill Trenholm State Technical College; H. Councill Trenholm State Community College, Montgomery, Alabama] sits on the designated--sits on the trail, you know, this is part of the original trail. They, they had to walk by here to get to St. Jude [City of St. Jude, Montgomery, Alabama], and Dr. McClammy [Thad McClammy], the president, and I, were on the same page, and so all of my efforts then kind of blossomed, I had all this stuff, you know, in my house. Rufus Lewis is considered the father of the voting rights movement in Montgomery, in central Alabama, I got all of his stuff. Idessa [Idessa Redden] was one of the great organizers, you know, of course I was, too, in 1965. And so it all came full circle. And Dr. McClammy asked me to--he thought what I was doing would be a museum because a lot of times people confuse a museum with an archives, and he did get elected to the state legislature, which was his plum and, and here I am. And then I had--and then, for some unfortunate reason, Dr. McClammy is no longer president, and we had a new president to come in--interim presidents, and I knew some of the interims. And they bought into setting up, you know, for me to establish an archives. But being smart, I made certain that in the chain of call--chain of protocol--that they put the archives in there to be really, you know, a permanent entity within the college, and so voila. And we're the only two year state college in the State of Alabama--we're the only two year college, I believe, in the State of Alabama, and maybe throughout the country--or one of the few--which has an archives. It's rich, I am just as happy as I can be, all of my prayers have come true, and the movement is legitimate, you know. The movement is not something that's a ragamuffin, or that's extracurricular outside your own existence. I, I lived the movement, you know, that's part of my life since I was a child. Or, as my, as my folks would say, "Since you came in the world screaming freedom," that I was born to be an activist. And so, I'd like to thank [HistoryMaker] Floyd Griffin, who also went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] with me during those turbulent years of fundamental social change in this country, for nominating me to be a HistoryMaker, I was really flattered and honored to be selected, and I can be known, from here on out, as the archivist-activist. Thank you. Story_ID: 565754 Speaker 1: Let me ask you-- Speaker 2: I thought I was through? Speaker 1: I just got a few more questions, okay? Just a few more. Speaker 2: Did you see how I tidied that up so nicely? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Just a few more questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: How do you wanna be remembered? Speaker 2: (Pause) As somebody who really, really wanted to make a change for the better in our lifetime. Story_ID: 565755 Speaker 1: And when you look back over your life, what one moment really stands out for you? You have so much that has gone on in your life, but what stands out the most in your life? Speaker 2: I do have a lot, but probably with my [maternal] grandmother, Mommy [Juanita Foster Washington]--two instances--one when she's teaching me to tat, that's making lace, and, you know, you have shuttles, and talking, no television, no radio--we were each other's company--and all kinds of things that she taught me. And the other, after the Montgomery Bus Boycott and we had won, and Mommy would always sit in the back of the bus and I would always sit up front, and lo and behold, don't be any white people up there 'cause I would really sit and wiggle, and one time there were no white people on the bus, and I went to the back of the bus and asked Mommy, "Why do you sit in the back of the bus? We all walk--we walked and struggled for 381 days, 382 days, and you still sit in the back of the bus." And she said--she was very proper, she always called me Gwendolyn [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], my whole name. "Gwendolyn, it was not about sitting next to white people, it was about sitting anywhere you please." And I guess I was sixteen or fifteen, and I had a whole new perspective about what freedom really is. It's not about sitting next to white people or any other people, it's about what makes you feel free. Story_ID: 565756 Speaker 1: What do you hope that your legacy will be? Speaker 2: That you have to always lace humor with serious matters, that you gotta have a sense to laugh, and to laugh at yourself frequently, and to always understand that you should not take yourself too serious, but you take the objective serious and make a distinction. I have met too many people who consider themselves important, and not what they're doing. Speaker 1: Because this will be viewed by generations to come, what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hopefully. Speaker 1: What message would you like to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: Learn all that you can, all that you can and, and if the country is what it is today, but only a variation of whatever the new, the new components will be, make certain it's formal because we live in a society where you have to have a union card, and what I mean by a union card, doesn't just mean that you're an apprentice or a journeyman, you know, or a master, it also means you got a bachelor's or a master's, or a Ph.D., or whatever the next degree is, and don't ever stop learning. I became an activi- I mean an archivist--see, I'm still into that activist--. I became an archivist, didn't know--didn't have a clue what an archivist does, not a clue. I knew nothing about processing, cataloging, you know, I knew the movement, I knew what was valuable. And I became an archivist in 1996, that was like ten years ago, which meant I was fifty-three years old. I got a whole new career. Went to school, I was taught by a wonderful woman who's strictly an archivist, Brenda Banks, and learned the whole, the whole science of archiving, preserving documents for future generations. But even though I am about preservation, I am much more about access, so that young people from generations to generations can come and view a marriage license that I have in the archives here [at H. Councill Trenholm State Technical College; H. Councill Trenholm State Community College, Montgomery, Alabama], of 1870, of a black couple, Ms. Beauty Mae--Ms. Beauty Mae Johnson's [ph.] grandparents, okay? Eighteen seventy [1870], we were only five years out of slavery--a marriage license, and they were married in the church. I want kids to come and see that, and hopefully would--that they will not only drink it up, imbibe it, but that it will shape who they are and what they wanna contribute to make life better for--not only for themselves, but for everybody else, because if you make your life better, then you will also make somebody else's life better--your parents, your grandparents, your children, whatever. Again, it goes back to the epistemological question, what is the value of being a good person or a bad person? Story_ID: 565757 Speaker 1: Speaking about degrees, where did you get your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: I have what you call all but dissertation--a Ph.D. all but dissertation from Union Graduate School [Union Institute and University, Cincinnati, Ohio]. I went to Marymount College, again, in New York--Tarrytown, New York, for a colloquium, and--there, and my dissertation was on 'Humanity Buried' [ph.]. I just simply could not abide that all white folks are crackers, that all white folks are racist dog pigs, I simply could not abide that. And during the highday--heyday of the movement, we had--oh, I can't--the Weathermen [Weather Underground Organization], and I'm certain that their model was John Brown, you know, at Harpers Ferry [West Virginia] and, and again in Kansas, and all, and I was interested in knowing if there were some other white models that young white people could emulate to make a difference for the better for all peoples. And I went to the card catalog again, just be simple, and I looked up the word, white, and it talked about a color, you know, I mean like literally on the prism; the absence of color, you know. I mean there's no, no human definition of white, and so I say, I need to write about white people 'cause they don't know who they are. And in my search trying to narrow down my scope, I came across--I was interested in Alabama history, I wanted southern whites--and came across an Alabama history that there were thirteen counties, oh, it represented 39 percent of special delegates to the succession--succeeding from the Union--conference in 1861--1860, 1861, who never did sign the Ordinance of Secession--a whopping 39 percent minority. And you know minority reports are important, so I say, let me dig into this, because the only thing I knew was that Winston County up in north Alabama, succeeded from Alabama, okay, refused to fight on the side of the South. But now I found thirteen counties, and so I studied those counties, I visited those counties, and I called it 'Humanity Buried.' Not that they had any sentiment against or for slavery, but they were not about succeeding from the Union. And as far south as Tallapoosa County [Alabama], you know, which is adjacent to Macon County [Alabama], you know, that they were not about succeeding from the Union. And, you know, you talk to the average Alabamian, you know, all white folks are monolithic, they all were, you know, in favor of--. They were coerced, many of them were coerced. And I even had big arguments with so called (air quotes) professional historians, and called them revisionists--in a public forum you're a revisionist, and you're doing a disservice when you don't let these white kids and black kids know that there was that kind of minority report. And I let--since learned that the--those who fought in the Confederacy on the side of force--side--on the side of Confederacy, became friends to Booker T. Washington, who founded Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee State Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. So, it's all that. You know, the human condition is a very complex, complicated thing to study, and we should not deal with it in some simple, linear fashion, you know, that it's, it's multifaceted, there are layers of it and, and we should really study the human condition and the human personality. Oh, that was my dissertation: 'Humanity Buried,' yes. Story_ID: 565758 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and desires for the African American community? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I want us to become economic- economically stable, you know. I don't know whether or not I'm reminiscing when prior to desegregation, where we had our own infrastructure, you know, our cleaners, our businesses, and so forth, and we--our communities were more stable, you know. I'm looking--I don't like to look back, I like to look forward in some kind of variation. But now this stock market business, you know, going back to these black business majors, and I had a cousin who was in the stock market, I lost twenty-five thousand dollars in the stock market fooling around with him. And I'm just not sure--the way business is set up in the U.S. is one of any, any principle, so when I look at economic development for the black community, I'm kind of in a, a, a quandary because we, we run on this capitalist system, it is all about dog eat dog, you know, it's all about exploitation, it's all about cheap products at maximum prices, you know. I'm just--you know, I'm just mixed on, how do we become economically stable within the context of the economic system of this country? So, I really--I'm really at a standstill. But we got to have some stability, people have got to make a living--quality jobs, quality homes, otherwise, we gone keep having these gangbangers pushing dope, and they do it like a science, just like Rockefeller [John D. Rockefeller] did it when he stole all the oil. Story_ID: 565759 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to talk about that we did not speak about? Speaker 2: Again, I just really wanna thank [HistoryMaker] Floyd Griffin, he nominated me for The HistoryMakers. I had heard about it, I think, through the AARP [AARP Inc.], through some other associations, but it was Floyd. We were at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] for a--what do you call it--class reunion. He was the keynote speaker, and I think I was serving either--no, as master--mistress of ceremony, or something, but I had a role. And he--we hadn't seen each other since the '60s [1960s], and here it was now 2006, I believe it was--in 2006, and he says, "You need to be one of The HistoryMakers." And I said, "Well, what is that?" He said, "Don't you worry about it, I'll get it all straightened out." And he did, and I wanna thank him, and thank you for choosing me. Speaker 1: Thank you very much for your time. Story_ID: 565766 Speaker 1: That's Gwen Patton [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], that's me. Is there a year in the back of it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Maybe 1991, '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on please, don't take it away yet. Got it. Okay, next? Speaker 2: That's my mommy and daddy. Yeah--that's my mother Jeanetta [Jeanetta Bolden Patton], they called her Dot 'cause she was little, and my father Clarence Robert Patton, Sr. [C. Robert Patton, Sr.], and they called him Bob. He was dashing, as you can see, and debonair, and that's probably around 1946. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on one second. Yep, got it. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's, that's 1965, March--probably March 24th. We're marching to the state capitol [Alabama State Capitol, Montgomery, Alabama]; the end of the Selma to Montgomery March for voting rights. With me is [HistoryMaker] James Forman who was my mentor from Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. A SNCC organizer is protecting me, and that's Joan Baez, the folk singer, and Jimmy Baldwin [James Baldwin], and they performed the night before at the Stars for Freedom rally to motivate the crowd for our final trek to the state capitol that day. And the SNCC organizer's name is on there, that's next to me. I haven't seen him since that year. Oh, I have his name, though. Speaker 2: Oh, my lord. Why would you select that picture? Okay, that's Bob Mance [Robert W. Mance, Jr.], who was a SNCC organizer back in the '60s [1960s], he's from Georgia, and me and somebody from, from Washington, D.C. thanking me for working on preserving the history of the Civil Rights Movement. And I cannot read that writing. Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You can pull your chair in closer to the easel there, if you want. Speaker 2: Okay. That is probably 2005. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's me with Earl Hilliard [Earl F. Hilliard], he was a U.S. representative from Alabama and he's from Birmingham [Alabama], and that's when we got our first predominantly black U.S. district since Reconstruction. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: I'm a little archivist, so that might be 1992. I'm trying to be an archivist. Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness. That's when I was organizing-- Speaker 2: That was in 1995, the last picture.- Speaker 1: Sure was, '95 [1995]. Okay, you wanna say that? Speaker 2: You're on. Speaker 1: Okay. That's Reverend Fred Taylor [Fred D. Taylor] with the glasses, and the tall gentleman is Reverend John Offert [ph.], they are Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC] organizers. John is from Montgomery, Alabama, Fred is originally from Montgomery, but he's now over in Atlanta [Georgia], and me. And we were organizing tenants in the housing project. I used to have a tenant rights organization, and I don't know if--is the year on there? That's in the '80s [1980s]. I was working for myself, so that must be sometime, maybe '87 [1987], '88 [1988]. I also used to work with children whose mommies were in prison. I had seven children. Speaker 2: That's me with Bill Baxley. Bill Baxley was attorney general, and he is the one who relentlessly pursued the killers--the murderers of the four little girls in the church bombing in Birmingham [at the 16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]. And that might be 2006. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: All right, that's me in the African dress standing behind Alex Haley, and that's Dr. Velma Blackwell [Velma L. Blackwell] from Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], she was the first black female vice president for, for development at Tuskegee. Governor Wallace [George Wallace], who asked me to beg his pardon, which I did when I visited with him one time one afternoon in his home--at his home; he was outside sitting under the, the umbrella table, and we had some lemonade and he asked me if I forgave him. I said, "Yes, you were just doing what you thought was hip." And some others--I think that's Mayor Johnny Ford, and that was on the occasion of Alex meeting the governor, and I was part of that delegation. That was probably around 1982. Speaker 2: Oh, my, my, my (laughter). That's over at Alabama State University [Montgomery, Alabama]. That's Tracy Larkin who was one of the cohosts with me on the 'Harambee' television program, which was on Alabama Public Television, and of course, the famous [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory who has--he knows how to weave a story, and two students at Alabama State. Speaker 1: That's me and [HistoryMaker] John Lewis. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: I don't know, but I think it was on the occasion of Morris Dees and the Southern Poverty Law Center [Montgomery, Alabama] opening up the Civil Rights Memorial [Montgomery, Alabama] dedicated to all of those who had been murdered and killed during the Civil Rights Movement. So, that had to be in the early '80s [1980s], 1980s. Is there a year on there? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh. That's me and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], I was his delegate. This had to be in 1984, and at the podium is Reverend John Offert, and sitting on the other side of Reverend Jackson is Reverend John Nettles. Reverend Offert and Reverend Nettles both were lieutenants in the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Reverend Nettles was the state chair of SCLC, and Reverend Offert was the Montgomery chair. Speaker 1: Oh, oh, oh. That's me again; I used to wear a lot of--in fact, I have on an African dress now--in my home with [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and my dear, dear friend--Jesus, oh, I can't think, I can't think of--Roy. Okay, that's me on the end in the African dress, poet--poetess, Maya Angelou, English professor and poet, Dr. Roy Hill. And that was Maya's husband [Paul du Feu], he was from London [England]. I can't think of his name right now, but they were in my home, and Maya cooked me some fried chicken. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. That's my high school prom [for Inkster High School, Inkster, Michigan]. I was in Inkster, Michigan at the time. That's me on the end--I guess on the right, my date Nathaniel Spencer [ph.] behind, and my friends. I was in the eleventh grade, and this was in 1960. Speaker 2: I thought you said just a few more. You keep going over there and getting more. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: That--we're paying tribute to Mrs. Viola Liuzzo. That was at one of our pilgrimage that was led by Southern Christian Leadership Conference, Mrs. Evelyn Lowery [HistoryMaker Evelyn Gibson Lowery] of women of SCLC, and her husband Reverend Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] who, at that time, was president of the national Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's me on the bridge, Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama], 19--I think that would be March 21st, 1965, when we kicked off to finally make our trek to the state capitol here in Montgomery to petition for voting rights. I was twenty-two years at that time--twenty-two years old. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: That's me, as you can see. I think I was seventeen years old, and as you can see, the defiant chin was there. You just couldn't say no to me without a reason. Speaker 1: That's me and my dear friend Julian [HistoryMaker Julian Bond], we are still very close friends and colleagues today, and Mrs. Marie Foster of Selma, Alabama--the late Mrs. Marie Foster. And she has the distinction of marching every step from Selma to Montgomery in 1965. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Speaker 1: And that's me with The Honorable Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]. I had the privilege of working on Andy's campaign when he ran for governor of Georgia, and I tried to convince Andy that we should take absentee ballots to all of the inmates in the county prison and the city jail, because they hadn't been convicted of anything yet, and that they were still potential voters. The other person on the other side of me is my first researcher--my first scholar when I became an archivist here at Trenholm State Technical College [H. Councill Trenholm State Technical College; H. Councill Trenholm State Community College, Montgomery, Alabama]. His name is Dr. Howard Robinson, and I am so pleased that today he is an archivist. Speaker 2: That's me again. I'm teaching over at Alabama State. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: That had to be in the early 1980s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yep, and that's when I'm working in the Jackson campaign, going--crisscrossing across the country, riding in my little car, helping--first of all helping Jesse's campaign, but more importantly, helping grassroots people to become actively involved in the political process. That's in 1988, and I always said that grassroots people should not just simply be passive participants in the political process by simply voting, but they must become active, and act on their own behalf as their own surrogates. I don't know what--that's 1990--1988. That was in Selma. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's the last one. Speaker 2: Okay. Oh, I know who this is...