 Story_ID: 624346 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Dr. Jennie R. Patrick, and that is J-E-N-N-I-E, my middle initial is R, and my last name is P-A-T-R-I-C-K. Speaker 1: All right, and can you tell us what the "R" stands for? Speaker 2: (Laughter) It stands for Ruth. It's a name that I don't like, and seldom use (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was January 1, 1949 in Gadsden, Alabama. Speaker 1: And how do you spell Gadsden? Speaker 2: Gadsden is G-A-D-S-D-E-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm a PhD chemical engineer. I am disabled at this point. I no longer work. And I'm actually in the process of developing a company called "The Environmental Wellness Institute". Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is December 14th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Peachtree City at my home. Story_ID: 624347 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite is homemade coconut cake. Speaker 1: Okay, that sounds good. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is black. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The Springtime. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: San Francisco. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "You know what I mean" (laughter). Story_ID: 624348 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. But we'll start with your mother's side first so we can get that side together before we ask about the other side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Elizabeth Patrick, and that's E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, P-A-T-R-I-C-K. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is August 10, 1910. And she was born in Troup County in LaGrange, Georgia. Speaker 1: That's True County, like-- Speaker 2: Maybe it's T-R-O-U-P, I think. Speaker 1: Oh, Troup County, okay. Troup County-- Speaker 2: In LaGrange, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, first of all? What were they doing? Speaker 2: I know very little about my mother's side of the family. My mother's parents, my mother's mother died when she was a little girl. I think she was part of that huge flu epidemic in, I think it's around the, 1918 through maybe 1920, somewhere in that area. Her father lived to be an older person, and I never got to meet him or see him. They, he was gone by the time we were born. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I take it they lived out in the rural county? Speaker 2: Yeah, they lived in a rural area, very country-like. I think they, you know, her father did farming. Other than that I know very little. She often talked about, you know, the hardship of the living. Speaker 1: Now, did your grandfather own his own land. Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. He moved about apparently, quite a bit when they were young. Speaker 1: Okay, so he more than likely was a sharecropper? Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family that your mother remembers that she would tell you? Speaker 2: She didn't talk a lot about her background as a child. She said it was a bit painful. It was such a hardship for them once the mother passed. There were two girls and a boy, and as the father grew older, he ended up in Alabama somehow, near Gadsden, and my mom interacted with him until he passed. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did your mother have a--did she have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: My mother was not educated. She had about a sixth grade education. During those days, it was difficult, first, because of money and also because they often used the children to help pick cotton and do the chores around the farms. Speaker 1: Okay, and often in the rural South, there weren't any schools nearby, you know. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: I've heard that too, so. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, did your mother pass down the name of a school that she attended at all? Speaker 2: No, actually, she really seldom talked about her childhood, other than tell stories about the farm animals and things like the pigs getting underneath the house and, you know, causing them to be uncomfortable because of the smells from the pigs (laughter). But other than that, very little discussion of, you know, she said it was a really tough lifestyle for them. Speaker 1: Now, did she talk about any of the racial tensions in those days, in the-- Speaker 2: Yes, she did talk a little bit about that. Her father was a very, very fair black man. And oftentimes was mistaken to be a white person, and was also a very, very proud man and sometimes found himself in difficult situations just simply because of his complexion and the fact that he had brown-skinned children. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, is there a story about any of those times? Speaker 2: Well, it's probably, the story is--I probably shouldn't discuss some of those stories, those particular stories because my mother was so uncomfortable with them. Speaker 1: Okay, but this is oral history now and therefore-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you know-- Speaker 1: And the next generation's gonna, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, I understand that, but I think in relationship to her father, one story was that he had to flee the area somewhere in Georgia. And that's probably how they ended in Alabama because there was a big confrontation at one point with a white guy. And he refused to, to be defeated by the person and fought back. And he had to flee with his children in order to protect them. Speaker 1: Okay. So whatever kind of conflict, the black person was gonna be wrong for it and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, whatever-- Speaker 1: --the authorities-- Speaker 2: --you know, it was just the, that time. And, you know, black people were not expected to demand respect or talk back as they would say. Speaker 1: Okay, so is Gadsden like near LaGrange, Georgia or at all? Speaker 2: Gadsden is, I'm not quite sure how far away it is, but it's probably three, four hours away. Gadsden, Alabama is near Anniston, Alabama, and it's about 60 miles, I think it's northeast of Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, Anniston, Alabama where the Freedom Riders bus was burned up that time--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In '61' [1961] I believe it was. Okay, so you're grandfather's story is not unique. We've heard of lots of stories about people having to move, you know-- Speaker 2: Move, oh, yes. Speaker 1: --they'd get out of the entire South, you know, and go North because of the same-- Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: --kind of conflict. So, okay, so your mother, so she went to the sixth grade. And what did she do after that? Speaker 2: She did domestic work all her life. She was a housekeeper, and for a period of time when we were children, she did not work. She just stayed home and took care of her children. But other than that, she always had low wages doing domestic work. Story_ID: 624349 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is James Patrick. That's J-A-M-E-S, and the last name is P-A-T-R-I-C-K. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is June 10, 1907. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Chattahoochee County in Georgia. And that's near Buena Vista, Georgia, Buena Vista. Speaker 1: I think I know how to spell Chattahoochee, believe it or not-- Speaker 2: Okay (laughter), that's wonderful because-- Speaker 1: I'm making an attempt to write it down. Speaker 2: may not (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, so, it'll be on the report I write up, and Chattahoochee, Georgia, right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you said it's near-- Speaker 2: Buena Vista. I think that's B-U-E-N-A, Vista, V-I-S-T-A, I think. Speaker 1: Okay, good vision, yep, okay. So, now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Very little, again, about my father's side. My father's parents both died with the influenza epidemic. His, one of his uncles took him as a small boy. My father was quite intelligent, very eager to learn. The uncle took him basically as a workhorse and would beat him when he wanted to go to school. So he had to work really, really hard on the uncle's farm in order to try to get some school days. And he told me a story what happened to him when he was a small boy. They had sling shots that they used to use to shoot little birds and everything. And he hit a pig with the sling shot and accidently hit the pig in the eye. The story goes that my, the uncle had asked him to get the pig from underneath the house. And as my father tried to coax the pig from underneath the house, it just refused to leave. So he decided to take the sling shot to hit it with a little pebble, and accidentally hit the pig in the eye. And from that day forward, the uncle did not allow him to attend school and felt like he had done it out of anger, which it was really an accident. And so my father, I think by the time he was fourteen, ran away from that uncle. He said, twelve or fourteen because it was just an, you know, unbearable environment to live in. And he was pretty much on his own from that point on. Speaker 1: That's a, it seems like the pig was an excuse to keep him from school-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --rather than actually-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, because, I mean he was more valuable to him as a work horse. Speaker 1: Okay, so well, where did your father run to at age fourteen? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. He said he just moved about. He would catch trains, I guess hoboing and go from place to place and work wherever he could work. Speaker 1: Okay, so, and so he wound up in Gadsden? Speaker 2: He winded up in Gadsden, Alabama, and that's where he met my mother. Story_ID: 624350 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mom told me a story. She used to, she was working in a Laundromat and my father came by that Laundromat and saw her there working and told one of the other ladies that he wanted to get to meet her. And my mom said she was quite shy at that time and that she sort of ignored him for a period of time. But he kept coming back, and so she finally met him, and they started to date. And I think they got married, you know, in, I think it's 1932. Speaker 1: Okay, 1932, okay. All right, now, and, well, what did your dad do for a living in Gadsden? Speaker 2: My father, as long as I can remember, he worked for Goodyear Rubber plant, tire and rubber plant in Gadsden for forty two years before he retired. Story_ID: 624351 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you think about your parents personalities and their dispositions, their sense of humor, the way they talk and walk, and acted and looked, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I look like my mother. People tell me I'm the spitting image of (laughter) of my mother. Personality, pretty much her personality. I have a lot of my father's curiosity and desire to learn. I have his humanity, a very kind human being who really cared deeply about the well being of other people. Both parents were very, very honest, very religious and just hard working, you know, decent people. My mother was somewhat of a fiery lady, and I'm told that I'm somewhat of a fiery lady (laughter). Her personality was very, very strong willed. My father, on the other hand is laid back and cool, but just always trying to understand what makes things work, what makes something tick. And so from early childhood, that was who I was. I mean I was always trying to understand why things worked the way they did. But both parents, very much, even though both of them had an equivalent of about a sixth grade education, both of them really valued education and believed that education was the key to getting out of poverty and instilled that, you know, to their children. And they worked, both worked very, very hard. My father, during the time that he worked at Goodyear, he always had a very, very large garden, a couple of large gardens. And he would come home from his hard day of work there and tend to his gardens and raised the majority of our foods. And also, at one point, had a small chicken farm, and a cow. And so we grew up having fresh milk and butter and fresh eggs and home-grown chicken which was absolutely delicious compared to what's available in the marketplace today. Story_ID: 624352 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now do you have siblings? Speaker 2: Yes, I have two brothers and two sisters. Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you list them in the order of their birth and put yourself in the order? Speaker 2: Yes, I will. The oldest brother is Joseph J. Patrick, Joseph James Patrick. And he is a surgeon, a general surgeon. The oldest sister is Irma Jean Patrick, and she is a registered nurse. And then the middle brother is named Bobby L., Bobby Lee Patrick, and he is a train engineer. And then the next one is me, Jennie R. Patrick, and then the younger sister is Judith Fay Patrick, and she, her educational background is in finance, but she's an administrative assistant. Speaker 1: Okay. So everybody I--it seemed like everybody went to school for something. Speaker 2: Everybody has at least a BS [Bachelor of Arts degree], yes. Story_ID: 624353 Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is from two years old. And I remember coming to Atlanta [Georgia], standing in the back seat of my cousin's car, and my mother's brother had been injured in a work accident. And I remembered passing the edge of Morehouse College. I did not know at the time that it was, it was a fence there. And I was looking up from the back seat, looking at these tall buildings. And I didn't a chance to come back to Atlanta again until I was a teenager. And I remembered those buildings (laughter). They were still there. So. Story_ID: 624354 Speaker 1: Okay, so were you raised then in Gadsden? Speaker 2: I was raised in Gadsden, Alabama, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and you all, from what you describe, you lived in Gadsden, but it was rural enough where you could have-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was rural. We were not in the city limits at that time. It is now considered the city, of course. But it was very rural. I grew up on a red dirt road that was very dusty in the summer, and that was one of the smells I remember, the dust from the road in the summertime. But it was a delightful place to grow up because I was so close to nature. I have a wondering kind of mind. I loved wandering through the woods. As I a child, I remembered going to pick plums and strawberries and Muscadine's and that was just, you know, just a wonderful time of my life, just total freedom, no real concerns and not really totally understanding the quality of life that we were living, even though money, there was not a lot of money available to us. Speaker 1: Explain what a Muscatine is? I know what they are, but most people don't know what they are? Speaker 2: Well, muscadine's look something like grapes. They're sour and tart, rather and sweet, and they grow on these vines out in the woods at that time. And they're similar to--some people call them scupindine's, but they're actually different, you know, species. Speaker 1: Yeah, one is red and one is gold, right? Speaker 2: Well, muscadine's are dark purple. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dark purple, look like, about the size of a marble. And I mean that was, that's one of the most vivid times, memories in my life, the enjoyment--even to this day, whenever I can get a muscadine, to eat a muscadine, I'm in heaven. So (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, those are interesting. You can only get 'em down South, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They don't grow in the North. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, they don't seem to. I haven't seen 'em, you know, but, okay, now, can you describe the house you grew up in and-- Speaker 2: Yes, I can. We, my father bought land I think he brought the property in 1939. I'm not totally sure about that year. It could have been 1942. But he bought a plot of land and built a modest home on it. And over the years, sort of gradually added to the home. It was a nice little, modest home, sitting on this piece of land, had quite a bit of land around it. There was a cemetery behind us, a large, white cemetery. Of course, the cemeteries were segregated as well during that time. And there was a man that lived above us on a hill named Mr. Cain, James L. Cain, and he was a black farmer who had quite a bit of land surrounding his place. So it was quite rural. It had a--one of the things that I always remembered as a child is always looking up at a large water tank that was a half a mile away. So, no lights, no street lights. So it would be awfully dark all the time. Speaker 1: And, of course, nothing--you said the road was not paved. It was like-- Speaker 2: The road was not paved most of my childhood. By the time I think I was maybe junior high or even middle school, they paved the road. And they moved the city limits out beyond that area and then required my father to get rid of all his little animals, his chickens and his cow, which was a big disappointment for us, you know, because we really enjoyed the fresh milk and the fresh butter and fresh eggs and what all. Speaker 1: Okay, now, was your oldest brother very much older than you? Speaker 2: My oldest brother is, let me think, how many years older? I think he was born in 1943. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. So your parents got married in '31' [1931], but they didn't have children until-- Speaker 2: Well, my parents, yeah, did not have children for 13 years. My mother had been told that she would never be able to have children. And so for 13 years, she tried, and she met this woman who was an herbalist. And she gave her some teas, a mixture of teas that she said, you know, changed her life, because after taking those herbs, she was able to get pregnant and had five children. So she always laughed about that. Speaker 1: Yeah, that is, that's a remarkable story because I wondered, I said, that's a long--they got married in '32' [1932], you know, gee. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He could have been like, really much, much, much older than you. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Almost 20 years older. Okay, to the five of you all come along together. Story_ID: 624355 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, one of the smells that I always long for is the smell of Marigold's, the little Marigold plants. My mother used to plant them in the early Spring. And so, and they would tend to come back, you know. And so when I would smell the Marigold's, I know that Spring is, you know, is really coming and that summer would be there and all these, you delightful things that--I used to love to go to the woods to pick the blackberries and the strawberries and things. And I would be able to do that. In terms of sounds, there was not a whole lot of sounds near the area that we lived other than cars that went up and down the road. And there were not a lot of cars at that point in time, but some. And I also remember the smell of horses or mules, rather. Early on, there was a house not too far from us where the man had a mule because during that time, they still used mules and plows to actually plow the gardens. And so I would, I remember the smell of the, the mule manure which was interesting, you know. It smelled awful (laughter). Story_ID: 624356 Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just saying off camera that your father refused to raise pigs, right? Speaker 2: No, he did not raise pigs. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he did not like the smells, and he thought pigs were a filthy animal. But he raised a cow and I remember the cow having a little calf and chickens. They had a small, little chicken farming. Speaker 1: Okay, now, oh, were we finished with sights, sounds and smells? Speaker 2: I think so. Sights, as a child I, you know, we were sort of limited in terms of where we went. But as I said, my parents did not have a lot of money. And so I never went on a vacation as a child, really didn't understand the concept of a vacation. And the farthest we ever was to Lees, Alabama, which was such an exciting time for us. My father had an uncle that lived there. The cemetery nearby was something that was always interesting to me. It was a beautiful, well-kept cemetery, and I used to wander through that cemetery as a child, looking at the headstones, reading things about the people who had passed and often imaging who they were and what they were like as people, which probably some people would find a little bit odd for a child to do (laughter). But it was such a quiet place to go, and the beautiful plants and trees that they had there attracted me as well. Speaker 1: Okay, did you sort of like learn more about the town and who the people were by looking at the, you know, while walking through the cemetery? Speaker 2: No, I think it was more of my just--I'm told I have an enormous imagination, my desire to wander and think and just imagine who's here, what happened to them. Sometimes you would see a tombstone of a child or baby. Sometimes people would have pictures of their loved ones there. So it was just an interesting place because it was, somehow, even as a small child, I understood the concept of death and often believed that there was a spirituality there that people couldn't comprehend, that death was not as final as we often think of it as. There's always lots of energy in that place, even though it was so peaceful. Story_ID: 624357 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about church? Where did the family go to church? Speaker 2: I grew up in the Methodist church and the church was probably about a mile away. My mother, both parents were quite religious and early childhood was fueled with going to the church often, going to Sunday school. Bible school was always very exciting in the summertime. Easter and Christmas was always exciting times. I sang in the choir, and Easter I remember dressing up as a little girl. You know, my mom would sew or buy us nice little outfits. And it was just a wonderful. It was a sense of community, you know, being a part of that church. Speaker 1: Okay, now, was this an AME or CME or-- Speaker 2: I think it's an AME church, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "Goodsel Methodist Church". Speaker 1: I'm sorry, was that the name of it? Speaker 2: Goodsel, I think it's-- Speaker 1: Good Soul? Speaker 2: --G-O-O-D-S-E-L I think. And the little church still stands in 2012. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did you, did the church kind of groom the youth for leadership roles and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I don't, I wouldn't say that they actually did that. I don't, you know, the thing that I remember most is just attending the Sunday school classes and having probably more questions than the minister cared for, about the concepts of religion. But there was nothing particularly that stood out. Speaker 1: Now, can you give us an example of a question you might ask the minister? Speaker 2: I didn't, the creation was an issue for me. It did not make sense to me as a small child, which was, did not make the minister happy. I didn't understand how such a variety of people from all over the world could come from two people. And I wanted him to explain that. I, Noah's Ark, that story, was a problem for me. I could not imagine something being built large enough to house every species of animals that lived on earth. And that was an irritation for the minister. The concept of soul and death was always an issue for me. And I remembered describing myself to him as a little dot of bright light in a big barrel. And he asked where did that come from? And I said, you know, life is filled with things that we don't understand. And I don't understand the concept of living itself. And so if I see myself as a little light in a big barrel that is filled with darkness, then that makes me feel better about who I am in the sense that that darkness represents all the things that I don't know and can't understand. And I'm reaching out as this little bright light. And the minister just found that incredibly annoying (laughter). So I probably was not one of his favorite little girls because I would ask these questions in the presence of other children. And it made no sense to him. Speaker 1: Did you ever wonder why adults weren't interested in these questions? Speaker 2: Um-- Speaker 1: Or him, I don't know if all adults weren't, but-- Speaker 2: Most adults were not, weren't interested. He once told my mother that I was a very peculiar little girl, and because I just never tended to accept things at face value. I often looked at adults and felt that they were hypocrites and questioned them based on that feeling. I thought that many times they were dishonest and, in what they said, compared to what they did. And as a child, I was always very observant, probably much more beyond my age. I observed the way children, adults reacted to children. I'll tell you a story. When I was about three years old in the heat of the summer in these little churches--there was no air conditioning, and my mother's, my baby sister was sitting on my mom's lap. And that we had these little paper fans, and they, you would fan to keep yourself cool. And the fans often was limited, the numbers of fans in the church. And I had a fan, and I was sitting next to my mom [Elizabeth Patrick] and the baby, and that, you know, she was fanning herself and the baby. And the baby reached out for my fan and insisted on having my fan. And I thought, oh, no, that's not fair. And so from early on, I had this concept of what's fair, and my mom said, give it to her. And I said, no. And so she said, no, give me the fan. And she took the fan from me, and I thought, I can't let you do this. And so I decided, I will embarrass you. So I screamed to the top of my voice (laughter) in the church. And the usher, in her white uniform comes and takes me outside. And I, you know, I had disrupted the service. And so the usher pinched me on my arms. And I got very upset about that. And I was probably at the height of her knees. And I thought, and I looked up at her, and I said to her, "You can't do that to me". And it shocked her. Here's this little kid at her knees telling her, you can't do that to me. And she pinched me again, so I decided, okay. So I proceeded to tear her pantyhose off (laughter). Oh, my goodness. And it was such a shock to the usher that she was sort of, sort of trying to kick me away. And it was such a (unclear) caractus (ph.) [fracas?] outside there that my mother had to come out and she took me home and spanked me (laughter). But that was the kind of child I was. I looked at things, I analyzed, and I said to my mother, she pinched me. You don't pinch me. She should be able to pinch me. So I fought her back. Speaker 1: So you were three years old-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at this time. So that's, you developed a lot of, I guess, character development for age three. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I, you know, it was, my mom always told me I was an adult as a child. So (laughter) Story_ID: 624358 Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah, but the fundamental questions that you raised, now, did your--you said your father was very, the situation he was raised in was, seemed, as you described it, seemed traumatic, you know-- Speaker 2: It was traumatic. Speaker 1: --this being worked and beaten and not-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --allowed to attend school. And you said, but he was very sensitive and very-- Speaker 2: Very sensitive. My father [James Patrick] and I were extremely close. He enjoyed the questioning and attempted as much as he was capable of answering it. It fascinated him that a child would want to know all the "why's" because he would tell me that he, too, wanted to know the "why's", but didn't have the ability because of education limitations. So as I developed from first grade forward, learning, my father learned with me. I would read newspapers and whatever I could read to him. I would work with him with arithmetic, and so he found that fascinating. And so did I because it was a tremendous tool for me because it gave me the opportunity to really teach myself more as I taught my father. So it was just a lovely relationship. Story_ID: 624359 Speaker 1: Now, okay, so now, did you all have radio and a TV and all that growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had radio and TV. The TV probably came--well, I think (unclear), and when I look back, the TV was there from a small child. My father regulated how much we would look at TV. But we listened probably more to the radio. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a TV from what, about 1954 or-- Speaker 2: Probably somewhere around that time, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, I think that was about the time it proliferated or something. We're the same age, and I remember, I always remember it, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, and we were poor (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: But we had one, so everybody probably had one by then. So-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, so about '54' [1954], and I remember it from when I was about three or four. So, did you have a favorite--so you didn't watch television much you said? Speaker 2: Didn't watch television a lot. I'm trying to think of something that we did watch. We did watch 'Amos and Andy.' We did watch, I remember 'Gunsmoke.' It was a cowboy movie. So we watched some cowboy movies, cowboy, I call them cowboy and Indian-type movies on TV. My father [James Patrick] was more interested in the news, very, very concerned about political activity. Speaker 1: Okay, and when you were growing in the, '56' [1956], the Montgomery Bus Boycott [Montgomery, Alabama] with Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], that was going on. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, did they actually broadcast the footage on the air in Gadsden? Speaker 2: Yes, I-- Speaker 1: Because some of the Southern cities didn't do it. Speaker 2: We saw some things. A lot of things we would hear on the radio because there were some black-owned radio stations in, I think, in Birmingham. And I think also in Gadsden, Alabama as well. But I do remember seeing some things on TV, not a whole lot. Speaker 1: Okay, well, were you curious about how the radio worked and the TV worked? Speaker 2: You know, yes, I was. My father [James Patrick] couldn't explain (laughter) that to me. But it was always a curiosity because here's this little box sitting there. And you would, in the case of the TV, you would see things. And in the case of the radio, there are these sounds coming out of it. So that was always interesting to me. Speaker 1: Did you ever look behind them as a little kid? Speaker 2: Yes, I did (laughter), yes, I did. I did look behind them, didn't see anything that I understood, however, but, you know, curious enough to pick things up and look and just trying to figure out what was going on. Speaker 1: Yeah, I often ask about the tube testing. Those were the days where if your, you know, if something was wrong with the TV and radio, usually a vacuum tube. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, did you-- Speaker 2: I was not aware of that at that time. You know, I just--my father used to sort of, I call it fiddle around with things. And sometimes, he would open stuff up, and it was probably the worst thing he could have done because he didn't really know how to fix it and would have to end up taking it to someone else to do the repairs. Speaker 1: Okay, but you all didn't go do the--change, take the bad tubes out and change 'em? Speaker 2: Well, I, he may have known how to do that. I'm not really certain about that. Story_ID: 624360 Speaker 1: Now, in light of the fact that you became an engineer at some point, did you experiment with any things, anything when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I didn't really experiment, per se, in terms of taking things apart. When I grew up, I was more looking at nature. You know, I was an outdoors' person. I still am. I'm an avid gardener. And I, you know, would look, take, look at little insects and wonder how the butterfly flies (laughter), enjoyed looking at the different birds and enjoyed looking at the flowers, you know, the variations of plants and things of that nature. It was more, not so much mechanical stuff. I'll tell you a story. When I was a small girl, I saw my father shaving. And I probably was about three, maybe four. And he had, you know, this beard, you know, this hair on his face. And he always had a mustache. And so I'm, you know, at his knees, and I'm looking up watching him shave. And I thought, hum, I rubbed my face and said, hum, wonder why he has hair and I don't, you know. And he, unfortunately, laid his shaving-- Speaker 1: His razor? Speaker 2: --his razor down, and when he turned his head, I grabbed it and decided to mimic him and cut my face wide open. And that was, I mean it shocked him. And, of course, it shocked me because it was so much blood and so much pain, and I thought--and he said, "Why would you do that?" And I said to him, I want to do what you do, you know. So he was always very, very careful after that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a great curiosity-- Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: --about what was going on around you? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 624361 Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us about school. Now, what was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: The name of my first school was James L. Cain. And it was an all-black school, and it was named for the farmer that lived next door to us that had all that land. Speaker 1: Now, is that C-A-- Speaker 2: C-A-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: James Cain. Speaker 1: Like Cain and Able. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one of the happiest days of my life was the first day of school for me, going to the first grade. And I remembered my mom threatened to punish me because I was so excited that I was beside myself. I truly, truly enjoyed going to school. It was just, you know, it was just every day was something exciting because I just loved learning, had wonderful teachers, nurturing teachers at that school. Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the teachers that you remember the most there? Speaker 2: My fifth-grade teacher was a man named Mr. Anthony Nolls (ph.). And a very bright man, and he was a mathematician. And so in the fifth grade, he taught me, started to teach (unclear) atribol (ph.) [Algebra?], to--he just thought that I was so bright that he wanted to challenge me. So he asked my mother for permission to keep me after school for an hour to have one-on-one tutoring. And I just loved him, and he is still alive. And whenever I have an opportunity, I go to see him. The other teacher that was quite significant in my life was a lady named Mrs. Pinkie Bridges. Mrs. Bridges taught English, and she was my sixth grade teacher. And she was a very sophisticated, proper type of woman, beautiful wardrobe, always dressed in her very best, high heel shoes, makeup always in order, hair in order. And so I admired her, but she was a superb teacher. She not only taught English, but she talked about character. She talked about one's presentation of oneself. She taught the little girls to be lady like, and thought it was important for you to present yourself in a certain way. So I admired her. So she was a tremendous role-model for me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to James L. Cain--now, James L. Cain was, did he found the school? Was he-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure if found the school. I would assume that he gave quite a bit of money to the school. He, you know, was a successful black farmer there in Gadsden [Alabama] and he had a large family. So I'm not really sure, but I would assume that he probably gave money and possibly the land that the school was on since he had so much land. Speaker 1: Okay, was James--do you think that the current politician, Herman Cain, is related in any to James L. Cain. Speaker 2: I would doubt it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right (laughter). Speaker 2: Different kinds of characters (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I thought I'd ask. So, all right, now, did you have any science equipment in grade school at all? Speaker 2: Science courses? Speaker 1: No, equipment. Speaker 2: Oh, science equipment. No, not at James L. Cain, very little in terms of being exposed to science other than reading about things in elementary school. Speaker 1: So when they taught science in elementary school, basically, you read about things? Speaker 2: Read about things. The first time that I was really exposed to laboratories, type situations was when I went to Carver High School, which was really middle school for me because I went there in the eighth and ninth grade, or junior high, I guess is what they would call it now. Story_ID: 624362 Speaker 1: Say, Carver High School. Speaker 2: Yeah, Carver High School. Speaker 1: And was that, where was that? Was that in-- Speaker 2: That was further over in the town. James L. Cain was just, you know, half a mile or so from the house. Carver High required getting on a bus or having your parents take you to the school. And it was probably eight miles or more away. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, were there any significant teachers in Carver that you remember? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, there was a teacher there named Mr. Morrell. I don't know his first name. I can't, I don't recall it. He taught biology and science and really always encouraged me and was very interested in me as a student in terms of giving me as much information as he could. And also a lady named, oh, man, I'm forgetting her name, Mrs. Crayton. And she taught me Algebra. Again, was always pushing and telling me that I could really achieve because I did so well in her classes. Speaker 1: Is that C-R-A-- Speaker 2: I think it's C-R-A-Y-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, but you said, this is really junior high school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This is the sixth, seventh and eighth grade? Speaker 2: I went to James L. Cain through the seventh grade, to the seventh. Speaker 1: So Carver was seven through-- Speaker 2: No, eight and nine. Speaker 1: Okay, eight and nine, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about the ninth grade? Speaker 2: Ninth grade, I'm still at Carver. Ninth grade was sort of a strange time for me because I was not happy with the quality of the education that I was getting. I was particularly unhappy because the math, the quality of the math teacher was not adequate. He had not been trained properly. He had not probably been trained to be a mathematician. And I found myself always correcting him in class, which was unfortunate. And therefore, he didn't like me (laughter) very much. And so I was put out of his class, and forced to sit in a gymnasium for a whole year. And I was extremely upset about that. Speaker 1: That sounds-- Speaker 2: I mean, you know, when I went to the principal, he refused to move me to the next class. And I did not appreciate that. He had a daughter who was my age. And he wasn't particularly happy about my intellectual capabilities because we, I always out performed her. And so he did not particularly want to see me move ahead. Speaker 1: This is the principal? Speaker 2: This is the principal of the school. And so I was very angry about that. I did not ever forgive him for doing that. Speaker 1: I don't think there's any reason to forgive him for (laughter) doing it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's really horrible to, and so-- Speaker 2: I thought so too. Speaker 1: So this is a time when you're really, when we learn most of the principles in math to go forward-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --and they're keeping you away from it. Speaker 2: Yes. So it, that became a tremendous motivation in 1964 because of that incident, to integrate the schools when integration hit the South. And so I said to my father, you know, if I'm going to be held back in a black institution, I might as well go and see what the white schools have to offer. Story_ID: 624363 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were saying off camera that you skipped in elementary school? Speaker 2: I was skipped in elementary school from the third grade to the fifth grade. And the principal, again, had a daughter my age and convinced my mother to put me back into the fourth grade, rather than skipping me. And as a child, I knew that was a mistake. And I was very upset about it, and I tried to explain to my mother as a child that the reason that the guy was trying to convince her to put me back into the fourth grade was because his daughter was not capable of performing academically the way that I was. And, but my mom did not pay any attention to me, and put me in the fourth grade. So the fourth grade was a problem year for me. I was angry about having to be in the fourth grade. And so I would do sort of, you know, bad things, weird things. I remembered coming to school with some Vaseline to put on the little boy's head in front of me (laughter). And I would disrupt class because I was angry about being there. So it was wonderful that when I got in the fifth grade that I had Mr. Nolls because he wanted to channel that intellect and master that energy that I had as a child and let me use my mind because that's all I wanted to do. I just wanted to learn. But I think because, you know, my parents did not have formal education, people found it really difficult to comprehend how a child on her own could be so highly motivated and so determined to do well. And I'll tell you a story that probably helped me to be that way and probably part of it is just genes, you know. But when I was a very small child, my mother was a housekeeper for a white family that lived on the mountains in Gadsden. And I remembered, she came home one day, and she was really, really upset. And she told me the story of the little white boy who insulted her that day. And he was, you know, a child. He was five, six years old, and he had power over her because she was a black woman. And she came home, and she cried. And I looked up at her, and I said, mommy, I will never be in your shoes. I will make absolutely certain. And she looked at me. I said, believe me, I will never be anybody's housekeeper. I will be educated. And that drove me. Speaker 1: That's an unexpected remark from a--how old were you? Speaker 2: Oh, I was probably about five. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that seems like a very informed remark for a five-year old. But that's--so, okay. So you're ahead of the curve, but not allowed to, you know, go at the speed that you can really travel at. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's always been the situation for me. I've had very, very few people that pushed and promoted me as a child to do well, you know. And it's always been a challenge, people attempting to hold me back. And the more they attempt, the more I fought to move forward. Speaker 1: Did your parents have the sense that you had a special gift for academics? Speaker 2: Yes, they did. Both knew that, but particularly, my father was just very fascinated with my mind, just asked me questions as if I was an adult. What would you do, Jennie, if such and such happened? I read, when I was in elementary school, I read his legal documents. When he had to sign things at work, I would read the documents to him and explain to him what the documents said. So it made me become very mature, very, very early, very, very aware of business transactions, analyzing things to make sure there're no pitfalls. And he trusted me. And when I look back, I find that rather remarkable. Story_ID: 624364 Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay. So, now, did you finish high school at, where were you at? Speaker 2: Carver? Speaker 1: Carver, yeah. Speaker 2: No, I integrated the schools in 1964. I was the first black child to sign up for integration in the little town there, Gadsden [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, does this work? We've interviewed people that have integrated schools before. Some have been recruited actually by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to do it, to take advantage of the opportunities. Now, what was the procedure with you? Speaker 2: Well, they came to the churches and talked about the fact that integration was a possibility for September, 1964. Speaker 1: Now, are these school officials or NAACP? Speaker 2: Well, they probably were NAACP people or SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. But they were Civil Rights activists. And I, they came to our church, and I said I wanted to go. The Ku Klux Klan in the town had put out the word that any black child who went to the white schools would be killed and so would their families. But that did not faze me because I was so determined to get away from Carver because I felt like I was being cheated in terms of my education, in terms of my abilities to really, you know, excel and get the quality of education that I thought I deserved. And so I told my father that I wanted to go, and he supported that. He told me that he would do everything he could to physically protect me. And so the Civil Rights people all agreed that they would all participate in trying to help physically protect the students that would go. But I got on the phone and called a few friends to encourage them to, you know, consider integrating the schools because people were afraid. And they really did have reasons to be afraid, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, well, how many did you integrate the white school with, I mean how many other blacks were with you? Speaker 2: The school had about 1,500 white kids, and there were about eleven black kids that went to that school. And I always like to share the story about the first days of that process. The first day that we attended the school was really just an incredible experience. We walked towards the school, and there was this huge mob of parents with sticks and bricks and they yelled and they cursed. And there was a line of state troopers that separated the mob from the black students. I was walking with two burly young black men, football size boys, I call them. And I was first sort of on the inside of them, walking, and one of them was near the mob. And I looked, and I observed that he was beginning, tears were beginning to come. And he was shaking. And I asked, what is wrong with you? And he says, I'm afraid. And I said, you cannot be afraid if you're going to do this. And I told him, I said, come you just move aside, and I will walk near the mob. And so I pushed him over, and I walked near the mob. And I, I said, I'm not afraid. You can't show fear to these people. And I just looked at them in the faces, and just doing that shocked many of them, you know, because I had told my father, I'm going to do this or I'm going to die in the process of doing this. So we got into the school that day, but getting past the mob, and I always say that the troopers themselves looked like they wanted to lynch us, okay. But they were sent there to protect us. But it was such an incredibly violent experience. Here you get past the mob with the throwing of the rocks and whatever they're doing and the cursing. And you get in the school, and there would be children throwing things at you. So it was rather traumatic. By the end of the first semester, only half of the students had survived. And fortunately, that first year of integration, it was really the best students that went there. But even with that many of them could not tolerate the psychological abuse and the physical abuse. Kids were beaten to the point they were hospitalized. Speaker 1: By the other students? Speaker 2: By other students. Teachers, I remember in the classroom, one of the first times I really understood that it was going to be a tremendous challenge, I was in a class and the teacher asked a question. And I was the only student who knew the answer, and I raised my hand. And she would not acknowledge my existence, would not acknowledge it. And I thought, oh, my goodness. This is going to be tough. Another situation in a classroom that I've shared in the past with people is that I was in a math class, and this big, big white boy, probably 200-plus pounds, stood up in the class, took the chair that had, these little desk that, pretty heavy, took the chair and banged it across my back. The pain was excruciating, and I flopped over on the desk, and when I got my breath, I thought, oh, my goodness. And I looked at the teacher, expecting her to say something to stop him. She turned around and ignored it. So I thought, oh, my, (laughter) I have to deal with this. So I stood up when I was physically able, took my chair and banged it across his back, total shock in the classroom, 'cause this boy was two times or three times my size. And he was in a state of shock. The teacher turns around and she says, Nigger, niggress (ph.), you go to the principal's office. And I said, no, I'm not going anywhere. You did not see him bang me across the back nor did you see me bang him and sat back down. And that was the end of that. But that incident spreaded through the school. Children, other students knew, she is not the one you want to attack. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was, I mean it was a challenge. The experience made me even stronger as a person, more focused. Speaker 1: Did, I know in other stories I've heard, the black students were split up. They weren't allowed to be in the same classroom together. Speaker 2: Yeah, they did-- Speaker 1: So, is that what happened there? Speaker 2: They did that as much as possible in the homerooms. Usually, you were the only one in the homeroom. But when it came to like a chemistry class, they couldn't do that because they only had one chemistry instructor or one physics instructor. But as much as they could, they broke you up. And so you were pretty much isolated. And you really had to be self sufficient, psychologically, emotionally and mentally. Story_ID: 624365 Speaker 1: Were there any teachers who basically, you know, were helpful or-- Speaker 2: Not a one, not a one. The chemistry professor, teacher, was an older gentleman. And I remembered there was a large like auditorium-type room, and I've always been rather frugal. I would, my mom would give me money to buy lunch, and I would take a lunch because I didn't want to spend the money. And I also used that lunchtime to study. And so I was outside of the chemistry study hall. Well where we had just had class. And the black kids used to sit together in the class. So what the chemistry teacher did was send the section out, where the black kids was on the front row and a few white kids. And he said, you guys go out first. And then he shut the door, but he did not realize I was standing outside the door. His name was Mr. Davis. I don't remember his first name, but I'll never forget that last name. And as I stood outside the door, I was in a state of shock because he was having a discussion about me in the class. And I had made the highest "A" for that semester in that class. There were other white kids, of course, who had A's, but since my grade point number was higher, he was furious. So he told the students, I will not tolerate this. I will kick your white blank if you allow this descendent from Africa to come to your school and outdo you. I could not believe what I heard. I always felt that the man didn't like me and didn't like the black students, but to hear this was just simply appalling. And, again, it did not unravel me. It made me more determined to do my very best. And, you know, shortly afterwards, you know, I encountered the same, the same teacher in a lab. And I'm looking at this man, and, you know, saying to myself, how on earth can you be that kind of person and feel good about yourself. A teacher is supposed to teach, you know. He just, he said he could not tolerate someone of my descendant outdoing his students. And that, I mean that was very painful for me. And so, at that point, I realized, you know, I have to do whatever I do on my own without any expectation of support from anyone in that environment. And that's how I proceeded, getting through there. Speaker 1: Okay, well, one thing, of all the other bad things, I mean they--would you say that they graded you fairly, I mean in terms of-- Speaker 2: They cheated whenever they could. But I performed so well that I would, you know, instead of a real "A", I'd get an A-minus. Or they'd cheat a little bit more, and I'd get a B-plus, you know. And it was always that situation. If there was any wiggle room, I was cheated. And so it was always a struggle. And then I had to, I had to readjust my own psychology and accept that that was a realty and that the only way I could counter that was to do my very best and to perform at the highest levels that I could humanly do and not worry about the results. Speaker 1: Now, did they ever try to retest you or imply that you were cheating in some way? Speaker 2: No, no, but something really traumatic happened the last year. My English teacher, we would have to write term paper. But it was an awful experience. The term paper was due in the following week, and this was before computers, of course. And Xeroxing was a challenge at that time. I had completed my term paper, and I thought it was odd that the teacher demanded that the term papers be turned in to her for review before they were finalized. And I thought that's odd, you know, but that's what she asked for. So I turned my term paper in with the rest of the students. And when it was time to give the term papers out, she didn't hand the papers out to us individually like she collected them. Instead, she put all the term papers on her desk and said, you come and get them. And that was the first thing that struck as being odd. And so when I got to the desk, there was no paper for me. My term paper was missing, which was due the next week. And I said to the teacher, where is my paper. She says, I don't have no idea. She says maybe you didn't turn it in. I said, of course, you know, I turned it in, you know. And so she said to me, Well, I guess you have to do it all over again, won't you? And it was a horrible experience. Some things I had written twice to make the paper look neater, but other things I didn't. So it took all the discipline and the focus that I had to re-do that paper. And it took me another month and a half or so during the summer before I could get a grade. That was devastating, but it taught me a lesson of a lifetime, that I would ever, ever get caught in that predicament again. Anything important, I would always have copies. I would always strategically put my copies in different locations. I would never, ever be that trusting. It helped me through my, you know, graduate education, my college education. I was always very protective of my work from that point on. Speaker 1: Now, in those days it was not easy to make a copy. Speaker 2: No, it was very difficult. Speaker 1: Because that was before Xerox. Speaker 2: And it cost money. Speaker 1: And, yeah, they had the thermo fax machine, and had the heated transfer. I know that cost money Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A mimeograph copy would be another way to do it or a carbon on the typewriter. Speaker 2: She knew that, and so she took advantage of that. Speaker 1: Okay, now, these are some rough stories, and so when it came time for--now, was there, you said there was nobody that really tried to help? Speaker 2: No, not at the Gadsden High. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 624366 Speaker 1: And so, as a senior in high school, did they let you be in the National Honor Society and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, it was interesting. I was able to be in, I get, they had a school newspaper. I think it was called 'Magnavox' or something, and they allowed me to participate in that. But everything else was, you know, I was pretty much shot out of it--shut out of it because of it was more of an election process. I had won a writing contest in high school that was given by, oh, one of these civic organizations. I can't think of the name right now. But it was a white organization in the city. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a scholarship, a $500.00 scholarship, which was a lot of money during that time. Speaker 1: This is like a Rotary Club or something? Speaker 2: Like a Rotary Club type. And I think it was the Rotary Club. And so I submitted this essay and won. But the people did not realize at first that I was a black student. And so normally, the student gets a $500.00 scholarship and you get invited to this luncheon, and it's put in the newspaper. And once I won the English teacher came back to me, and she says, I'm sorry, Jennie, but they're not willing to give you the scholarship, the prize because they didn't realize you were black. This is not for black students. So there will be no award this year. Speaker 1: What a town? Speaker 2: Yeah, what a town. Speaker 1: So, of course, you're--did you have a counselor for-- Speaker 2: Oh, the counselor (laughter), the counselor at the high school was interesting as well. The school was upset because I was taking college prep courses, college preparatory courses. So these were their more advanced courses, and they could not imagine why, you know, a young black girl wanted to take their more challenging academic courses. So one day, I'm sitting in the class, and I hear my name, Jennie Patrick, come to the counselor's office. And I thought, oh, my goodness--this is in the middle of my class, not during break or anything. And I thought, oh, my goodness, something must have happened to one of my parents. And I was just horrified. So I get up and walk out of class, and I go to the counselor's office, and I'm standing at her desk. And I wouldn't sit. She says, sit down. I said, no, no, what's happening? Is one of my parents ill? Something wrong with my parents? She said, no. And, you know, now, I'm really shocked. I said, you've taken me out of my class. What is wrong? She says, I just need to talk to you. I said, "During my class?" She said, sit down. I said, I really don't want to sit down. And she says, sit down, Niggres, is the word they used to use. I sat, and I said, what is this about? She says, I need to better understand you. You are an odd child (laughter). I said, really? She says, you don't fit in any category that I've studied. You want to go to college. You're taking all these courses. She says, why are you doing this? And I stood up, and I looked at her. I said, "Lady, you have disrupted my class for a bunch of nonsense." She says, how dare you talk to me that way. I said, you don't deserve anything else. She says, I can't believe this. I said, believe it. I said, for future, do not ever, I said, hear me, do not ever call me out of my class. I said, I don't care what your books say. I don't care what your opinion is of me. You are irrelevant. It is what I think of me that is important. I am going to go to college, I am going to be successful. And you don't matter and walked away and went back to class. Speaker 1: So you didn't, there was no penalty for talking like that to the counselor? Speaker 2: What can she do? I talked the same way to the superintendent (laughter). I had been attacked at the school by a young white boy, and he had--I wore glasses, and he kicked my glasses off my face one day. And I, when my father came to pick me up, I said to my father, "Dad, please take me to the board of education. He looked at me. He said, oh, my goodness, Jennie, what is going on now? I told him the story. I said, I need to go see the superintendent. And when I went to the superintendent's office, I said, I need see the superintendent. And the secretary says, no, you can't see the superintendent. I said, I will see the superintendent today, now. And she looked at me, and the man came out. And he said, I hear you're out here disturbing the peace. I said, I need to talk to you. And he took me back. He said, I can't imagine a student barging in here like this. I said, something awful happened today and you need to know it. I said a student attacked me, kicked my glasses off my face, and I need you to deal with that student. I said, the principal and the teachers at the school ignored the situation. And I'm not happy about that. He said, well, what do you expect me to do about it? I said, I expect you, and I want you to expel him from school. He said, well, I'm doing no such thing. I said, by the time I finish with you, you will change your mind. I will be calling Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] I will be calling Civil Rights organizations. I am not going to let this go by. I said, and on top of it, I'm going to kill your student. He said, you said, what? (Laughter) And I said, you heard me. You can't even discipline him, I will take it in my own hands. He said, they send you to prison. And I naively said, well, I won't really care as long as I have my books. I said, but by the time I finish, you will not have a career. I said, so, are we going to deal with this? And he says, well, I will do the best I can. They took the student out of school for three days, and he says that is for his protection because we're concerned about you and what you'll do to our student. And they had policemen to follow me for about four or five days from class to class, pretty remarkable situation. Story_ID: 624367 Speaker 1: Okay, well, what's remarkable about this story, it seems to me, is that there are no adults around to advocate for you. So, I mean is that true? There's no, nobody from the-- Speaker 2: There were no adults-- Speaker 1: --Civil Rights organizations that recruited you? Speaker 2: Well, the Civil Rights organization, you know, there were people there in the town. But I was pretty much on my own, and all the other students that were there. There was so little real power from them, you know, that they had. And other than having meetings, you know, among, amongst themselves, you know, talking about what happened, nobody was going to the Board of Education, nobody was trying to pull in, you know, authorities from Washington to address, you know, the extreme discrimination that took place. Speaker 1: Was there any kind of an orientation or preparation for you as a student upon entering the-- Speaker 2: Yes, that was-- Speaker 1: --Gadsden High School? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: I mean by the Civil Rights groups that recruited the students? Did they do--(unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, yeah, well, what took place was a spokesman would come to the church. And they were really just trying to get people not to be so afraid but to go to the schools. And as I said, most people were frightened to death because, you know, there was a lot of violence from the Klan [Ku Klux Klan] in the past in these, you know, this little town and most other little Southern towns. And so people were reluctant to do things. The meeting that was our so-called "prep meeting" to attending the school, the focus was to go there, do well and be nonviolent. And I was fourteen, and I stood up in the meeting, and I said to the organizer and the preachers, I want to be perfectly clear with everyone. I will defend myself if need be. I do not want to tell a lie and don't anyone believing that I'm going to be nonviolent if there is violence committed against me. And then, unfortunately, I made the statement that if Jesus Christ slaps me, I will slap hell out of him (laughter), in the church. I remember the faces of the people, the face of my mom. She was horrified. And I sat down. But I meant what I said. And that mindset protected me. People understood, the students understood that she is not the student that you're going to jump and beat and there'd be no consequences. Speaker 1: Now, what, so did they do any follow-up meetings with the students later on to find out what the progress was or what the-- Speaker 2: No, never. Speaker 1: --incidents were? Speaker 2: Never, never. Speaker 1: That just seems completely irresponsible. Speaker 2: You're on your, you were on your own. It was very disjointed, very poorly organized. And, again, I think part of it is, you know, the churches were involved. I mean this, you're dealing with something that is foreign to people. I mean you're dealing with very difficult challenges, psychologically, emotionally, people worry about their own livelihoods, being too far out there, whether or not they're gonna lose their jobs. And so if you choose to go, you know, it's you and your family and those friends, you know, that are gonna be supportive of you. Initially, I think there were people who sort of helped my father, you know, watching the house, you know, trying to make sure we were protected that way. So-- Speaker 1: So every day you would go to school, you went with the other black students or-- Speaker 2: My father took me to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was so afraid for a while. And then at some point, we started riding the buses. But it was--'cause we had to walk a distance from the bus line to get to the school. So it was very dangerous, quite dangerous to be on this. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So the parents sort of, you know, rotated for a while. You know, if one couldn't take, the other one would take the child to school or pick the child up. Speaker 1: There were, how many black students in-- Speaker 2: Well, the first year there were eleven, and by the end of the first term, there were about five or six of us left. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: And most of those were small-statured girls who were physically active and would fight. Story_ID: 624368 Speaker 1: And by the time you graduated from high school, about how many of the black students were there? Speaker 2: Well, when we graduated, the second year was different. A lot more, I don't know the number of black kids came to the school the second year. And they were a different type of black student. They were not the most studious, academically oriented kid. They were, some sport-type guys that showed up who did not do very well in class. So the next batch of kids were more physically violent who came, who would, had no concept of doing anything nonviolent. If someone attacked, they attacked back. But it was a much larger number. I don't recall the number. And so that in some ways was good because now, you know, you have these kids who are just typical kids who are big guys, the big players, but also having those sports guys there sort of softened the white student body 'cause now, all of a sudden, and they're playing basketball with the white students and football with the white students and helping them to win games. And so the violence died out, the actual physical assault on us died out during that second year. But initially, that first semester during that second year, there were quite a number of incidents, but it became clear that the white students did not have an advantage anymore. Speaker 1: Okay, but the incident with the glasses, did that occur your last year. Speaker 2: That was my first year. Speaker 1: Your first year, okay. Speaker 2: First semester. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: So, I mean after that first year, things died down, you know, in terms of the absolute violence that were committed against us. But the psychological and the emotional isolation, you know, prevailed. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were on the verge of graduation, what were your--now, you said you worked on a yearbook, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked, no, I worked with the school newspaper. Speaker 1: I meant newspaper, yeah, school newspaper, right, right. That's a different--and were you involved in any other activities? Speaker 2: No, that was the only thing that I recall really participating in because most of the other activities, you had to be, you know, sort of-- Speaker 1: Elected? Speaker 2: Elected, you know. Speaker 1: Now, did, in terms of the social stuff, like the prom and that sort of thing, what was that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to the prom. I'm trying to remember if I had an escort at the prom. I actually don't recall (laughter), may have, may have gotten a black guy from another school to, from the Carver School to come. But it was not the most enjoyable prom. Some of the white students were cordial. Some of 'em would, you know, I just a little notebook, wrote me notes towards the end of the year, admiring my strength, admiring my intellect, appreciating the interactions, friendship with a few people. But often, wondering how did I survive because they saw the things that took place. Speaker 1: Did any of them ever apologize for-- Speaker 2: As an adult, I--about fifteen years or twenty years ago, I spoke to a girl, a woman who had attended the school. And she apologized for what she saw, which was, you know, rather shocking. And she lives in Atlanta as a school teacher and said to me, she doesn't, she always felt sorry, was her word, for me, but she never could imagine how I was able to endure what took place. Story_ID: 624369 Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have a college in mind at the time you were in school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I always wanted to go to U-C Berkeley [University of California, Berkely] because I thought of it as a liberal institution. It was always on the news in the '60's [1960s], you know, the Hippies and the whole story. I applied to a number of school and got in them. And I needed scholarships, of course, because my parents had no funds to-- Speaker 1: This is like, you're a senior in 1967, right? Speaker 2: Yes, so I was, had to be totally self sufficient if I wanted to be educated. And I always knew that from a small child. So that was nothing new to me. I filled out all the applications, all the financial aid requests. I did that all myself and helped my father to sign it. And so I got a scholarship to U-C Berkeley, which was just, I mean I was just so happy about that. But my mother did not really appreciate, you know, that that was really an achievement. So she was only concerned about the fact that it was so far away. She did not allow me to attend. So I lost that scholarship and ended up at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama]. She actually really wanted me to go to a junior college which had very little accreditation, every little status. And I just refused, right there in Gadsden [Alabama]. Speaker 1: That must have been sort of frustrating, I guess-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was very frustrating. Speaker 1: Yeah, and-- Speaker 2: Just incredibly frustrating. Speaker 1: And your parents, I guess, as much as you love them, you mother had no idea what, the scope of the, what was going on here, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. I mean, didn't really, totally appreciate or understand what I had just accomplished. And I think part of that is lack of education. And, you know, it was just one of those things that was part of my life, and I had to overcome that. Speaker 1: Okay, now, in terms of graduation from Gadsden High School, right, did you have any role in graduation at all? Or did they recognize you as one of the top students? Speaker 2: You know, I, no, they did not recognize me. I had an "A" average, you know. I had a 94.6 average out of 100. I think it was 94.6, somewhere along in there. And I had been cheated, just enough to keep me from getting that 95, which was rather frustrating so that they could say that I did not have a straight "A" average. So it's just, you know, you sort of learn to deal with. I mean some things you can control, and some things you can't in life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I just, you know, that was one of those realizations that I did the very best I could with those very challenging and difficult circumstances. And so it doesn't matter if they don't want to say she was a straight "A" student. Speaker 1: Okay, but you were able to take chemistry and physics, right? Speaker 2: Chemistry and physics and trigonometry and, you know, Algebra. Speaker 1: Did they teach calculus? Speaker 2: No, they did not teach calculus at that time. Speaker 1: All right, but you had trigonometry at least, and so, okay, so at--did you have a career goal in mind when you graduated? Speaker 2: I had thought about being a chemist, is what my original thought was. And then I changed my mind at the end of my freshman year to major in chemical engineering. Story_ID: 624370 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now, what was Tuskegee like? Now, here's you're going to Tuskegee, Alabama, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Tuskegee [University] was sort of a relief valve kind of environment (laughter) for me, surrounded by, you know, black students, enjoyed the environment. It was a very tough situation because I'm so much on my own, I had to maintain the scholarship. I had to work on the campus, and at the same time, do well in the classes. And so it was a very rigorous time for me, had no time for much of anything other than my studies. Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any teachers or advisors or anybody at Tuskegee that was helpful? Speaker 2: I had a physics professor who was a young, white male from, he had, I think, had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And he was very supportive, very encouraging, was fascinated with my intellectual skills and always made an effort to nurture me. Also, a chemistry teacher who was from one of the Ivy League schools. I cannot remember exactly which one. She and her husband both PhDs, a young white couple, very committed to teaching at Tuskegee. She taught there until she retired. But they were interested in, you know, offering a quality education to the students there. Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you--now, you probably had heard most of your life about the legacy of George Washington Carver, even having gone-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to Carver School for a period of time? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Did you, had you ever been to the campus to see the, some of his experiments and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, while I was a student there, I did go into the museum, the, George Washington Carver's museum and saw some of the produce that he produced, that is preserved and saw, you know, some of the things that he, you know, created, just a, really, a wonderful experience. And then to read about him as a person, he was a very humble, very brilliant man. Speaker 1: Okay, were you inspired by his humility? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was inspired by his humility. I think humility is a very good trait to have. I was inspired by his honesty, and those are two things that are very, very important to me as a person, to live my life in such a way that I don't have to remember lies (laughter). I'm a very simple, open, loving and giving individual. Maybe sometimes too simple, maybe sometimes too open. But it makes for a very uncomplicated life. I believe that life is best enjoyed when one gives to others of themselves. I think sometimes we get too involved with ourselves and what we achieve and what we own and what we do, that we forget that the real meaning of life is beyond one's self, you know. That's part of the reason I think there's sometimes a feeling of, people who are very successful, they seem not to be able to be comfortable with that success. They want more and more, and greed takes over because the material things only offer short-term sense of pleasure, you know. I think there is an energy that is given out. When a person releases a sense of warmth and love from within to someone else. That rewards that person who gives it out. Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me about how you first decided to get involved in chemical engineering instead of just chemistry? Speaker 2: Well, a friend mentioned to me that Tuskegee was about to start a chemical engineering program, and that person mentioned that, you know, towards, somewhere during my second semester there. And that excited me because I thought, I was doing very well, exceptionally well, in, with the chemistry major. And I thought this will be more challenging. And it will open up more avenues in terms of allowing me to look at how things are actually put together, engineering. And so I, you know, changed my major to chemical engineering. I was the first student to sign up for chemical engineering. And, unfortunately, for me, the head of the department was a Southern white male who did not think very highly black students in general, but thought even less of black female students. And so he was just beside himself when I, you know, went to sign up and did everything within his power to convince me that this was something I should not be doing. [mic scratching]. Speaker 1: Okay, was it at that point, was there a specific incident around why you decided to, you know, quit Tuskegee and to transfer to-- Speaker 2: Well, actually, there're a couple of things that happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The, you know, Tuskegee had just started this program and was having difficulty maintaining it. And so I attempted to transfer as an exchange student to the University of Michigan because they had an exchange program at that time. So I put in an application for it and never could hear anything back 'cause I submitted the application to the dean's office and then found out later that they basically trashed my, they trashed my application. Speaker 1: Tuskegee did, on the Tuskegee side. Speaker 2: Yeah, the dean's office, the dean did. And the dean was the, a person who wasn't really--he was a white male who didn't have, again, a lot of respect and faith in the black students. I think he's there simply for the money and the position. So the department started to fall apart and was collapsing, and so I, you know, decided it was time to leave because I wanted to pursue that area. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, what, 1969 or so? Speaker 2: I think I was still there in 1970. Story_ID: 624371 Speaker 1: Okay, so 1970, so you no longer had access to the scholarship to go to Berkeley, so-- Speaker 2: So that was a challenge. So I worked a year and saved every penny trying to go to Berkley [U-C Berkley], had enough money to survive about a half a year once I got there. And it was a tremendous hardship. And I didn't have any real support. I met a black professor named Dr. Harry Morrison. I took physics from him, and I was the only black kid in this large auditorium. And one day, he smiled at me. And I thought, oh, my goodness, the professor smiled at me. And so I was reluctant to just, you know, go down and say something to him because I didn't know whether or it would embarrass him or not. But I did. I took, you know, got the courage, and I went down and told him I wanted to say hello. And we started talking, and, you know, he asked me how was I doing. And at that time, I was really struggling financially, really had difficulty feeding myself 'cause I didn't have, you know, enough funds. So I would cut back on the quantity of food that I ate. And I explained to him what was happening. And he took upon, you know, upon himself to go to the financial aid office and secured me a grant, told them that I was an excellent student and there was no reason that the school couldn't find some way of financially helping me. So he really was very, you know, very important in my survival there at Berkley. Later on, it allowed he to house sit for him a couple of semesters which allowed , you know, me not to have the cost of living for that time period. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was, I think I've heard him mentioned by others at Berkley that we've interviewed as being one of the brightest people they've ever met. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very, very bright, very humble, just a wonderful spirit, yes. Speaker 1: I think one said he was the smartest man he had ever met. Speaker 2: I think he had a PhD in both mathematics and physics if I'm not mistaken. Speaker 1: Was he the first physics professor at Berkley, black, you know, physics professor? Speaker 2: May have been, I mean easily could have been. I'm not totally certain of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm pretty sure he's the one. Now, did you ever meet Robert Bragg. He was a material scientist. Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Don't know a lot about him. Berkeley was such an intense period of my life, had very little time to do anything other than study. I was the first black undergraduate student they had had in ten years. I was the only American female in the chemical engineering department at that time. They had three oriental students, female students. It was a challenging environment. Students were hostile, and so were many of the professors, really felt that I did not belong there. Speaker 1: Was Bill Lester there then? Speaker 2: Bill Lester was there. He was, I think associated with Lawrence Livermore, I think. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So he wasn't someone that I knew at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, just wondered. So, but from what I've read, there's an interview that we had in the packet where you were asked about your experiences at Berkeley, and they seem to be pretty bad. They almost sound like high school. Speaker 2: It was pretty bad. It was pretty awful. Yeah, Berkeley was a challenge. My senior year, we had to do design projects, and you usually work in teams of four people. And during the session that we were beginning to separate into teams, I sat in the room waiting for someone to join me and be on my team. And nobody would join me. And so I raised my hand, and the professor's name was Mr. Blue. I don't remember his first name, but I'll always remember his last name because he gave me the blues. But he, you know, was extremely bigoted. And I raised up my hand, and I said to him, nobody's on my team. And he looked at me, he says, "So what? You don't belong here anyway." And it shocked me. And I said, but this is a, you know, a project for a team. He says, "Well, you do the best you can as your team." And so here I am left with doing all this work that three other people should have been doing, by myself; horrendous experience. The teaching assistant was a Hispanic guy from some foreign country. I don't recall where. And he said to me, he says, I'm so saddened by what's, what I heard in the class. He says, I'll help you as much as I can, but I can't work on the project with you. And so I said, I'll do the best I can. I worked night and day, night and day, very, very little sleep. Towards the end of the project, I had gone to the campus early one morning, and again, this is before the days of the computers, so we had these huge Wang calculators that sat in a calculation room, they called it. And I'm sitting there, and I had been there since early morning, typing away, putting my little data there. And I was interrupted by these guys. Story_ID: 624372 Speaker 1: I was telling the story of doing these calculations, and I had gone there early in the morning. And as I sat in the room, all of a sudden, the door burst open to the room that I'm working. And these four students come in, four, young, white males, and they grabbed me and pulled me away from the calculator. And I'd been sitting there for hours. And they take the calculator and type in nonsense data to destroy the data that I had sat there and put in, you know. I, I was dumbfounded. I was just horrified. And they laughed and laughed and said, now, finish your project. I'm doing the project totally by myself, but when they saw that I was still crazy enough they said, and determined to finish it, they decided that they would disrupt it. And that was a really bad, painful experience, something that I found hard to comprehend. And even to this day, it is a deep kind of meanness and insensitivity that you wonder where that kind of energy comes from in another human being. Speaker 2: Right, right, that's horrible, ghee whiz. So you had to do all that work again? Speaker 1: Had to do the work again. I, it was horrifying. I became very, very ill, was hospitalized because at that point, I was not sleeping, had a terrible flu and was in the hospital for about a week before I realized I was there. During that time, they had to encase my body in ice because I had such a high fever [clearing throat]. And when I woke up, I remembered my cousin and my older brother standing above me. I had lost fourteen pounds in a week. And I'm not a very large person to begin with. But they told me that they had to forcibly take me to the hospital. I had gone by the University infirmary the day that I was ill asking for something to help with my headache. Apparently, when the physician took my temperature, I had a temperature of 104. But I was on my way to take an exam, and he said you can't go, you know, anywhere. We need to put you, you know, in the infirmary. And I said, no, no, I need to go take the exam. And he said I became really upset, and that they had to subdue me. And, because he's--and put me in the infirmary against my will. And as I said, I didn't wake up for a week. I was not aware. He said, I was--what did he call it? When you have a high fever, I can't think of the term right now. Oh, man-- Speaker 2: Comatose or-- Speaker 1: No, no, you become delirious. Speaker 2: Delirious, okay. Speaker 1: Delirious. And so that they were forced to deal with it because, you know, it's, a temperature of that level is, you know, physically dangerous. So I finally did complete the project and finished the school year out and graduated. But it was just a very challenging experience. Another story I tell is about a math instructor that spat on the floor every time I walked into the classroom. And the first day of class, I sat down and he looked at me, and he said, you are in the wrong room. And I asked was this for Advanced Engineering Mathematics? He says, yes, but you are in the wrong room. And I said, I don't think so. And he walked around and gave computer cards out to the other students that were there and did not give me a card. And I looked at him, and I said, you didn't give me my computer card. And he said, "You don't belong here". And I said, "I need my computer card". And he walked, he started to walk away, and I smashed down on the desk, and then I said, "Give me my computer card". And it stunned him, and he came and threw it on the desk. And the next day, when he walked into the classroom, and I always sat at the front of the classroom because I didn't have the best eyesight. And I didn't want to be distracted. And so when he got ready to go towards the front of the classroom, and he passed me on the edge, he spat on the floor near me. And it stunned me, you know. And there was this little guy who was a Chinese guy from chemical engineering who was taking the class because we were the only two chemical engineers in that class. And he looked at me, you know, his eyes, you know, wide open. And after the class, he said to me, "Jennie, don't look at me, don't talk to me. I don't know you." I don't want to be associated with you. And I thought, oh, my goodness, okay. I said, okay, no problem. That day I went and got a tutor who was, I think a person doing a PhD in physics from Africa, from one of the African countries. I asked him would he make sure that I was always a step ahead and make sure that, you know, I was solid in the course and explained to him what had taken place. And he said, I'll do everything I can to be supportive, and he was. Speaker 2: What was his name? Do you remember? Speaker 1: I do not remember his name. I, you know, I often-- Speaker 2: And he was a grad student there-- Speaker 1: Yes, he was a grad-- Speaker 2: --working on a PhD? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In physics, I think. Speaker 2: In physics. Okay. Speaker 1: But he was very helpful. Speaker 2: So was he studying under Dr. Morrison? Speaker 1: I don't know. You know, he could have been in mathematics as I think about it. Dr. Morrison was a theoretical physicist. So I'm not really sure, but he either--I think he was a physics major so he could have been in any other area in physics. But I'm not totally sure. But he was helpful. Story_ID: 624373 Speaker 1: At the end of the course, I had done well, but the teacher always cheated. He always marked my grade down as much as he could. And I felt that I deserved an "A" in the class, and I went to him several occasions where I felt like he had mismarked the exam to contest what he was doing. But the very first exam I performed very well on it. And when he came into the classroom to give the exam out, he walked up to me and smiled, which was shocking because every other time, he had spat on the floor. The day of the exam, we sat at tables. The day of the exam, the professor came to my table, sat directly across from me, put his hands to his face and stared at me two feet away, with his face on my table (laughter). And I looked at him, and I thought, oh, my goodness. This man is trying to mess me up, make me nervous so I can't function. And that was not going to happen. I looked at him and I said something not very proper (laughter), that I won't repeat. But it shocked him. His eyes got big, and then I put my face into my paper, and I forgot he was even there. I focused. I had that ability to concentrate. So when he passed out the exam, the Oriental student, after the class and the other white fellows--there were no other girls in the class, they came to me and said, "Jennie, you just have done very well on the exam", which I had. And I said, yes, I did. Well, what did you do? I said, well, it's really none of your business because they all knew that I had done well because the professor, first of all, did not spit and second of all, he smiled at me, which was really, really incredible. So from that day forward, he stopped spitting. At the end of the course, when I said to him, when he--he gave me a "B-plus" in the course. And I was furious. And I said to him, you cheated. And he said, I don't understand you people. He says, you got a good grade. I said, earned an "A". You gave me a B-plus. You have cheated on me every step of the way. And he just sat there and looked at me. The same guy, after the quarter was over, I was crossing the street on Berkeley's campus, and I was standing at the traffic light, and this car comes to a screeching halt to allow me to walk (laughter), through the crosswalk. And I was sort shocked that the car made such an effort to stop. So I really carefully looked to see who was behind the wheels, and it was that professor, telling me to walk across the street. And I said, no, no (laughter), no thank you. I could not feel certain that I would get across the (laughter) in one piece or whether he was trying to make a nice gesture. So I chose to allow him to move forward. Speaker 2: These are really rough stories. Speaker 1: Yes, they are. Speaker 2: This is U-C Berkeley, supposedly in everyone's mind, the liberal bastion of higher education-- Speaker 1: Well, that's what I believed. That is what I believed, but the School of Engineering was extremely, sciences and engineering, tremendous challenges for students of color. Story_ID: 624374 Speaker 1: Now, were the students, black students on campus organized in any kind of way? Speaker 2: We would have little get-together's, you know, here and there, but not really that organized, at least the engineering students were not. I mean they had, you know, a little organization. I did not participate very much at all because all of my strength was needed in surviving. So I, I recall maybe going to one or two functions the whole time I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. I know there should have been a black student union on campus. I know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'm sure there was. Speaker 1: --a lot of the science students we've interviewed don't necessarily participate in that because they're so intensely involved in doing science-- Speaker 2: Well, it's, you know, it's such a demanding curriculum for the science and the engineering students. And at least during my era, there were so few of us that it made it even more challenging, you know. Story_ID: 624375 Speaker 1: So, you finished your degree in what, '71' [1971] or '72' [1972]? Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], okay. That makes sense, you had the year off. Okay, so you got a Bachelor's of Science in Chemical Engineering? Speaker 2: In Chemical Engineering. Speaker 1: And did you have like sort of a capstone project that you worked on? Speaker 2: That would, I think you're referring to the senior design project, and that was the project that I had to complete by myself when it was usually a team. Speaker 1: Right, so what--well, 'cause, all right, 'cause you ended up in the hospital-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --trying to do that. Now, were you able to, when you got out of the hospital, to finish your test and-- Speaker 2: Yes, I-- Speaker 1: --turn in your project? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: And interesting enough, the school was so concerned wanting me to attend the graduation because I was the only black student in the College of Chemistry to graduate that year. And I had not planned to attend the graduation because it had been such a trying and difficult environment to survive in. And so even the dean, so the dean of the school called me and asked me to please come and have my family come to the graduation ceremony and huge audience. And there were three, four black people in the audience, my brother, a cousin and a black guy who was a friend and myself. Speaker 1: Now is this your brother who is the surgeon? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a student at that time in San Francisco at the medical school. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was in town when you were doing your-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did he know of any of your trials and tribulations? Speaker 2: Probably not that much. He was probably having his own (laughter), trying to get through medical school, talked to him every now and then. But I had to be really focused basically like a laser to get through all that took place. And these are just some of the more, I mean there were so many things that happened, day in and day out, that I think most people would have just given up. So I've shared with you some of the most outrageous things. But the subtle hostility, I call it muffled hostility, the subtle anger, backlash, that comes day-in, day-out, the subtle put-down's, just pretty challenging. And if you are weak, psychologically and emotionally, you're not gonna endure those challenges. But I had been already conditioned from high school that I had the ability to completely block things out. And I had, I would say from early childhood, training, psychologically, mentally and emotionally, not to allow others to define me. It did not matter what you thought. What mattered was what I thought of me. And it mattered what I wanted to achieve, you know. I learned very early in life that often when you put your hand out for help, it gets smacked. So I tended not to stretch out my hand very much in life because I did not have that expectation that there would be others that would help me and support me. Story_ID: 624376 Speaker 1: It's seems like it was awfully tough, no counseling or any support. Now, what did you--now, you went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for graduate school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And how was that facilitated from, did someone help you make that connection at U-C Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] or did you-- Speaker 2: No, I just applied and got admitted. There were some things that were taking place at Berkeley that had gotten one of the professors in trouble. He had-- Speaker 1: One of your professors? Speaker 2: Yeah, he is a very world-wide, known thermodynamicist who had written stuff in my academic record that was not permitted by law or by the university. And so Berkeley was very helpful because I had threatened a lawsuit, that he had done that. And so they made certain that I, you know, could get to the schools that I wanted to go to, the schools that I applied to. They made sure that they had other people to give recommendations, and the university supported me in my effort to go further into graduate school. Speaker 1: Okay, who was this professor? I think history, his name should go down in history. Speaker 2: His name was John Prausitz, John Prausitz is his name. Speaker 1: How do you spell Prausitz? Speaker 2: Prausitz is P-R-A-U-S-I-T-Z, I think. He, (huh), he just had such an intense bias towards black people. It's pretty remarkable. When I became a student at MIT, he came to MIT to give a lecture. And my advisor was another world-wide known thermodynamicist. And they were colleagues and friends, and he told my advisor that he wanted to talk to me because he had made a mistake. He had misjudged me, and he had wanted to apologize for what he had done and asked for a meeting with me. And I said, no, I don't want to see, talk to the man. And my advisor said, you know, why are you doing this? And I said, because he does not deserve a meeting with me after all that he attempted to do, and he got caught. So, he was delivering a special lecture at MIT at that time, and students were very much in awe with him, very much admired him, and he was up on the podium on the stage. And I had sat at the very back of the auditorium because I did not want to have to interact with the man. And so he walked off the stage into the audience and walked down to me. And I saw him coming, and I thought, clearly, he can't be coming to me. And, unfortunately, for me, that was what he was doing. And he walked up to--and the students are just so impressed that this professor, you know, this world-wide known professor is walking to speak to me. And he walked up and said, Jennie, I, he reached out his hand to shake my hand and said, I want to say hello. And I just looked at him and did not respond. And he turned around and walked back on the stage. Well, after he had delivered his lecture, and I had gone back to my lab, my advisor unlocks the door, and here walks Professor Prausitz into my lab. And he was determined to make me hear what he had to say. And I was sitting at my desk, and he says, he reached his hand out again, and said, "I am sorry for what I did. I was wrong about you. I hear that you're doing very well here. You're a great student. I, I misjudged." And I said, and, you know, he again wanted to shake the hand, and I said, I don't want to shake your hand. I said, you know, if you were truly sorry for what you did to me, then make a change in your attitude and in your life. I said, are you capable, are you capable of believing that a student, even though she or he may have black skin, still could be intellectually capable of performing. I said, so if you want to repent, tell me that you won't ever treat another black student the way that you treated me. You don't need to prove to me anything because in my mind, you are who you are and will always be that person. But if you want to change, then do something about it. Story_ID: 624377 Speaker 1: So, I think the most important thing that I would like to say in terms of history is that in spite of all that happened in my life, I am not bitter. I looked at every situation for what it was worth. It was a teaching moment for me. It was a challenging moment for me. It made me stronger, it made me more determined. And it made me take the position that people can only do to you what you allow them to do. If you let someone get into your head and make you stray from your goal, then you've lost the war. If you become bitter and angry because someone else is small, you're ruining your own life. And so for me, these things just happened. And I look back and just see them as things and people, and it allows me to move forward in life, in an even more positive vein, believing that I am who I am. You are who you are. For the most part, people do not change. And if you let someone intervene in life for you and get you off your path, then in many ways, you are responsible for that. Speaker 2: Now, did you ever--now, this is a lot to endure, all the stuff you described-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --is a lot to endure, and your courage and fortitude is remarkable. But did you ever have any counseling or did anybody ever talk to you about any of this? Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: 'Cause people have psychological help-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --that haven't gone through half of what you've gone through. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, fortunately, for me, I think that I was given a gift, a gift of strength and a gift of insight. Over the years, I've been the student who have helped other students who were breaking under similar pressures. When I was a student at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], on occasion, I had as many as black--six black students sitting in a very, very small dormitory room, sitting around me to draw from my strength and my courage and my determination because they were having difficulties surviving the emotional, the psychological stresses that they endured. I had deans of students, sending students to me for me to counsel them. And I found that rather incredible. I'm, you know, I'm a student myself, but I've always had the desire to help others. But I could help lead them on a path of how you emotionally and psychologically approach things. The psychiatrist at the university was not very helpful to those students. And because the training that one would get in a formal educational background in psychiatry is not going to include these kinds of situations. And I don't think many of them had the kind of personal depth, you know, that they need to reach down into the spirit and the soul of another person. People, when people attack other people psychologically, they expect to win. They expect to be able to penetrate your psyche. And for me, the key was never to allow that to happen. Since I have no expectations of you as a person in terms of your ability to demonstrate character and the right, do the right things, then I'm not injured. I don't develop this victim kind of psychology. That's not part of my makeup. I am a warrior. And I've always said that since I was a small child. I am a soldier, and soldiers have to be strong. And soldiers have to be focused. And the key is not letting people get into your head, not letting people make you feel unworthy, not allowing people to make you feel useless, not valuable, not intelligent. When people say things to you, what I do is, I hear what you say because I can learn from my worst enemy. I listen very carefully. I try to be very analytical in what you say, and I analyze every word and see how I can use that information to better myself as a person. Story_ID: 624378 Speaker 1: Okay, now, who was your advisor? Speaker 2: My advisor's name was Professor Robert C. Reid. That's R-E-I-D. He is a, he was--he's now deceased, a world-wide, known thermodynamicist, very well-known and respected and admired. Speaker 1: Okay, and, now what was your dissertation about? Speaker 2: My dissertation was about super-heated limit temperature or different substances. And that's a technical word--I guess I should have tried to review it to think in terms of looking how different liquids, when they have contact with each other, how, if there's heat and energy there, how those liquids interact with each other. And it's probably a little bit too difficult to get too far into in terms of just everyday concepts. But it's looking at what we call "nucleation phenomena". For instance, if you have water on a stove, and it's boiling, how those little bubbles format, how they're made, the heat that is required to create that bubbling, those little air bubbles in boiling water or something. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, the boiling point of any liquid, I guess--now, correct me if I'm wrong 'cause I'm not a, I didn't study hard in science in school (laughter), not hard enough. But the boiling point of any liquid is the stage when it starts turning into a gas, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. The liquid becomes vapor. Speaker 1: I got that right, so far we got that. Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: So you were studying how different liquids interact-- Speaker 2: Yeah, when you-- Speaker 1: --at the boiling point? Speaker 2: Well, what happens, what was happening, in industry sometimes, they would have two liquids in contact. And they would have different boiling points. And what would happen is sometimes one of 'em would start to boil very violently. And you're talking about huge vessels that may have hundreds of gallons of particular chemicals in it. And if one of them starts to boil unexpectedly, then you have an enormous explosion. And so that was the phenomena that I was trying to understand and give theory to why, when and how it happens. Speaker 1: Okay, just kind of explain that. When does the explosion take place? Is it because the two liquids boil at different temperatures (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they boil at different, yeah, they will boil at different temperatures, but there were other perimeters that actually affected when one would boil versus the other because of the contact of those two liquids, that actual contact itself could alter the surface tension between the two liquids, which could then maybe potentially lower the boiling point of one of the more volatile liquids so that the amount of heat that is being put on that vessel would unexpectedly be too much-- Speaker 1: So would that then ignite the liquid? Speaker 2: Then it would cause that one liquid to all of a sudden, you know, all these little bubbles now become like a big explosion. Speaker 1: Okay, so it would be fair to say that they ignite like, the heat would cause the liquid, rather than to boil anymore, it would cause it to just-- Speaker 2: It just really, the boiling is actually, if you look at water boiling, it's pretty violent. I mean if you look at all what's taking place, and if you have this in a vessel that is closed and you're heating it, and you expect to be able to heat it to a higher temperature, and it actually, the temperature that you expect to be able to heat it to is way too high because of the contact with that other liquid. And so when it starts to boil, all of a sudden this enormous amount of energy just becomes like a little bomb that goes off. Speaker 1: Okay, so the explosion is the strain against, of the vessel whatever it's in, a beaker or (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, the explosion, it could be in a vessel, the explosion is coming from within the liquid itself because all of a sudden, you now have an enormous amount of energy in this chemical that one does not expect to be there. And if you have an enclosed situation, it makes it even more dangerous because this energy cannot escape. Speaker 1: So, well, I guess what I'm trying to figure out, is it dangerous when it's not contained, I mean-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's dangerous. Speaker 1: --does it just disperse in the air or-- Speaker 2: No, it's, it's deadly. It's deadly. Speaker 1: It could blow up. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So give me an example of two liquids that would-- Speaker 2: Oh, I can't think of that right now (laughter) on the top of my head. You know, I used to examine all kinds of different classes of hydrocarbons with oils, but, you know, the specific chemicals right now, I can't recall them, that I used. I used, looked at different fluorocarbons that was at the time being used in industries, just a variety of chemicals that could be used to make plastics, that kind of thing that would require being mixed with other chemicals. Speaker 1: Okay, for some reason I keep thinking about what would happen if you boiled gasoline (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, no (laughter). Speaker 1: It doesn't seem like a good idea, but (unclear)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not a good idea. Speaker 1: Yeah, so that was your dissertation, and can you think of the title of it? We don't have-- Speaker 2: It's been such a long time, "Super heat limit temperatures of something (laughter). I wish I had looked. I can't think of the complete title on it at this point. Speaker 1: Okay, it's the study of what happens with super heat that combines-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --certain chemicals (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 624379 Speaker 1: Okay, so after your PhD, now was there, did you, was there anything special about your graduation, getting your PhD--I know it is special in the first place. You were the first black woman to achieve a PhD in Chemical Engineering in the country. Speaker 2: Yes, that is correct. Speaker 1: So this is a big deal, and was that noted during that time? Speaker 2: Yes, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] was the first university, I think it was in 1888, that started chemical engineering. And schools like MIT, Berkeley, Wisconsin had a lot of the history and old timers who had passed the history on. When I finished my PhD at MIT, my advisor was the person who told me that, Jennie, you are the first African American to obtain a PhD in Chemical Engineering, African American female, to obtain a PhD in Chemical Engineering. Speaker 1: Now, this is 1979, right? Speaker 2: Nineteen-seventy nine [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay, so 1979, this is the last year of the Carter [President Jimmy Carter] administration. The, I think the Iran hostage crisis takes place that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --same year. So, now, were you hired (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I had lots of offers. I was really surprised. Every place I interviewed, I got an offer. My advisor and I often sort of bumped heads. Very, he was a very strong personality, somewhat mischief, somewhat of a prankster, a brilliant man, tremendous teacher, tremendous teacher, loved teaching. I was somewhat suspicious because I, you know, I thought that maybe he would give me the best recommendation because of some of the encounters (laughter) that we had. Speaker 1: You know, he was also a good friend of the-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes-- Speaker 1: --professor from Berkeley that-- Speaker 2: --but to my shock, he did the reverse. I had interviewed for a position as a professor, and this professor asked me, he said, you know, you got such a--he says, he asked me what was the relationship like with my advisor. And I was suspicious when he asked that, and I said, "Why do you ask?" He says, well, I've never seen a recommendation like this one. And so immediately, I thought, "Oh, my gracious. He gave me a bad recommendation." And I said, so he said bad things about me, is that the case? He says, you thought he would say bad things about you? He says, no, to the contrary. He has you walking on water. I said, "Excuse me?" He said, I've never seen a recommendation like this. He says, I'm surprised that you thought he may give you a bad one. I said, we had conflict. He said, well, obviously, that conflict made him have enormous respect for you. And he says, for him, knowing who he is, to write a recommendation, says, you're pretty special. So I was pleased, of course, but shocked. Speaker 1: Now, what was your biggest conflict over, if you recall? Speaker 2: Lots of things, lots of things. He seemed to have wanted to just continue to add work, additional work to me, not always very helpful. So I was pretty much on my own, seemed to just, wanted to challenge me. And if I was going to succeed, it would be because of me and no one else. And that was the way it ended up. And so at the end of the dissertation, when I defended it--you normally present your dissertation and the room is filled with the professors. And they send you out after you present your information and they debate. Sometimes, it'll be a matter of minutes if they feel very good about you, half hour, hour. When it hits an hour, you're really probably in trouble. And after 15 minutes for me, they came back out and said, "Congratulations". And that was rather surprising to me 'cause it took a short time. And my advisor, I noticed he got to the end of the line, and I wondered why was he doing that. So he walked to the end of the line, and everybody had walked out of the room, and he looked at me, and he says, "You know, you're a tough cookie" (laughter), and I'm looking at the man. He says, you're one of the strongest people I've ever met. Congratulations, you won this war. Speaker 1: That's an interesting comment, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So I can see why you might have suspected that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you won this war. That was profound to me. Speaker 1: Interesting. Speaker 2: What were the backgrounds of these men? I mean did they share a similar background or did you ever--I mean I don't know if you had the opportunity to--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: No, I think, I think chemical engineering traditionally was very, very conservative. Traditionally, it was a white male discipline. And since it started at a place like MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], it had a lot of elitism associated with it. And so I was pretty much out of place when you think about it, in every sense of the word. I was neither male nor white. And-- Speaker 2: I wouldn't (unclear) be surprised if they had that much energy that--we hear often from people in the sciences that once they can get to the MIT level or that people don't really think about that-- Speaker 1: Well, MIT, in general, was a very good place for me. It did, the hostility was nowhere near the hostility at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley]. MIT had a lot more black people by the nature of the school in science and engineering, had a lot more women. And so I loved the environment. I loved, I thrived on the intellectual challenge there. I thrived on meeting people with such brilliant minds. So for me, it was a great environment. The hostility was not as blatant as it had been at Berkeley. There were still lots of problems, don't get me wrong. But I never had, you know, really ugly confrontations with professors. Story_ID: 624380 Speaker 1: You said your advisor would do mischievous things, or silly things, I guess? Speaker 2: Well, he would do silly things. Rather not get into all those details, but he was, he was a character. You know, he, I think deep inside was, you know, a pretty decent human being. He would do stuff like--I'll tell you one. One time, what he did in class, I had talked to him about a fairly difficult concept in thermodynamics and had discussed it with him. And so he brought that concept, so he knew that I knew and understood the concept. So in class, he decided to ask the question in class about what we had discussed as a question to the other students. Well, nobody knew the answer. But he knew that I knew the answer because I had talked to him about it. So the students sat there. So my advisor sort of looks over at me, and I just sat there, looked at him. And that puzzled him because he knew I knew. So he called me after class and says, Jennie, I don't understand you. Your classmates don't know how bright you are. And I know--we just talked about this, and you know the answer. And you wouldn't talk, you wouldn't say a word in class. Why? I said, because I don't have to prove to them anything. I don't have that need. I don't care whether they know I knew or not (laughter). It's not, the issue is not with me. If there's an issue about someone questioning my intellect, it is their personal problem. It is not mine. Therefore, you know, there's no reason for me to jump and to try to demonstrate or prove to someone something about me that I already know. And he found that very puzzling. Story_ID: 624381 Speaker 1: Okay, well, okay, now, after MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], you got some job offers and recommendations, and you were telling about the glowing recommendation you received from your advisor. So where did you eventually land? Speaker 2: I ended up, my first job was at General Electric in Schenectady, New York. And it was the Research Center there. At the time GE and Bell Labs were the two most prestigious research centers in the country. Speaker 1: Okay, we did interview a man who was there, and was working on lasers, and I can't think of his name now, but he was from Long Island. His parents had a duck farm (laughter), and we interviewed him Schenectady. But, so were there any other blacks working in the area that you worked in? Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a number of black people, a few chemical engineers up there, a number of chemists. I'm not sure if there were any physicists there or not. But there were, you know, it was a few, you know, not a whole lot. Again, you probably could count us all on one hand--maybe two hands, maybe. So I'm sure there were less than ten. Speaker 1: Okay, it is an age when this is all sort of new to GE, having African American employees of any significant number. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, how did things go? Now, what was, you were a research (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was a research, staff engineer. Speaker 1: Okay, staff engineer. Speaker 2: Had a, you know, an enjoyable stay at GE. The president of the company, Dr. Roland Schmidt, took an interest in me, which I thought was unusual, provided me a lot of liberties that I took for granted and didn't understand how special they were at the time, unfortunately, but provided me with an account to travel, extensively talking to students at various universities, to travel and do whatever I saw fit, gave me a budget, an independent budget to do this with and just showed an enormous amount of respect and admiration to me. Speaker 1: Okay, what research were you conducting for General Electric? Speaker 2: Oh, GE, boy, that's so long ago. Let me think because it's so many projects. I think at GE I did basically, supercritical extraction technology, and this is a technology that was brand new at that time, and there was only a handful of researchers in the country that was working in supercritical extraction. This is a technology that separates different substances and purified different things. For instance, today, you can see supercritical extraction used to separate caffeine from coffee in the food industry, nicotine from tobacco. It's used a lot in the herbs industry now, natural foods industry where the essence of various herbs are separated from, say, a leaf. If you wanted to extract the oil from a particular herb plant, you use this technology. And what they is either water or carbon dioxide as an agent to make this extraction. And therefore, you're not using these harsh chemicals that then become of that product or that food product or that substance that you're trying to separate. Speaker 1: So do they use carbon dioxide, that's a gas, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, to extract. Speaker 2: Yes, so it's a high-pressure technology where you're using high pressures and sometimes high temperatures to do these extractions. Speaker 1: Okay, and I was reading somewhere that they use it to extract cholesterol from foods. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, nowadays, they're using it in so many different ways. It has run its full course in terms of development. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were doing this at GE from 1979, I guess, to-- Speaker 2: Yes, 1979 till--boy, I'm losing track of time here, '79' [1979] till '83' [1983], I think. Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983], okay. And any story about General Electric you wanna tell us before we move you to the next one? Speaker 2: No, General Electric was intellectually stimulating, a pretty good environment to work in. Story_ID: 624382 Speaker 1: Okay, so in '83' [1983], where did you go? Speaker 2: Let's see, GE, from GE I went to--1983 to Philip Morris. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I worked at Philip Morris Research Center, using supercritical extraction technology on tobacco. There I was focused on removing the carcinogens from the tobacco plant. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is the age when, I know a lot of--well, no, is it--I guess it was the earlier '70s [1970s], where the tobacco companies were all fighting to obscure the fact that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there at the nick of time when, I was there right before the first lawsuit. And Philip Morris, shockingly enough, had a really sophisticated research facility, had animal laboratories, highly qualified PhD chemists, biochemists, biologists and chemical engineers. And Philip Morris was doing research on these animals and was really able to pretty much state scientifically that tobacco caused cancer. But that was not public knowledge, and that was not something they wanted to be known. One of the reasons I was willing to work for Philip Morris was I thought that I was going to be able to make a contribution to mankind by removing these carcinogens from tobacco, but Philip Morris made the decision that they did not want to use the technology for that effort, and basically said to me, we appreciate your skills, your capability. We don't want you to talk about this because it says that we are aware of the dangers of our product, and we're just going to pretend we don't know anything, I mean, in so many words. I quit after a couple of years because I just felt there was no real integrity there. They destroyed the animal research facility in one day to make sure that they were ahead of the first lawsuit. So, and shredded all the lab notebooks so the data was not available. Speaker 1: Okay, so all the work that you did was basically, a lot of the work you did was destroyed-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm not so sure they destroyed the work that I did. They may have because I can't say that for certain, but I had been able to demonstrate that you could remove the carcinogens from tobacco without destroying the tobacco. They denied that fact under oath, yeah. Speaker 1: What were some of the carcinogens in tobacco at that point? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't recall the long chemical names. I just don't have the capacity in the memory at this point. But there're hundreds of chemicals in the tobacco, hundreds. Speaker 1: That cause cancer? Speaker 2: Yes, hundreds. Speaker 1: That can be removed. Speaker 2: That can be removed. So I don't think to this day that they're using the technology. Speaker 1: Is the, in your opinion, would the extraction technology be so expensive that they couldn't (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, it's not expensive. Philip Morris uses, Philip Morris brought, I think General Foods or one of those companies, and they use it to extract, I think caffeine from tea. But they also can use the technology to concentrate the caffeine, I mean the nicotine in the tobacco. So it is to their best interest to concentrate the nicotine so that you become more addictive. Speaker 1: So, is that, the concentration process, is it just the reverse of-- Speaker 2: Is the reverse. Speaker 1: --of the-- Speaker 2: Extraction. Speaker 1: Yeah, of extraction. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, you now can take the nicotine and implant it. But also, it gives them the advantage in the sense that they now can buy inferior tobacco plants and put in fragrances and tastes into this inferior product. So they can alter that product. Speaker 1: And spike the nicotine content. Speaker 2: Say that again? Speaker 1: And spike the nicotine content. Speaker 2: Yeah, they can spike the nicotine as well. Speaker 1: Well, I can't say I'm losing faith in (unclear) (simultaneous) (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Oh, boy. But I think in recent years, they've had to admit to some of their wrongdoings. Story_ID: 624383 Speaker 1: Yes, so 19--around 1986 or so, you moved on? Speaker 2: I stayed at Philip Morris till, I think 1985, 1983, '84' [1984]. Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you go next? Speaker 2: And then I left Philip Morris, and I moved on to Rohm and Haas, outside of Philadelphia in Bristol, Pennsylvania. And that, again, was a research center. Speaker 1: And what kind of research were you conducting there? Speaker 2: Okay, at Rohm and Haas, I was a manager, and I had about thirty, thirty-plus engineers, PhDs, Masters, working for me doing research on different processes that the company had and trying to develop new technology for them. Story_ID: 624384 Speaker 1: All right, 1985, now, you're with Rohm & Haas. Now, what does Rohm and Haas do? Speaker 2: Rohm and Haas is a specialty chemical company, and they made all kinds of things. They made Lexan (ph.), fertilizers, herbicides, intermediates for paint, different types of plastic materials, just a whole bunch, thousands of different chemicals. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what projects did you work on--now, you were supervisor? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a manager there, and I had a, I used to, I actually created a group called the "Fundamental Chemical Engineering Research Group". And they gave me the ability, the latitude just travel and select people from all over the country, the best students. You know, I had MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] graduates, Cal-Tech, Stanford, some of the best PhD engineers that you could find. And so I had a very good group of young people that were just very, very bright, and so we, you know, we were very creative in looking at ways to improve the productivity of the company's existing processes, but also looking at how you bring new technology to the company and how you approach things on a different scale. Speaker 1: Okay, so how long were you at Rohm and Haas? Speaker 2: Let's see, Rohm and Haas, I was there from 1985 to 1990, I think it is. Story_ID: 624385 Speaker 1: Okay, and where did you go in 1990? Speaker 2: Okay, in 1990, I left Rohm and Haas, and I moved to Alabama and to Birmingham, Alabama, worked for a company called Southern Company Services. But the reason I left Rohm and Haas at that time was my mother had had a massive stroke that January of 1990. And I felt I needed to move back to be able to take care of her and my father, and that was what prompted that move. I had just actually gotten a recent promotion at Rohm and Haas so it was difficult to walk away, but it was necessary. Speaker 1: So, at Southern, this is--the name of the place Southern-- Speaker 2: Southern Company-- Speaker 1: --Company. So,-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Southern Company Services, and they, it's, you know, it's like a sub company of sub, the Southern Company, Southern Company which is the, I guess the mother company for Georgia Power, Alabama Power, Mississippi Power. Speaker 1: Okay, so (unclear). So, now, you were there until, was it, okay. I'm looking at the wrong list here. But so, well, how did things go at Southern Company Services? Speaker 2: Southern Company Service ended up being a small nightmare for me. When they hired me, they didn't have blacks in management positions at that point dealing with technical things for certain--I think they had someone in Human Resources. They didn't have females in, you know, not real management positions. So I was sort of, I guess an experiment for them, an anomaly for them, enjoyed the work that I did. I, you know, it was sometimes an awkward situation because it would, I would be primarily--and I, to be honest, in most of my positions, I, most of my colleagues were all-white males, for the most part. And, but here in the South, there was a different kind of energy associated with that professional interaction. Many of the white males were not totally comfortable with having a black, female interact with them as an equal and at their level, which was not a problem, of course, for me. I mean I was all--very comfortable because it was something of, you know, that I always did. But the mindset was much more biased. Story_ID: 624386 Speaker 1: It was worse than say, Berkeley or-- Speaker 2: Well, it, it was not outwardly as hostile, but actually what happened, I got, I was fired from that position. My boss got a promotion to become the CEO of Mississippi Power, I think. And unlike, what he would typically do would be--I was his assistant, assistant to the Executive Vice President. And normally, you would sort of make sure that that person, being me, would be given a good opportunity, something comparable to what you're doing. Another person who was a vice president asked to become my boss. And at that point, I knew that I had a major problem because in the past my interactions with him, I knew that he was a very typical, Southern white male, very uncomfortable with the level of my education and would make comments to say things like, oh, my goodness, you're brighter than me. You should have my position, you know. He had a BS, I think in electrical engineering from maybe Auburn, Alabama, Auburn University. And so once he requested that I work for him, I just assumed I would continue working in the capacity, maintaining my same office. So as soon as I started working for him, his focus was to minimize me as a person and as a professional. And one of the first moves was to insist that I be moved from my executive suite office to be put in a building that housed chemical laboratories. At that time, I was already borderline ill. I had already been exposed at Rohm and Haas to these 4,000 chemicals. And so I needed to avoid contact with, you know, very serious chemicals, and he knew that. So he insisted that I move, be moved into this building. And upon entering the building, I became ill quite readily. So I said to him, I really can't work in that building. You really need to put me back where I was. And he said, I can't do that. You either work in that building or you don't have a job. Well, I had made this move, disrupted my, you know, my family, moved to Alabama, and now, I'm confronted with this unreasonable person, this unreasonable character who's now my boss. And so I made an effort to go into the building after I had first realized that the building was making me ill, and became deathly ill, fell out in the building, had to be rushed by ambulance to a hospital. And so I was told by the physicians that you can't work in that building. Your body will tolerate the exposure to additional chemicals. And the man insisted and so my doctor said, I can't release you to work in that building. And so he fired me. The company claims that they did not fire me, that I refused to work (laughter). So it was one of those things, and then in Birmingham, Alabama, I attempted a lawsuit. But the company basically had the upper hand in terms of the judges. They had ways of eliminating judges that would be more fair minded and made certain that I got a judge that was more to their liking. The judge threw my case out, but one of the memorable things about the judge, which should never happen in the legal system, the judge demanded that he see my resume because the company had told him, I guess things about me. My lawyer recalls and told me that he had never seen anything like it. The judge looked at the resume, sitting on the stand and got angry and said, "Who does this woman, who does she think she is?", (laughter) and threw the resume down on the bench there. The lawyer said he was speechless to see that kind of conduct. And he threw the case out, as simple as that. So it's been some challenging times to say the least. I think a lot of it is because when you do something that is not typical, I mean you're in a field, you're in a time period that people don't expect you to be doing things, it's, it poses a challenge for them. Never in my life from the beginning of the things that I've done did I ever think that I shouldn't be doing something. I would always say, why not? Why should I limit myself? Why should I think about the fact that I'm a black female? You know, why? Why would I have to think about that? And I once said that to one of my bosses who, at Rohm and Haas, who commented on the fact that I was way before my time. And I, my response to him was that, are you telling me that my brain should say to me, don't do this because you are female, and you're black? I said, my brain doesn't know all of those details. All it does is function. And therefore, what you're saying to me is irrational. There is nothing within me that should limit me. It is only those factors around me when you look at me, you make that assessment. And so I will have to respond and say to you, as a person, that it is really your personal problem and not mine. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so was that the end of the litigation with the throwing out-- Speaker 2: It was just thrown out, just thrown out, as simple as that. And so that's, you know, you hear things about injustices. And it, and I think sometimes people find it hard to comprehend until things happen to them. There're just, the country has its issues, and so even many, many years later, you can see from current affairs that so many things, especially race relationships are not what they should be. There're beautiful people throughout the country who don't hold those views. But I think from generation to generation, people pass down ideas that are irrational, that are illogical and mean spirited. And they don't think about the consequences of their actions and their words and what it means to another person's life. Story_ID: 624387 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you went on to teach at Tuskegee [Tuskegee University]. Speaker 2: I went to Tuskegee-- Speaker 1: And you had a special position. Were you brought in as-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, had an endowed chair there at Tuskegee. Speaker 1: That's the 3M-- Speaker 2: 3M Eminent Scholar Professorship. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a program that was a combined effort with the State of Alabama and the 3M Company out of Minne--I guess it's Minnesota. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, enjoyed my stay there immensely, enjoyed teaching. It was just a wonderful experience to have the opportunity to impact young, black minds. And it was a, it was a beautiful experience for me because all of a sudden I was in a position to analyze some of the "why's" in our community in terms of education, you know, some of the struggles that young, black people have in regard to education, and so I, there are several--I came away believing several things, that education by itself, has so many components that a lot of people don't address. There is a psychological, emotional component which deals with how you feel about yourself, you know, in addition to the component of whether or not a person coming from a different environment, have they been taught how to learn, how to grow academically? All right, and do they know how to now take these pieces and then utilize them. What I found, I taught thermodynamics at Tuskegee, which is a difficult subject in engineering. Thermodynamics is often used as the weed-out course in various engineering curriculums, mechanical, electrical, because it's difficult. And I wanted to teach the students at Tuskegee thermodynamics in the same way or at the same level, in terms of quality, as I would at any institution. But I found that to be an enormous challenge because they did not have the background. And so what I had to do was take a step back and then think about myself as a person, the fact that I came up in such limited surroundings, the fact that I didn't have the parents there who could plan for my future, who could plan to tell me what to do, how to take this, take that, to better myself. So what I did with the students at Tuskegee, I said to them, we're gonna start with a new slate. I'm gonna teach you how to learn, and we're gonna pretend that we're walking up a ladder. And each step of that ladder has a number of processes associated with, and so before we get to the next step, you will have had to achieve certain things. And you're going to be the person analyzing, have you actually done that? And so that is what I did with them. And I think many of the students really appreciated the time. I worked twelve to sisteen hour days with my students. I actually lived in a dormitory. I started a program there where I developed a program where I lived with, I think it was about thirty female students, honor students that I would select and interview. Speaker 1: What was the name of the program? Speaker 2: Well, I, it was Tandem Hall, and I just called it "Honors Program for Tandem Hall", okay. And I sort of modeled it after the programs at MIT where they have professors and graduate residents living with undergraduates. So you're there to help nurture them, to be a, you know, a support for them, if there're social issues, emotional issues or whatever kinds of issues that they may have, to help develop them in terms of--my particular focus was to help them really think about what they needed to achieve to be successful in life. So I would have little sessions with them, with little snacks, and I would teach young women about dealing with young men, how to survive young men (laughter), how to survive, you know, moving into the corporate world, how to survive even just becoming a woman. How do you look at yourself as a female, if you choose to have children and a family? How to preserve oneself, how do you think about your own image of yourself and what you need to do to protect your life and your health? And I shared with them my experience through my professional career, how my life was altered and my health was destroyed because I, in so many ways, depending on the system to be there to protect me, to have laws and regulations that prevented certain kinds of things to happen to me as an employee. So I shared my life experiences with them in a way that I hope it would carry on. I mean I even exercised with them, and I called it the "Ladies' exercise", how not to have in fifteen years, a middle-aged spread. And we, so it was a fun time to be with those girls. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624388 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, is--a question was raised in my mind when you were talking about to deal with the young males and that sort of thing. In colleges today, in black colleges all over the country, I guess, black females are succeeding at a higher rate than black males. Is there pressure on black--or how are black males dealing with, how are they, how do they treat black women in the sciences, especially, you know? Speaker 2: Black males? Speaker 1: Yeah, is there any way that typifies that response? Speaker 2: It's probably, there is probably no common thread there that I've detected. Many males, black or white, are threatened by women who do science. I think the number, the fact that there're more black women or more women, I think, in general, that are taking on the hardcore courses, is that, you know, females have had to struggle through, you know, history and time to achieve certain kinds of things. And societies have now gradually started to open up and think that a female can do this or a female can do that. And it's more acceptable that women do certain kinds of things. You sort of touched on something that has always been an issue for me. Black, young black males tend to struggle in our society, tend to struggle in our educational institutions to some degree. There's some very, very smart, very capable young, black men who are very, very focused. And then there are others who are not as focused, and therefore, you question what are the elements that are influencing them, okay? And that has been something that has been at the back of my mind for years. What happens to our young black men? And I have several theories, and that may and may not be of any real value. But it is something that I think I have, as an observation. I think oftentimes, black mothers and within our community, there are a lot of households where young men are raised by mothers, single mothers. And I think that in some cases--I don't wanna generalize too much, that these mothers really understand the struggles and the dangers that their sons are going to face. And so, in some ways, they're fearing and they're dreading what is about to happen. And so, in some ways, they over compensate, I think, for that, trying to protect, sometimes giving them more liberties than they should have. And I call it, spoiling them, making them not as responsible as much, not taking on their own responsibilities--they're busy protecting them. Speaker 1: Did you see that, I mean what you're describing, manifested amongst the male students at Tuskegee? Speaker 2: The male students at Tuskegee, I think in some cases, some of them lacked the seriousness, yes, because I saw more female students more focused, with the students that I had. I saw, in some instances, I saw male students who had come from highly educated backgrounds, with parents who were actually well known, less focused. And that was a puzzle to me. I mean that's not to say that they were not achieving. They were, but they were not performing at the level that I thought they were capable of, considering the privileges that they had had all their lives. Speaker 1: Did you get the impression that they thought they had it made already? Speaker 2: I won't say that. I think it, when I looked at them, and I tried to analyze what was happening, I think it was the lack of maturity. I think it was a lack of awareness of what the world really felt about them, and what they were really going to face as time went on. Story_ID: 624389 Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you taught at Tuskegee. Now, who is the president when you were at Tuskegee? Speaker 2: Dr. Payton, Dr. Benjamin Payton. Speaker 1: Now, you were there from '93' [1993] to '97' [1997]-- Speaker 2: To '97' [1997], and then I came back to Birmingham, and worked for Raytheon Engineers and Constructors. Speaker 1: Now, why did you get out of academics and go to Raytheon? Speaker 2: Well, I--Tuskegee was, I was still caring for my parents. So Tuskegee was a distance. It was a two hour distance from my home place in Birmingham. And as I said, I lived on the campus, and I would commute back home on the weekends. And over time, it became more and more challenging to keep the kind of domestic help in the household that I needed to care for my parents. As my mother ages with the stroke, it was more of a challenge, and I needed to be, you know, closer. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So, now, how was your health at this point? Speaker 2: It was a tremendous struggle. Tuskegee was also, health wise, not a good environment for me. The buildings were old. The engineering building was highly contaminated with mold, very poor ventilation. And so, it was really a struggle. I, at times, even taught the class outdoors just to survive. Speaker 1: Okay, so at Raytheon, what were your duties at Raytheon? Speaker 2: Raytheon, again, a management-type position. I did some technical things, but I did outreach for the company with education. I did, you know, community affairs. I just did a variety of things at Raytheon, and I enjoyed, particularly, trying to interact with the schools in Birmingham, the school system, the community kinds of activities, looking at how the corporate world interfaced with the community, trying to have a positive impact on various neighborhoods. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was public relations-- Speaker 2: Some public relations kinds of activities, you know, managerial stuff, looking at technologies and doing consulting as well, you know, for the company, different areas that Raytheon may have been interested in, I would do consulting for them in addition to the outreach. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were there form '97' [1997] to 2000. Speaker 2: And 2000, I became very, very ill. I think, again, I had another exposure there at Raytheon and just could not really recover from that exposure. Speaker 1: Okay, and can you tell us what specific-- Speaker 2: Well, I think it was probably a combination of things. In one incident, they had a pool, like a little pool in the center of the building, fountain, that someone had put too much chlorine in, too many chlorine tablets. And that got into the ventilation system in the building. Story_ID: 624390 Speaker 1: All right, so you left Raytheon in 2000. Speaker 2: And since that time, it's been just a struggle to stay alive. The first year I left, I did not function physically much at all, struggled with enormous life-threatening infections. I've had sepsis which is when bacteria gets into your bloodstream, it shuts down all your major organs. So in 2004, I had an episode there and nearly died. And so it's been just a struggle to become physically functioning and as fit as I could be since that time. Speaker 1: Okay, and now at home here, you virtually almost have to live in a bubble. Speaker 2: Yes, I, my home here, I've designed it, and it is my bubble. I've designed the home in such a way that I can enjoy being here, but it has special ventilation equipment in the house. It has been built out of solid, natural materials, woods and, you know, avoiding carpet as much as possible, hardwood floors, stone floors, but it is truly a health building with all the considerations of what goes wrong with construction projects, using materials to avoid formaldehyde and that kind of thing. Story_ID: 624391 Speaker 1: Okay, and, well, in 2000, though, you founded Environmental Wellness Institute. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's what I've been working on little by little, and hopefully, this year, this is one of the first times after a great deal of struggle that I feel that I'll be capable of really physically and mentally being able to function without having long periods of illnesses. The purpose of the Environment Wellness Institute is to really educate the public about environmental dangers, to educate, you know, schools. I'd like to be able to interact with industry to talk about a lot of the things that we use as personal hygiene products that are actually very, very toxic and very, very dangerous. And, unfortunately, industry is, in this country, the biggest motivation is money, and without regard to the well being of the public. And so products that are sold in this country that should not really be sold to the public, but one cannot expect the public to have the high technical awareness, the chemical engineering or the chemists or the biology background to analyze these products. And so the public is at a disadvantage and at risk. For instance, over thirty years ago, they outlawed antiperspirant deodorants in Europe, and they're still sold very readily in the U.S. without question because of the aluminum components in it, antiperspirants. And the average American, you ask them what's the difference between an antiperspirant deodorant and a regular deodorant, they don't know. But it's that aluminum component that is the danger, aluminum Zichlorate (ph.). It's going to say "aluminum" something. But that aluminum is suspected of causing early Alzheimer's. And it's that kind of unwillingness for public officials to take responsibility to say, we won't do this to our public. We're going to protect them. There are certain chemicals that are sold in the U.S., Europe does not permit to enter their countries. And, you know, the chemical companies here moan and groan about it (laughter) and are angry about it, but they can't do anything about it, you know, so they sell their chemicals that are known to be dangerous inside the U.S. and into other developing countries or countries that are open. Speaker 1: I'm starting to think this is political now, in-- Speaker 2: Well, there is a lot of-- Speaker 1: --the sense that you would think that the Food and Drug Administration or the EPA would be able to guard the public interests in regards to (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I think it's, you would hope and you would think that. I think there's some real limitations because the lobbying system here in this country is so well developed, it makes it more of a challenge to confront these industries who really know that their products are harmful because the average politician probably does not care, to be honest, and does not have the background to make a real assessment of what is being said to them. And so when you look at organizations like the EPA, yes, you have trained engineers, etc., etc., but depending on the level of training, the areas that they are trained in, they're often at a disadvantage to analyzing the data that is presented to them. And so there lies this gap there. That was something that I observed with Philip Morris, and it frustrated me. When they were being sued about their product, at one point, there was a discrepancy about a technology that Philip Morris was using versus one of their competitors. And it hit the court system, and, of course, the judge sitting there, has no idea what they're talking about. And Philip Morris wanted me to be a witness for them. Well, the fact of the matter was that the other company was correct in their assessment that Philip Morris had infringed upon their technology. And there was no way for the judge to really understand that without the kind of background that I had. And so I refused to testify for Philip Morris. I said, I could not in good faith testify on your behalf because you are doing what they say that you're doing, technically (laughter). They were not happy with me. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a--as we sit here today, there's a debate over global warming, just as there was a debate over nicotine spiking in cigarettes and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and they're still debating on whether cancer, cigarettes cause cancer, and if the--you know, I think most cigarette companies know that without any question. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I think we, I've heard it said that we, as the budgets are, the federal budget is cut to, you know, balance the budget as the Republicans say, the agencies that guard, you know, the public don't have the resources to do it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, what you see now happening, and it's quite disturbing to me, is that there's one side of politicians in this country that does not seem to be concerned about the overall well being of the masses of people in terms of your health and what happens to you as individuals, continuing to want to cut back on regulations. And regulations are essential. The fact of the matter is that the regulations are not totally effective anyway because it's hard to enforce them, but it's also very difficult to have that in depth understanding of what these people are actually doing in these various corporations when they use dangerous products, you know. And to be honest, from my experience in the corporate world, the research, the technical world, many of the corporations are limited in what they really know. And they make decisions based on limited information, but are really guided by the concept of profit, all right. I mean I give you an example. At one point at Rohm & Haas, we were in a building where--we had been moved from the old building that exposed sixty-some people, to a new building. And all of a sudden one morning, everybody was coughing and choking and we were all sick. And you could smell this horrible chemical in the building. And so the alarm goes off, and they say evacuate, evacuate. And the chemists who were on the safety committee, run into the building with their little backpacks on and their equipment on their backs and their little devices to detect. And they get into the building, and we're out now. We're all out of the building within five minutes. And when it's all over, they tell us that we couldn't detect anything, so therefore, we can't tell you what you were exposed to (laughter). That was a teaching moment for me. That's when I realized what a dangerous profession I had selected. And the fact that these companies were not at the level that they needed to be and should have been. Story_ID: 624392 Speaker 1: Now, I've read that part of your message to young people is to try to recognize as much as they can the hazards of being a chemical engineer, if they want to be one. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, you know, I, in good faith, will tell a person, if you choose to do chemical engineering, walk in knowing the danger of the profession, walk in understanding that your health and your well being is totally your responsibility because even though there are laws and regulations out there, and you have an employer, that does not mean that that employer has your interests at heart. You can be replaced. And that is the cycle that happens. Companies hire people, use them up and replace them with someone younger who was naive and innocent. It's just a cycle. And the bottom line is usually the focus is money. It cost money to make certain kinds of corrections. And they're not really willing to spend that money. You see companies fighting EPA regulations, and it's just so sad because even with the regulations, the exposure is enormous to the public, enormous. And you can--EPA does studies across the country. They can tell you where the pockets of heavy cancer, where the chemicals are, etc., etc., but there's nobody really forcing these companies to cut those chemicals out of the emissions that they emit on a daily basis. Speaker 1: Now, in your opinion, is the black community at more risk? Speaker 2: I would say so. I think companies oftentimes move their dirty plants and facilities in neighborhoods that are poor because those people will have less of a voice, many times, less education, not the means to fight back. You start trying to move something close to a community of this sort in Peachtree City, there would be enormous public uproar and people with the means to say, you're not coming here. So it is, unfortunately, a fact of life. People who are more vulnerable are going to be subjected to more environmental hazards and wastes. Story_ID: 624393 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, today, in 2012, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, that--yeah, yeah. I probably would have gotten a BS, finished that BS in chemical engineering and gone to business school (laughter) or gotten that BS in chemical engineering and gone to medical school, probably would not have done that PhD in chemical engineering or even if I did the PhD, immediately go to business school and get away from practicing as a chemical engineer, away from the industries of chemical engineering. Story_ID: 624394 Speaker 1: I hear, I guess I'm reading in what you're saying that it is hard to do good in those corporate environments as a chemical engineer. Speaker 2: Well, you can do some good, but at what price? What personal price and what price to society? The fact is, if the corporate world had a real conscience, that would probably not be an issue for me. But what I've seen is a lot of hypocrisy, a lot of dishonesty with corporate leaders who do not want to deal with the realities of their products. For instance, scented products in this country, an enormous, enormous health risk for the public at large. Scented products are made from toxic wastes, period, in this country, all over the world, they are now, all right. The petroleum industry is a tremendous force in this society. The wastes from petroleum is in all scented products. At the end of the process with distillation and the process of oil from the ground, there is left this black gook that's in the bottom of the reactor. Many years back, in the early '60's [1960s], mid-'60's [1960s], they had to take that material, load it on tanker trucks and send it to the incinerators and burn it. Late '60's [1960s], somebody realized they have the chemical structure of things that smell good in nature, Aldehydes, you know, ketones, and they figured it out. We take now, this awful black gunk, react it chemically again, and we make personal hygiene products. Speaker 1: Is this like coal tar basically? Speaker 2: Coal tar, okay, and so they sell them in perfume bottles, you know, for expensive prices, put nice little colors in it. And, of course, add their formaldehyde to keep it from going rank. And, you know, we know that formaldehyde is definitely carcinogenic, but those products are carcinogenic. And what's fascinating to me is nowadays, you'll hear sometimes people, even on the media, you know, talk about the fact that the same products that are in scented products, the same chemicals or the same carcinogenic chemicals that are in tobacco. So a scented product will have at least 95 percent of the same toxic chemicals that's in tobacco smoke and in tobacco. So if you're now outlawing tobacco in public places, why are you not outlawing scented fragrances in public places? Why are physicians and nurses in hospitals wearing poison when you have these vulnerable patients who are already struggling with serious illnesses, weak immune systems-- Speaker 1: Now, the fragrances that are made, I guess, the old-fashioned way, scented oils and-- Speaker 2: There is no such thing nowadays as the old-fashioned way. Everything is about the bottom line. The old-fashioned way was to get flowers, you know, from one's yard, you know, and you had ways of extracting the fragrances from it. Speaker 1: Right, we were discussing being in Egypt, both of us had a chance to go to Egypt at one time, under the same person, and they always take you to a perfumery where they, in Egypt, they make perfumes, presumably, the old-fashioned way. Speaker 2: Well, that's even so debatable too (laughter). I think I visited one of those shops and didn't have a good experience in it, okay. They, they're still having the challenge of getting those fragrances out of the leaves, the flowers. How do you get the bulk of those fragrances out in an economical way so that you can mass produce that. That's the challenge, and so they use harsh hydrocarbon chemicals to do so. But the, even when they do that, but that is not often done anymore because that costs so much money to do that. So the easiest way is to take the wastes and make the fragrances from the wastes. One bottle of perfume may contact four to 600 different chemicals, four to 600 different chemicals. The air fresheners, the dryer sheets, all of these things are just so, so toxic because it's like tobacco smoke. Now, you hear, first-hand, second-hand, third-hand exposure, all right. That third-hand exposure relates to the fact that that smoke and those chemicals adhered to the surface. Well, the same thing is happening with fragrances. They do the exact same thing. Story_ID: 624395 Speaker 1: I've often wondered, there's a commercial on television where people are sitting in a roll off box or a garbage dumpster, and they have a, they sprayed it with Febreze and so-- Speaker 2: And that commercial-- Speaker 1: --they're sitting there, and they say, that smells wonderful. Speaker 2: That commercial really upsets me every time I see it (laughter). It's outrageous, it's dishonest. What it does, the Febreze, basically--and I wish my husband was nearby to explain medically what it does, but it really destroys your sensory within your nasal capacity. And it ruptures things within you. So the smell is still there, but you can't smell it. Speaker 1: Because it's ruining your olfactory glands. Speaker 2: Yes, the smell is there. And what's even more outrageous, they will have a small baby sometimes spraying the Febreze or whatever air freshener they're spraying, a small baby in that environment, which is so damaging to the baby's lungs and body, probably even more so than an adult. And they're doing that without a conscience. And I always wonder, I mean are they doing this out of ignorance? Do they truly not understand what they're doing or is it simply greed, you know, or is it simply greed? It's probably a combination. Speaker 1: Yeah, so what you're saying is that the stink is still there-- Speaker 2: Yes, oh, the stink-- Speaker 1: --and with all the qualities that it had before, except you can't smell it. Speaker 2: You can't smell it. You can't smell it. So the-- Speaker 1: So the, the molecules are now, of the chemical that you sprayed, have now stuck to the insides of your nasal capacity. So you're smelling it. So when you think of molecules floating through the air, you--that's, this is always fascinating to me because people can comprehend the dangers of cigarette smoke because they can see it, you know. But with perfumes and things, you can't see the molecules. So people just assume it's harmless. But the fact that you can smell it, if you really think through that, should tell you that there's something really there. Those molecules go into your body, rupture your tissue, your cells, effects your heart, your lungs, your arteries, your, you know, your tissue silently and destroys your health over a period of time, causes cancer, emphysema, Asthma, high blood pressure, sinusitis, all kinds of serious illnesses. And the challenge is most physicians are not trained in a way to be able to make that connection or make the association any way. Story_ID: 624396 Speaker 1: Okay, now, again, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy. I think my legacy is about me as a person, the kind of person that I have been able to maintain, my humanity, my love for people in general, my commitment to honesty, the good side of human nature. I believe that education is a tool. Education does not make the person. You are what you are. I think that it is a means of having a livelihood. It is a means of making a contribution in your life, and that you should value in that sense and separate the humanistic qualities of yourself as a person. Use that education for the well-being of others, for people. I have real issue with people who get so focused on what status they have in society, what position they hold, how much money they make. That kind of thing is very, very surface, and when you value that to a point above one's character, then you don't have a whole lot left because then those issues become your driving force. So my hope is that I will continue to be able and, as I live, to be able to make an impact, to make people aware of what happens to them, help people to learn how to protect themselves. I also have an enormous interests in getting again involved in education. I would like to see people look at education from a different perspective. I would like to particularly focus on kids that come from disadvantaged environments. I'm also interested in that psychological component. When you tell a child early in life that they're no good, that they're dumb, that they're stupid, you put a child in an environment where the child does not feel good about oneself. You know, the society has so many biases about appearances, just so many things that little children pick up. I mean you've seen probably these experiments where little kids will equate a black doll and a white doll, and the white doll is good and the black doll isn't. Well, that's because of the environment, the society. And when that is in a child's mind, and a child goes to school and in an integrated society, what I've seen is that sometimes in these classrooms, there is this bias that is there. And it's subtle, and that energy that is given off, that child may not be given the opportunity to express oneself as being bright and capable, but only wanted to look at that child as whether or not that child is amusing rather than whether or not that child is capable of really producing academically. Story_ID: 624397 Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us something about your family? I know you're married, and do you have children? Speaker 2: I have no children. I'm married to Benjamin Glover. He likes to be called Ben, Ben Glover. He's a physician, he's an internist. I've known him since the early '80s [1980s]. We married in '87' [1987]. He is my very best friend, very honest, caring, loving person, has been with me every step of the way with my illness, very committed to my survival, and for that I thank him, very bright individual, very compassionate individual, went to medical school after I became ill so that he would be in a position to take care of me. Without his having done that, I would be dead today. He is also a trained chemical engineer. And with that training, in addition to his medical background, he's able to put that knowledge together to help to protect me. And so the two of us use my body as a, you know, as an experimental laboratory (laughter). That's the way I've been able to survive. So it has been quite a challenge. Speaker 1: Okay, that's remarkable. You know, that he went to medical school after you were sick. Speaker 2: Yes, he had a Masters in chemical engineering. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about your, did your parents get a chance to see you become a PhD in chemical engineering? Speaker 2: Yes, my parents both lived to see me become a PhD in chemical engineering. And I spent, you know, many years afterwards sitting down with my father, telling him various little stories (laughter) about my experiences as I, you know, worked in industry. And he used to always love to have me tell me some of those stories because some of them were actually quite funny, with people's reactions when I would walk into facilities and (laughter)--it was just interesting. And he would ask me what happened when you went to that job site or that kind of thing. So. Story_ID: 624398 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, is there anything we haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. I think we've covered a lot of ground, and I'm appreciative of that. I think, my last thought is about trying to make an impact, to use the knowledge that I now have to hopefully, with the new technology to be able to have a bigger platform to share my knowledge, especially the knowledge about environmental dangers, to somehow also share my gift of understanding human emotions with young students who travel--not travel, who are in hostile environments and help them understand how to survive hostility without become hostile. That is so important in life. If you embrace negative energy, it makes you negative. And so regardless of what happens to you in life, your challenge and your responsibility is to remain the person that you are and not let anyone else come into you and make you something different. Story_ID: 624399 Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, I would like to be remembered as Jennie Patrick, the little country girl (laughter) from Gadsden, Alabama who loved people, who loved nature, who will work in a yard for 16 hours a day and feel tremendous pleasure, who feels pain for the smallest animal, pain for people I've never met, just who loved life, period. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much for your story. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 624400 Speaker 1: That is a picture of me as a baby, and probably about four or five months old. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Can you say it again? Speaker 2: That is a picture of me as a baby, and I am probably four to five months old, I think. Speaker 1: That is my elementary school picture at James L. Cain [School], and that is probably, what, second grade. Speaker 2: It's got a caption. Speaker 1: And that is my first-grade picture. Speaker 2: I'm not sure what grade that is, but that's elementary school as well. Speaker 1: That is a photo of me at MIT as a student, and I was attending some large function there. Speaker 2: That is a picture of my husband and me on a camel in Egypt on vacation. Speaker 1: That is a picture of my parents, in my home, house in Gadsden, Alabama, and it was probably 1980--probably 1984 or so. Speaker 2: That is a picture of my father, and I'm standing behind him, and his relatives. That is on his 90th birthday. I had given him a party. Speaker 1: That is a picture of a reception that was given to me by CB Gigee (ph.) Corporation, where a photo or a print was given to Tuskegee [University], a painting. Speaker 2: That is a picture of my parents, and that was taken in about 1986. Speaker 1: That is a picture of me and Dr. Charles Zigler who was a vice president at CB Gigee who became one of my very best friends. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me taken in Birmingham, Alabama in front of one of my prize plants, I think in about 1998. Speaker 1: That is a picture of my home-house, with my father, and that was probably around 1992. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me in France, I think around 1996 on vacation. Speaker 1: That is a picture of me in my garden, my favorite hobby, and that was probably taken in 1999. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me and my husband, and it was taken probably in, around 2002 or so. Speaker 1: That is a picture of me with President Payton at Tuskegee University, and Dr. Lester who was the provost as they gave me an honorary degree. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me in my office at Raytheon Engineers and Constructors somewhere around 1998. Speaker 1: That is a picture of me that is part of a poster series that was made by CB Cigee, called "Exceptional Black Scientists". Speaker 2: That picture is a picture of the artwork that was done, commissioned by CB Gigee for the black scientists series. That photo was taken at Tuskegee [University] in 1984 as that picture was delivered to Tuskegee as a gift. Speaker 1: That is a picture of me around 1975 at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] in my laboratory. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me in my office at Rohm & Haas in Bristol, Pennsylvania, taken around 1986. Speaker 1: That is a picture of me on my very first job after graduating from MIT at General Electric in my laboratory. Speaker 2: Okay, well, thanks. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're welcome...