 Story_ID: 314935 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Sumayah Ramadan. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Okay, [HistoryMaker] Mujahid Ramadan, Mujahid is M-U-J-A-H-I-D, Ramadan, R-A-M-A-D-A-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth 11/17/51 [November 17, 1951] and I was born outside of the small rural town of Lake Providence, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay and sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Currently, I'm a partner in a communications company, Ballard Communications. I'm a senior partner here. Speaker 1: Okay and sir what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is September the 29th, 2004. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are Ballard Communications office on Flamingo [Road] in Las Vegas, Nevada. Story_ID: 314936 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask and they only require a short answer. The first one is, sir what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food--chicken. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The month of Ramadan. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Probably most places I can get away for some quiet time with my wife [Sumayah Ramadan] and, and it really won't matter the location as long as it's with my wife and, but I could think of some nice places she enjoys: San Francisco [California], she enjoys New York [New York] holiday season, and so I think New York holiday season with my wife. Speaker 1: Okay not the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying? It's, it's not mine, but I quote what we say in the Koran [Qur'an], what god reveals to us in the Koran. "Verily in every difficulty there is relief." "Verily in every difficulty there is relief." Story_ID: 314937 Speaker 1: Okay, now I wanna ask you some questions about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Johnny Young (ph.)] side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side, but first can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Full name Elizabeth Harris, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S. Speaker 1: Okay what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth approximately 1918 and she would also be from rural Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay now how much do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: Probably to, clearly to, my mother's grandmother. Grandma Grey [ph.] we called her, clearly to her and, and really actually to her grandmother who was born in slavery so my grandma--mother calls it, the ones who were born on the other side. So my great-grandmother's mother was born in slavery and so there's some--I have some working knowledge of that portion of my family. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories from that side of the family about slavery or about experiences in, after slavery, immediately after? Speaker 2: Early after I, I in talking, hearing my mother I often hear language--that's why I begin to hear the langue of the ones who were born on the other side and so I had to inquire with her what was the other side and, and that's how they termed slavery. Slavery was the other side, and the ones who were born on this side and there are the experiences of being property owners and the struggles of dealing with racism, being some landowners and owners--small businesses and small stores. Probably one of the historical aspects of it is the, the conviction that all of the men probably, certainly and probably the women were the ones who passed it on the strong convictions of being responsible for standing up for who you felt that you were. Not being accepting to be abused by anyone, no matter what their race happened to have been. My grandfather and actually his brother were ones who you know really showed the most dramatized that I think that I had known about it. There were certain events that I won't share details about that were you know there were certain acts of violence that were perpetrated on our, our ethnic group in our family and the response to that was you know very forceful and very comprehensive to you know let people know how people be treated (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now if--because this is a historical document it would be useful if you could get into some detail about that because that may be the-- Speaker 2: Well there a case where-- Speaker 1: --the only time anybody ever hears all of it you know. Speaker 2: Well there was a case where a, a white sheriff accosted some of my family members. Speaker 1: Now about what time is this? Speaker 2: Probably early 1900s, and, and my father's mother told them that, that's not something that they, they could tolerate from people so they went and, and took due action to, to respond to it and then my father's brother left the South and, and moved to--interesting, (laughter) Ohio and never came back to the South again, so it was pretty clear the effects of what had happened he--and they never knew where he went to either, he was on--because when he was talked about he was never talked about any great detail or anything, we just knew we had an uncle who lived in Ohio, but there were some events that had happened that affected the entire African American community that he and my grandfather had been involved in and so then he had to leave and based on that and it--then it was, it was subsequent to obviously these events that had happened with the sheriff, and so which my great-great grandmother saw was being wrong and abusive and so she directed them to, to deal with that process. Story_ID: 314938 Speaker 1: I think another visible event that I see historically in my own family on my mother's [Elizabeth Harris] side is that my grandfather fought in France with Emmett Till's father [Louis Till] and Emmett Till's father was killed in France fighting for the proposition that all men are created equal. Speaker 2: This is during World War I [WWI]? Speaker 1: During World War I and then they rewarded his son by hanging him, so that's something in my family--you know I've often heard you know--I often say you know I remember Emmett Till so, his father died for the freedom of people so they duly rewarded his son by--the events that occurred in Mississippi and because my grandfather knew his father that's how we were somewhat closely connected because we--living in Louisiana and during the time when Emmett Till was killed in Mississippi you know it resonated right into Louisiana because we were only right next door and where we were living we were like very close to the borders of Mississippi and Arkansas where those events had occurred at, so it was very dramatic and so, and our side of the family you know you, you won't find anybody on my mother's side of the family that doesn't know about Emmett Till because it was such a big event because of my father-, my grandfather's relationship with his father. And my grandfather was a deacon at A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal], but he was also a deacon outside of the church also, and both my grandfather and my father [Johnny Young (ph.)] were deacons in the church and outside of the church and so in Louisiana-- Speaker 2: Now when you say a deacon outside of the church, what do you mean by that? I know what it means in the church, but what does it mean outside of the church? Speaker 1: Louisiana is--the deacons really are not outside--outside of Louisiana is probably not a, a noted history about the deacons but it was a--I wouldn't call it a civil rights group but it, it occurred during the era of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in Louisiana, and. Speaker 2: Well you're talking about the Deacons of Defense [Deacons for Defense and Justice]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, all right now that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so we just had to-- Speaker 2: --now that's a different. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that, so they were part of that group--they, that's the term they give 'em now the Deacons for Defense but, but-- Speaker 2: They didn't really call 'em that then that necessarily? Speaker 1: No, not necessarily that, you know but I was, I was born in 1951 so the deacons were very, very active then and it was a natural transition for my grandfather coming out of the family that he had grew up in with the value system that we had to be pretty much for defending yourself so and then of course my father was, was also a member of the deacons you know and so it's something in history that I know about. As a matter-of-fact I was--my mother's sister who is a twin to my mother--when I was born they gave me a name and she said but we gonna call him Deacon [HistoryMaker Mujahid Ramadan], because his granddaddy's a deacon and his daddy is a deacon so it's a name (laughter) probably it's not unusual becoming a Muslim, it's just part of really being a deacon, and so that's part of the history of my mother's side of the family. I think those are big paramount events that probably mostly of you wouldn't talk to my cousins in New York or New Jersey and you start talking about those events that my grandfather and his father, the deacons, the whole framework of the Civil Rights Movement, those would be big, big events that happened during that time. Story_ID: 314939 Speaker 1: Maybe you can, if you can, I know the deacons [Deacons for Defense and Justice] have been written about, I don't think exhaustively or anything but they've been written since that, those days and there's a, there's an impression that they were, that some have written there were a whole lot of 'em, some have written that there weren't that many of 'em, but being an organization that wasn't really out in, you know all out in public anyway. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And identified as, I mean what's your impression of--who were the--just for the record like who, what's your impression? Who were the deacons and how many do you think there were and how much did they do? Speaker 2: Probably not a large, large number. I think they were very select because I, I knew some. Now I know that I can look back and see who were and they were a very small--some--very small group. I knew my father [Johnny Young (ph.)], my [maternal] grandfather and my father were, but very small and select. Most of them probably were religious men who were members of churches and who, who saw, they saw a different purview of you know not so much turn the other cheek. I think they saw that more spiritually and symbolically, but not so much in the physical sense of turn the other cheek. I think it was their religious and spiritual convictions that led them to being who they were and that feeling as though they had a right based on you know the law of God you know to defend and, and protect themselves. So I think that was a basic foundation to it, and, and probably I, I use to hear every now and then while sitting on the porch and hearing discussion about, "Well you know the white man in Louisiana was a different kind of white man," so he wasn't one who you could possibly interact with while, while many of them publicly had relationships with the, the transitional non-violence of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. That wasn't something they could actually practice with everybody because they didn't think some people were accepting to that so they felt as though the best way to deal with them is the way they dealt, and, and because the, the Civil Rights Movement while it was visible but it never had a stronghold in Louisiana because Dr. King wouldn't come there because of the deacons, because of what they practiced or the way they approached things--I would say the way they would approach things that, that affected that, and it--I notice sitting around, it was only like sitting around on the front porch and hearing about it sometimes and then sometimes then be told to, "Get, get outta here boy ain't nobody talking to you," but being--I, I guess that maybe the fact that being that my name was Deacon I was privy to at least hearing so maybe at a certain stage in life I would remember you know what that was about. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a--well, I know there's, there've been rumors that the deacons had--were followed certain civil rights marches just to make sure that if anybody you know was fired upon that there'd be some kind of protection, you know available and that sort of thing, but I, I don't you know you hear a lot of stories but you never know what really. Speaker 2: Well you never knew who they were, I mean you know I was just in a family that they were a part of but you never knew like knew publicly who they were and they, they were like shadows you know pretty much now that I look back on it and now that I look back and, and being in the audience with my grandfather sometimes I can look back and say, "Oh, okay, this person was and who wasn't," you know you could tell by the way they talked to one another. I remember language like, "How you doing pilgrim?" "Hey pilgrim, how you doing?" But he wouldn't call everybody pilgrim and there weren't you know and then the other--not everybody called him pilgrim back. The ones he called pilgrim they called him pilgrim. So I probably concluded that they were, they were in that group because it was just such a small portion of them that were like that and most of them were in church. Story_ID: 314940 Speaker 1: Nowadays I think when people look back at the Civil Rights Movement they assume that everyone, I mean black people in the South were defenseless or the--that the white population could do anything they wanted to the people anytime they wanted and-- Speaker 2: Not in East Carroll Parish [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's probably not true in a lot of places and also the nonviolence, the strategy of Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--that he personally believed in he wouldn't, he wouldn't strike back himself. In fact there's a story about him being hit in the face by a white man on a stage at one of the conferences and he just got up and the guy hit him again you know and then all the preachers jumped on the guy (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) And that's powerful. Speaker 1: Yeah, but-- Speaker 2: That's powerful. Speaker 1: You know--yeah. Speaker 2: That's powerful. Speaker 1: Yeah, but you know, yeah but the preachers took care of this fellow you know (laughter) you know. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I hear you. Speaker 1: And they were all like middle of the closet they weren't as committed to nonviolence as Dr. King. Speaker 2: It is transformative, you know, Dr. King did see, he did see something else that many of us have not seen I, I know because I couldn't buy the idea but I understand the deeper dimensions of, of what we call nonviolence but it's really called transformative nonviolence and, and it is just what it says, it's transformative to be able to take that and then harness it and use it to--Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi] says it's the only real of the soul and when you use it like that there's no, no opposition that it can't overcome and Dr. King--actually when we were talking earlier Dr. King learned that through Dr. Thurman [Howard Thurman], and, and it was his book, 'Jesus and the Disinherited' [Howard Thurman], that Dr. King then took and did the Civil Rights Movement from, but certainly it had, it had you know great effects not taking away from but you know the reality of men like my [maternal] grandfather and my father [Johnny Young (ph.)] who were involved in and saw the other dimensions of life which, which says a great deal also. Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right to bring up Howard Thurman in this too. I've heard--we interviewed Vernon Dobson [HistoryMaker Reverend Vernon Dobson]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He talked about Howard Thurman's philosophy in terms of nonviolence and the power you bring to change, you know that the power that can have in terms of change and-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's ultimate power. It's ultimate power, Dr. Thurman spent a period in the '40s [1940s] with Mahatma Gandhi and saw the concept and then brought it back and, and Dr. King then studied it when he was at Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] under Dr. Thurman's tutelage and then read the book 'Jesus and the Disinherited' and that became the profile. Dr. Thurman really is a spiritual father of the Civil Rights Movement. He might--we might say he's the CEO and Dr. King was the COO, he, he operated it, he took it and, and turned it into a movement, but, but certainly we can go and look at the events that happened in India with Mahatma Gandhi and, and you can see it, and I had the opportunity of seeing it. It was a recent book that I read called the 'Nonviolent Soldier of Islam[: Badshah Khan, A Man to Match His Mountains,' Eknath Easwaran] and it was by a Pashtun Muslim in, in Northern India, Northwest India who, now the Pashtuns are considered probably the most violent of that group among the Afghanis that some of them because it borders Afghani and, and India and the Pashtuns are considered the most violent in the 18-, 1800s, late 1800s, about 1890. They in one period of about seven days, but in a close framework they killed about sixteen thousand British Soldiers, fourteen thousand cavalry and the whole traveling group that was with them, very--tended to be very warrior like. Speaker 1: Is that the famous Khyber Pass I think, yeah (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right now so that group. In 1930 they stood before a British Army and the British regiments and they--without weapons, they stood before them and the British started shooting them at eleven a.m. in the morning and they continued to shoot until five p.m. in the afternoon and, and Gandhi said they really demonstrate what transformative nonviolence really is because they were the very most violent group of people, but once they understood the concept through this Muslim that was there in their--among--in their community who embraced Gandhi's concept, then they became the most nonviolent and so that's--Gandhi said that really demonstrate what the transformative nonviolence--what it does when a violent person embraces. He said a coward that won't work--a person who's a pacifist, transformative nonviolence doesn't work for him because he doesn't want to fight anyway. Transformative nonviolence works for the person who's very violent and then they use it. So, Dr. King virtually saw it and what it does is virtually neutralizes a powerful person because then it brings about the power of the soul and there's really no, there's no weapon, and we experienced it. I, I saw even in the Civil Rights Movement a girl was talking about that she was in a--Carolina and a, a police went to hit her and she just stood and told him, "Hit me." Well the Pashtuns would walk to the British and poke, push their chest out for 'em to shoot 'em and sometimes they would shoot 'em like five and seven times. They piled up bodies until the British soldiers just collapsed. So it, that's it at the high, high level. What we faced was dogs and hoses and pretty much got some of the similar results. That's what, that's what Kennedy, President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] saw when he was watching television and saw Bull Connor against Dr. King and those people in his house, that's what he saw, 'cause he couldn't believe that was happening. "Where in the heck is that at?" It's in, it's in America but if Dr. King and those people who were with him had of been fighting them back he could've of seen it. He only saw it when they weren't fighting him back so the power would express itself. Even with animals, I mean you can see that if, if one dog is fighting and another dog rolls over and bares himself, that the dog will even stop fighting. So when a human being does that, only a human will keep going against that but it will turn against him, just like it turned against the British in India, just like it turned against the, the racist people in the South. Anywhere where you do it so at this stage of my life I really saw--I have a better understanding what Dr. Thurman taught Dr. King and how Dr. King implemented it and how it produced the civil rights legislation in this country. We owe so much more to Dr. King than we would, really would realize now. Is that saying let's go out and replicate that? Well, no well there are things remaining to do. Story_ID: 314941 Speaker 1: We're talking about your mother's [Elizabeth Harris] side of the family and did your mother talk about growing up and what kind of childhood and growing up did she have and? Speaker 2: Unlike today, sometimes, she grew up in a two-parent household. Very interesting: my mother probably didn't reach as some as we talk, she didn't reach puberty until she was about sixteen years old, and now it's probably about ten years old. So it gives me a chance of looking at like man that's like a six-year difference. That's a long, big jump and, and you know she was a twin, a--not identical twin but paternal twin. She had one younger, two younger--well one younger sister along with her twin and one older brother. My uncle, a very interesting person, he was the guy that Richard Pryor talked about--book numbers, didn't need pencil, paper. He didn't do that but he had one of those kind of minds you know, (laughter) he had one of those kind--even after a stroke in his late seventies, yeah he still was, was remember dates and things like that you know and so he'd tell you about, "Yeah, boy I remember yeah that was 19--must've been about 1929 'cause 1928 I remember the cow got hit by that train, 'cause the levy broke that year when it rained--cow got hit by the train, 'cause that boy was born"--and, and all of us like we'd be born in clusters, you know sisters, and in-laws they were born in clusters. Like I have several cousins who are about my age and so he knows everybody's birthday, not only his children, all of the nieces and nephews. "Yeah, boy let's see you's born in November 'cause that other girl was born the next year," and then he'll tie it to an event. So a phenomenal memory and even like after a stroke I walked into a room once which told me also he was sensing with more than his eyes and he said to me, he said, "Donald?" I said, "No sir, it's not, that's not Donald." And he said, "Oh, yeah, okay boy that's you Deacon [HistoryMaker Mujahid Ramadan]. Yeah, you and him, and Donald is cousins." And he just picked up it was one of us but even at that stage. So he was a very phenomenal individual now that I can look back on it and see who he was and, and was the one who told all the stories in the family and so you hear, hear that about in families? There's always somebody probably somebody around like that. Experiences of growing up, being--you know features how we inherit each other's features, my mother talked about how, they said well you know that's like so-and-so and she's like her grandmomma or she's like his cousin. Kind of looked back and see some of the, the European, Caucasian features in my family also. That, that's very visible when you start going back in the 1800s. Speaker 1: Now did they talk about any of that and who the people were and any of that in your family? Speaker 2: Not, no it's connected more to slavery so it's not, not as much, was not as much as discussed but you know but I can see, I've asked questions about, "Well this person here almost look like a Caucasian" and he said, "Yeah well her father was you know almost, what we almost said was like a white man," and so she ended up looking like that. I see a lot of. Speaker 1: Now you said your family owned property in Louisiana, was any of that tied to those kind of relationships with, or is that being descended from like a, landowner, white man or something? Speaker 2: No it didn't, not out of Louisiana; it seemed to have been more of just hard work that, that produced those type of situations. My grand, my mother's grandparents [sic. Ramadan's maternal grandparents] were grocery store owners and farmed, big farm owners, my father's [Johnny Young (ph.)] side of the family was more general labor but it came out of just hard work. Speaker 1: But is, is it a little bit more too 'cause you got you that those--that's a part of the country when where they really begrudged black folks any kind of ownership so. Speaker 2: Oh definitely. Speaker 1: I don't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was that hard work but there's also a strong conviction that said you know there's only a certain way you gonna treat me and that of course what my--I mentioned about my grandfather and his brother, but that, that was a just a historical pattern. In order, in order to probably to be landowners and stand up and look people in the face like that, it probably took a certain type of conviction and. Speaker 1: And probably an opportunity too I guess, I mean did they, did--is there any story about them acquiring how they acquired land and property, is it--was it during Reconstruction or? Speaker 2: After Reconstruction. Speaker 1: After. Speaker 2: Um-hm after Reconstruction and significantly you know late 1800s or early 1900s 'cause my mother was born in 1918 so they were already property owners at that point in time and then a lot of the, a lot of that beyond there was probably was up through maybe the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] where you begin to see--because my grandfather you know he, he later ended up going to work, so a lot of the property ended up being probably taken over in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] after, after World War II [WWII] because I know my grandfather's away, well no, he was there but after, after World War II I think significantly because I see a significant amount of sharecroppers. I was born in '51 [1951] and I probably saw more sharecropping at that point in time and then you begin to hear, hear the history of how land was you know usurped from people in particular when you lived in the rurals like that. Speaker 1: Okay so your mother's family is more well-to-do, well off I guess in terms of ownership and that sort of thing and having? Speaker 2: They had significant ownership, had a history of ownership and it, it probably produced a certain type of mindset. Speaker 1: Now did your mother have a chance to go for higher education or anything? Speaker 2: No, high school she just and got married after high school and. Speaker 1: Do you know the name of the high school, did she ever talk about it--I know it's an all-black school in them days, but (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, well my, my it probably would have been connected to like, what did we call it--we lived in East Carroll Parish [Louisiana], so it'd be like Carroll Elementary School [Lake Providence, Louisiana] which was the elementary school. It started out as a one-room school and then eventually grew into that, but they actually--I think that's where--but it, it ended up moving into a town and they were largely out in the rurals at the--you know really out in the woods at almost that point in time because there wasn't that town didn't even exist in that capacity. Story_ID: 314942 Speaker 1: Tell us, what was your mother [Elizabeth Harris] like and what was her personality like? Speaker 2: High complexion person you know so you could, you could see probably Caucasian features you know in the background. And firm convictions, you know religious values, raised with strong religion, religious values; real, real powerful determination. I learned early what faith was because my natural father [Johnny Young (ph.)] was killed when I was about four years old and it's a historical point also. When I go to my father' side of the family I'll see if I can remember that, but my mother was a person of strong resilience. My youngest brother [Ben] was killed in a fire, he died as a result of a fire when I was about six or seven years old, and I watched my mother go through that and, and I watched her bounce back from it and it was, you know she was alone with two children and, and I, I watched her do that and how she told me about faith was--I remember telling her one night that I didn't want to live in the South and I didn't want to grow up there, and she told me, "If you would just believe then God will make a way." So I remember going to bed saying, "Okay, God I believe and I don't want to live here." About three years later we moved to Nevada so as that--after I grew up I said, oh, that's what faith is it's believing in something and at seven years old I only knew how to believe like my mother told me if I would do that. So she was my provider and because she was I believe--if my mother said that so now as a grown man I understand what faith it, just based on that experience right there so I learned so much because you, you can't give a son anything greater than that, because I mean she equipped me for everything else at that point in time and then after I became an adult, and I could look back and see that, I thought wow it works, and then having that, that also says that we can have the faith of children 'cause I was just a child and that's, it's very interesting I mean you know I wouldn't mind if I could grab it like that, but I was just a child so I think the Bible talks about having that kind of faith and that none can come until the Father unless he comes as a child and, and so I can--it's always good to go back and grab that sometimes during difficult situations. I can just go back and grab that, hey here it is right here so she, she gave me that and, and for that I'll be ever grateful, and there's probably not, and along with a lot of other things the whoopings (laughter) you know she'd tell you real quick about, "Yeah, you know this is gonna hurt me more than I hurt you," and all that good kind of stuff you know (laughter), but she had to reinforce some other things and she, she taught me how to believe. Speaker 1: Just one more thing about your mother and we'll move to your father and then try to tie it up, but what, what did your mother do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother, man my mother worked in the cotton fields, she worked in the cotton fields when I was growing--for the few years we lived in the South and you know did some labor, housekeeping. I--growing up here in Southern Nevada, I moved here when I was ten years old then she did--yeah some housekeeping here in gaming and tourism at the at the hotels and you know then worked a while after she came here, did that for a short period and then she retired you know when she being married at that point in time she didn't have that, that berth. Story_ID: 314943 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: By birth, was Johnny Young [ph.], traditional spelling, J-O-H-N-N-Y Young. Speaker 1: Okay now what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Born there in Louisiana probably about, about 1915, 1916 in rural, in rural in West Louisiana near Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about his side of the family, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: In that area and probably due to the fact that his, his early death when I was a young boy, probably inherited most of my tendencies from my father's side of the family. Came from a father, came from a family of religious people. My grandfather on my father's side, Emmett [Emmett Young (ph.)], was a Baptist minister, Baptist preacher and he preached in Mississippi, Arkansas and Louisiana. Probably my father's side of the family seemed to have been significantly creative-minded people maybe that could have led to the spiritual dimensions. He was one of the earliest ones to lose his life in a work-related accident and, but I seem to have had--he and I were close in relationship. Story_ID: 314944 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about your father [Johnny Young (ph.)] and his--we were talking about his side of the family and you know you said you take after some of the people on that side? Speaker 2: Yeah and then being absent in my life was, was really interesting because I, I reconnected with my father's side of the family when I was in my late twenties, but it--after he was killed and then I was mainly consumed and engaged with my mother's [Elizabeth Harris] side of the family which probably had some benefits to it also, but he had several brothers and they mostly had moved out West and we remained living in the South. Speaker 1: Oh yeah we were talking about you said he was killed in a work-related accident, what happened? Speaker 2: Well it's kind of interesting I say work related, I say accident. Some kids spiked a railroad and--they, they worked on the railroad and they spiked it, they put spikes in the railroad. Speaker 1: On the tracks or something? Speaker 2: On the tracks um-hm, and it flipped the machine that they rode on and it just, you know a shovel hit him in the head and, and a lot of people were injured really bad, he was--I think there two fatalities out of that, my father and possibly with somebody else. Somebody lost some arms and things like that, that was li--damage like that and, and nothing was ever done about it, I mean you know nobody was ever, there was no, it was just a--you know kids playing and so nothing happened, but some black people got killed so, it was kind of--that's kind of troubling, and then of course I was, I was young and he and I was--my first experience with death was with my own father. I didn't--death had--I didn't know what death was, nobody I knew had died, and it was a very, very traumatic experience because I knew he would--I was four years old he was dead and I knew he was dead. Well go and go and talk to a four year old about what death is and they won't, they won't know what it is, we have no concept of death. That's how I knew what death was when my father got killed. So it really kind of shaped you know my whole life because you know you start going through a struggle that early, so then beyond that you know I went, went into elementary school [Carroll Elementary School, Lake Providence, Louisiana] and had some you know interesting experiences that I can look back on and then right behind that my brother, the house burns down and my brother gets killed about two years later. So it really, really--I'm, I'm, it's kind of interesting what that type of experience did now that I look back on it, and I had a laugh. A few years ago my mother and I were talking I said, "Yeah when the house burned down and you were gone about three months?" And she said, "No, I was just gone three weeks." I said, "No, I'm talking about when the house burned down and Ben was in the hospital and he died. The three months, about three months or almost half a year." She said, "No, I was only gone three weeks." And I didn't--I had lived for over forty years thinking my mother had been gone that period of time and I finally was able to see how the child's mind worked, especially when faced with that type of trauma. It just accelerated everything; three weeks, it seemed like I went through an experience of a lifetime during that. Story_ID: 314945 Speaker 1: Then so you know, another benefit probably living in the South is that I didn't--we didn't have a television. You only watched television like very, very seldom you know like once a month or something like that if, if that and you look back now and say oh okay so it gives you a different kind of imagination because if you're not bombarded with that type of media; I mean we can see it now with everything that's written about print. I began to see the benefit of the imagination. The mind that I have now and I think a lot of that comes--because it comes out of that environment because I wasn't--I was ten years old when I moved to Nevada so a lot of my whole shaping had already been shaped out in the country. So I, I always thought that a vivid imagination was normal. I didn't realize that it, it wasn't. I always thought, I always thought because I could remember things--everybody remembered things. I, I didn't think it was unusual to know who played with John Coltrane in 1957 in the Tokyo [Japan] jazz series with [HistoryMaker] McCoy Tyner and Paul Chambers. I, you know I, I--the whole group I, that's--to me that was normal situation. It was normal for me to have a paper route that I didn't have a list for nor did I have a book for collecting because I knew how many customers I had. I knew how it had--how much that people had paid me, that was normal, then I look back on it as growing up out there in the country by myself. It, it produced probably some different neural cells that, not having television to retard that produced, I, I and I didn't know it. I mean now I can see it because you know you can see, oh a little bit different. People aren't different so much in fact they're different, they just, they just think differently and a lot of that is shaped by the time we're ten years old like ten, 90 percent of the personality is fully developed, who we're going to be and so I'm thankful that I had that chance to live and go through what I went through so by the time I was ten years and I moved to Nevada you know I could--I had already learned and then the rest of it was just process. Story_ID: 314946 Speaker 1: So, lived those next few years in the South, had some interesting experience growing up going to school there. I had a very wonderful elementary school teacher, Mrs. Virgil [ph.]. Now she wasn't wonderful when I was in the first grade you know 'cause she'd whoop your hind part and let you know that you and make you feel it, and you'd better like it, but I was in a play called--it was with Old King Cole, and Old King Cole had the most role. He was the leading character so with my imagination and memory I was Old King Cole and I remember how she told me, "You gone do this," and I didn't want to do it then it ended up you know you were five or six years old it was really a good learning experience and I'd go back and see how she, she was showing us then you know, you know you can, you can do things and not only you can, you gone do it and, and having seen that and a lot of African Americans who went to school in the South like they got a lot of benefits. I didn't finish there but I see the benefits of Mrs. Virgil. I remember--then Mrs. Mayfield [ph.], my second grade teacher, her daughter was my third grade teacher and they both taught at the same school there, this little black elementary school. Speaker 2: What was the name of the school? Speaker 1: Carroll Elementary School [Lake Providence, Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Carroll, okay. Speaker 1: Right there in Lake Providence [Louisiana]. Story_ID: 314947 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Like what was your, your neighborhood like and what was the-- Speaker 2: Hay. Speaker 1: --and what was the-- Speaker 2: Neighborhood man, not no neighborhood (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But hay, I remember rain when in the day time it would be so cloudy, the clouds would be so thick until you would think it was actually night time. It could be twelve noon and the rain, the way it could rain down there and it's like in the South. I mean you really get rain, turbulent rain. I remember the, the smell--the wet smell, you know you remember hearing crickets and the things that chirping and the noise and the noise and frogs in particular when it's rain you get all of them just--become alive. I remember dew and having dew that settled in the morning and then you'd watch it dissipate over the day. Flat lands, sunset over cotton. The sounds that existed--I remember vividly hearing trucks on Highway 65 [U.S. Route 65] at night, I remember that and I thought I don't want to live like this. After I was an adult and I went back to the South, the levee that was there because of the floods, I said, "Hey that levee shrunk." Somebody said, "No, it didn't shrink" (laughter), "you just grew up" (laughter), so it wasn't as big at that point in time. Animals, watching animals you know sometimes the killing of animals--hog killing, even though they told us don't watch it I'd watch it anyway, a lot of space, a lot of space. Certainly realized that there--the sounds of nature, the seasons changing. Now I'm always sensitive to when the fall comes because those first ten years you know I could kind of see the seasons come and go, and that it's still in my memory banks you know when the fall begins to set in because it's very visible when the fall sets into the South like that. I, I almost feel it sometimes now, even if I'm living here in Las Vegas [Nevada] when it's hard to tell when the fall is coming. If I feel deep enough in my senses I remember what, when the fall is coming. Story_ID: 314948 Speaker 1: Did you have any sense that at all, I know your father [Johnny Young (ph.)] died when you were four, but do you have any sense--did you have any sense growing up what he was like at all? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah we, 'cause we were so close I, I remember going to the, I remember going like to get my hair cut. As a matter of fact the guy who cut my hair, Mr. Dan Bell [ph.], he worked on the railroad and got injured when my father was killed. So I, I remember those experiences, I remember church, I remember pray, hearing people pray. I remember him you know coming in from work. I remember some of the, the early relationships I picked up through him. I remember how people responded to him, how they, how they were--you know he was one, kind of like my grandfather, he was one of those persons that people kind of looked to you know, as a decision maker, which way should we go with this right here, which way we should be? Speaker 1: Now he would've been pretty much established by the time he died right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean he was in his mid-thirties I guess when he died? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, and worked and you know deacon in the church but virtually, the leading--one of the leading figures in the church and then a deacon figure outside of the church [in the Deacons for Defense and Justice], a leading figure. You know one of those persons who you know went to, went to register when they told him you know, "Nigger, if you register and still try to vote we'll kill you." You know, went to register because he knew that's what he had to do and strong, strong faith convictions and, and he and I were--we--I guess we were, I was just a clone of him and so I, I probably didn't see myself existing as much through my mother [Elizabeth Harris] as most children do. I probably saw myself existing more--I know I existed more through my father because when he was killed--I watched this young boy almost die. I, I watched that experience and nobody even had told me. They never did say well like, "He's dead," somebody just knocked on the door, and when they knocked on the door I knew he was dead, and that's you know for a four-year old then you know how do you--and that's what almost killed him and so that's how we were, I didn't see myself living through my mother. I saw myself living through him, as a matter of fact they thought I had, had a heart attack and the doctor said, finally my mother said they finally told her said, "He probably went into shock," but nobody had said like, "Your father's dead." Nobody, had, I just had heard there it was an accident and then I knew, but I knew that he was dead and it's just that I didn't know how to interpret it. So it shut down my breathing. It shut my breathing down and I remember--yeah, that's a tough one. Speaker 1: Well you had a rough couple of years there you know. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: Yeah, that, and that a--that's good in a sense because it shaped me for the rest of my life. I've, I seldom--you know, it shapes you 'cause you, it'll, it'll put you in a situation where you could bump your head sometimes 'cause you don't, you don't know how to give up because I was carried so early until I--the only thing I know how to do is just keep going. I've never, never known how to give up from that. Story_ID: 314949 Speaker 1: Now there were only the two of you, you and your brother right? Speaker 2: No, there's my sister. Speaker 1: You, you've got a sister, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah oh actually I have two other, I actually I have two other brothers, live here in Las Vegas [Nevada] and, and a sister who lives but they were in my mother's [Elizabeth Harris] first marriage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and my sister and I and my youngest brother [Ben] who got killed was in the second and so they weren't in my life directly because they spent time living with their father who lived out in California. Speaker 1: Okay now well how was it that the family ended up in Nevada? Speaker 2: My mother's second husband, who, my father who raised me, Flenorte Harris. Speaker 1: Now what's his name again, can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: Flenorte, F-L-E-N-O-R-T-E Harris. Speaker 1: F-, I'm sorry, F-. Speaker 2: F-L-E-N-O-R-T-E. Speaker 1: O-R-T-E, Harris? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What sort of name was that first name? Speaker 2: I'd probably say French, it sounds somewhat like it, but it's unique. I don't think--I've only met, heard of one other person who had that name and he was a unique man himself, I think it's very appropriately fitting, he was a very unique man, and-- Speaker 1: Okay, what can you tell us about him, you know what I mean? What can you tell us about his life? Speaker 2: Probably was borderline brilliant and it produced an interesting personality because having his type of intelligence growing up in the South it would almost seem like he was almost a retard, having that kind of intelligence as an African American would have seen--it would have been very, very abnormal so as I got to know him old--and as I look back on him in life I mean very, very much in--highly intelligent man who just was a hard worker, dedicated, hardworking man who, who didn't talk very much but showed you everything you needed to know in life just through his actions, a man of very few words. I remember asking him one time later in life, why didn't you tell me that? And he only said, "You couldn't hear me then," and that's all he said about it, I knew exactly what he was saying, he said, "You couldn't hear me then." Never gave up on me no matter what I went through. Hit me one time and, and I was in his house from ten years old to the time I moved out when I was about twenty-one, only hit me one time, and what he hit me about he didn't even tell my mother about, she wasn't at home, and he--and I didn't know until after he was deceased that he didn't tell her, but I knew she, when she came in she didn't whoop me like I was anticipating, and I'm just waiting for her to come you know through the door like she would normally come through the door, right? So I finally end up going out in my room and she's in the kitchen cooking, spoke to me and everything. I'm saying, "Hey, I know something gone happen here." So then later after he was, after he was gone I asked her about it and she said, "That's the first time I heard about that." Speaker 1: Well what was it about, I know you remember so? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had some girls in the house on Sunday when he was at church and she was at work (laughter) and I got busted, and so you know and then I didn't do what I should've done 'cause I even told them to sit down and just stay, and so then he told them they had to leave and he took a, some caulking that you used to caulk to put along the wall or the floor, and he took that and grabbed me by my arm and whacked me one time and twisted the arm to let me know and don't try to buck me either, and hit one time and he took it and threw it down and told me now take that and put it out in the storage room and never said anything else about it, and when he went to pick up my mother I knew he was gonna tell though and then he never told her and that's the--and I learned from that, and, and so he was that, he was that type of person you know. Probably had about a six to eighth grade education because school was not something that could encompass where he was at. Story_ID: 314950 Speaker 1: And knew how to raise you to be a man. I mean without a lot of discussion, I remember him [Ramadan's stepfather, Flenorte Harris] getting my mother [Elizabeth Harris] off me one time you know. He was the one who, who told her don't slap me, because my mother had a tendency and I'm sure probably from the period when she was raising me by herself, she wanted to control my spirit and especially growing up in the South you have to control the spirit 'cause if that spirit gets outside of her, then it'll get outside the you know other situations and have some problems, and so but probably when I got a certain age I remember her telling him--telling her one time, "Don't slap him anymore." You know 'cause she was quick if she thought I was bucking her she'll--my mother could slap you and put her hand back down before you knew she had slapped you, just feel it, but he told her--because and what happened she slapped me one time and, and she saw the look, she said, "Oh, what you thinking?" Well he knew what I was thinking you know, 'cause you know a guy get fifteen, sixteen years old if you let him get slapped indoors, somebody can slap him outdoors. So I wasn't like that and so she, he just and I heard him talking after he told me to go outside, "You know you can't slap him, he's too old." So he was very understanding what being a man was and he lived it, I mean nobody had educated him in what a man was, he lived being a man and so there--and he was in the Masons [Freemasons] and you know those orders, you know a member of New Jerusalem Church [Greater New Jerusalem Church, Las Vegas, Nevada], he was an usher there in the church but he lived these values you know worked hard--I remember one time I got in trouble in school, got kicked out of school. She told me, "When your daddy get home I'm gone tell him." She told him, he asked me to walk in the storage room with him, he's taking off his work hat. You know he's got that construction hat on, the metal hat and the hat fits right around here so his face has the cement and stuff all over it from the husk on it, his eyes are red. She'd make him take his clothes off out in the storage room right because and have him put on housecoat or something and come inside, but leave that stuff outside. He's taking his stuff off and he tells me to reach down and un-pull these tight-ass boots for me, you know and you can see him going through the ache of working like that all day--hey man, by the time he was halfway finished dressed I wanted to say, "Go ahead and beat me please," 'cause he's not, he's just having me help him. He takes the helmet--and says, "Oh, lord it was hot out there today, untie, untie them boots for me will you boy?" I untie the boots he pulled those off, you know you could smell the odor. You know he's been out there working in the sun for like eight or eight hours all day in that heat, Las Vegas [Nevada] heat--he said, "I heard you had some problems in school today?" And I mean I, I start feeling this man out there working like this right, and I think that's what he wanted me to see. "I'm out here working like this and you acting like a fool." When he finished I--the beating was over, I had been beat down so bad seeing what he had to go through like that 'cause I was never there when he got undressed and that--it made me feel a little bit uncomfortable and I think that's what, that's all he--I guess he knew that's all I had to do was show him this right here. So I--let me do, let me at least not be acting like this right here I school, so and he could do--I mean he would do that with numerous things, very--I remember the first job that I had. I got a ticket on a motorcycle, he said, "I'm not gonna pay for it." I said, "Well, what am I gonna do I ain't got money?" He said, "I'm gonna take you to get a job." Went and got a job at a car wash. He was also big on teaching you worth ethic, work ethic. I've, I've grew up with a good work ethic you know, we owned some apartments. I remember we had to use to stop playing sports, stop playing ball in the street or hanging out or something like that, and go down and unplug the sewer line in the apartments and I had to un-tack the sewer, not the nice newer sewer things, I'm talking about them snakes you have to lift together and shove 'em down in there. Aw man, that was a funky, stinky job but he was teaching me some sense of responsibility. So I've always known how to do something, I don't care what it is I'm gonna take a look at it because that's the way he was. We all, we would take a look at something before they called somebody. Being frugal with spending, you know he was charged 10 percent and paid 90 percent. "Pay your bills even if you're broke 'cause if you pay your bills you have good credit," that, that would--but he never really talked about that kind of stuff now, he just did it. So he was one of those who you know, so I, I had, had good opportunities and then I probably along with it I grew up in a neighborhood in Southern Nevada to be around a lot, a lot of good people you know, people who were instrumental in the Civil Rights Movement here getting integration into, in Nevada, a lot, lot of people like that. We grew up in Berkley Square [Las Vegas, Nevada] so anyway I mean I flip flopped over to there but, but my father, certainly my father who raised me certainly. Speaker 2: You had a fortunate circumstance it sounds like (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, no doubt about it, no, no--deeply blessed. Story_ID: 314951 Speaker 1: So, you moved [to Las Vegas, Nevada], you were about ten years old so this is about 1961 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-one [1961], November 17th. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: The day after I came here I turned ten years old. Speaker 1: Okay, so from what I've heard, just in hearing entertainers talk about Las Vegas, in those days Las Vegas was still somewhat segregated. Speaker 2: No (laughter), not somewhat segregated, (laughter) Las Vegas was segregated, ain't no somewhat about it, shucks and I think we had a few black police officers then, but they policed in the black community, you couldn't arrest a white man. Speaker 1: And even entertainers, the big time entertainers like Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Come out here and perform. Speaker 1: And other people had to-- Speaker 2: Stay over here. Speaker 1: Stay in the black community. Speaker 2: Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] was real big then because they produced, they developed that so black people would have a place to come to but Frank Sinatra and everybody else came over there after twelve 'cause that's where the party was at, but even what was--now it's a historically black community I mean you know everybody was there. I went to Kit Carson Elementary School [Kit Carson International Academy, Las Vegas, Nevada], came when I was in fourth grade. My wife [Sumayah Ramadan] said one of the things that her mother liked about me when we met she said, at least the good thing she thought, she said she didn't like me too much, but anyway she said, the boy got shine--he keeps his shoes shined. Well, at Kit Carson Elementary School I was on the patrol, and on patrol, Mr. Herschel Williams required you gotta have your shoes shined every day. So I was inoculated with the value of keep your shoes shined. Living in neighborhoods that were segregated but everybody lived around me. Man I grew up in the neighborhood with Dr. Charles I. West who founded the Voice [Las Vegas Voice; The Vegas Voice] central newspaper here in Las Vegas, Reverend Donald Clark who was instrumental in the Civil Rights Movement, Dr. McMillan [James B. McMillan]. Dr. West was the first African American doctor, Dr. McMillan was the first dentist. We had to clean his swimming pool to go swimming. Ruby Duncan who founded the Welfare Rights Organization [Nevada Welfare Rights Organization], here in Southern Nevada, lived across the street from Kit Carson Elementary School, H.P. Fitzgerald who was the principal lived in the neighborhood. My teachers lived in the neighborhood, the religious leaders lived in the neighborhood, my football coach who became my football coach, African American, Coach Curtis [Overton Curtis] he lived in it, in areas like that and I had the luxury of there while going to the integrated school, all of the people, Mr., Mr. Smith [ph.], Mr. Jordan [ph.], they, they all lived in the neighborhood. So I grew up around a lot of people. Robert "Moon" Mullen who was the first African American judge, his wife was my sixth grade--so she was one of the teachers in my sixth grade school class. There was a team of teachers who taught us in the sixth grade, so I grew up around Robert "Moon" Mullen. Reverend Bennett [Marion Bennett] who became well, Commissioner Woodrow Wilson who became the first African American elected official as a republican, became an assemblyman. He became also the first African American county commissioner. Well, my wife [Sumayah Ramadan] grew up two doors from Woodrow Wilson. He lived in the next neighborhood over really almost like the next street over. He, he founded the Westside Credit Union [Westside Federal Credit Union, Las Vegas, Nevada] is where we did all of our banking at because you know, segregation. Being at the Credit Union sometimes on the--my father [Ramadan's stepfather, Flenorte Harris] sometimes served on the interviewing committee up there. You kind of sit around hear the, the war stories of the Civil Rights Movement and how that went. People like Mr. Clarence Ray who was shooting pool up in Carson City [Nevada] with an old white guy who told him where the legislation, what the law was that we get the civil rights bill passed here instead of Nevada; a lawyer Keller [Charles Keller] who was the attorney who fought the civil rights legislation here in, in Southern Nevada. I grew up in that era and, and grew up in that neighborhood. We went to clean Dr. McMillan's--Dr. McMillan taught me what pain was, the difference between pain and pressure. I had never had a tooth pulled and me being from Louisiana and so--the rural part and so went to the dentist and had to have a tooth pulled and he shot me like about seven times and he would go out and pull other people's teeth and come back and he'd still shooting me and so he, he reached down, after he said, he'd touch on it and push on it he says, "Can you feel it" and I said, "Yeah," so then he reached down and pinched me, "Hey doc that hurt." He said, "Now that's pain." I said, "Okay I know that," and then he pushed on this right here he said, "Can you feel," I said, "Yeah," he said, "But does it hurt?" I said, "No," he said, "That's pressure." So I had gotten it (laughter) confused until Dr. McMillan helped me understand, but we had to clean his swimming pool in order to go swimming 'cause the swimming, the only swimming pool was like we had to walk downtown to swim, so he had one in his backyard, but he always said, "You guys gotta earn it." So you kind of grow up in a neighborhood like that, around people like that who are involved in the Civil Rights Movements, who are involved--the movers and the shakers. You know Reverend Coleman [V.C.L. Coleman] was at Second Baptist [Second Baptist Church, Las Vegas, Nevada], Reverend Thompson [Abner Thompson] was at Victory Baptist [Victory Missionary Baptist Church, Las Vegas, Nevada], Reverend Addison [F.N. Addison] was at New Jerusalem [Greater New Jerusalem Church, Las Vegas, Nevada] and you know and all the people lived in, you know we had a general concern. So there was a down side to integration also because we became disbursed in, I think the concerned kind and those models that use to be right there in the neighborhood, those models moved elsewhere. I, I was lucky to have come up in an environment where I had those models and then, in high school [Valley High School, Las Vegas, Nevada] I had the luxury of being around a guy by the name of, not a guy, a man named Overton Curtis, Coach Overton Curtis from the eighth grade to the twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Oberland? Speaker 2: Overton. Speaker 1: Overton, okay. Speaker 2: Overton Curtis and played high school football here, and went to Utah State [Utah State University, Logan, Utah] and had a short career for the Pittsburgh Steelers which I'm glad of and came back here, became a P.E. [physical education] teacher, health teacher, that's how I met him and that like really you know shaped the whole situation. Story_ID: 314952 Speaker 1: What grade school did you go, you go to here when you got here? Speaker 2: I was at Kit Carson. Speaker 1: Kit Carson. Speaker 2: Kit Carson Elementary School [Kit Carson International Academy, Las Vegas, Nevada]. Speaker 1: Now this is a, Kit Carson [Christopher Houston Carson] is a--Kit Carson is a character we remember from-- Speaker 2: Western guy. Speaker 1: --TV Westerns but here-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --he is a real. Speaker 2: Has an elementary school. Speaker 1: --he's a historical personage in Nevada (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. I think somebody said he may have come through here, everybody did, and then the most important thing there was a guy by the name of H.P. Fitzgerald which there's a high school named after Mr. Fitzgerald here in Southern Nevada also. So they named a high school after him and Mr. Fitzgerald was like--that was the last segregated school I went to was Kit Carson and when we were going to the seventh grade, I remember him pulling a lot us together and telling us, "Look, now when y'all get out there and you go to school and you go to school with white kids, don't sit in the back of the room, sit in the front of the room and let people know that you can talk well." So that's when--and you know Mr. Fitzgerald, strong disciplinarian you know and Mr. Fitzgerald was the last person I remember would whoop your butt with a paddle. Speaker 1: Okay so it's Kit Carson Elementary School and then next was. Speaker 2: J.D. Smith [J.D. Smith Junior High School; J.D. Smith Middle School, Las Vegas, Nevada]. Speaker 1: J.D. Smith. Speaker 2: It was a junior high school, called middle school now. I was only there for a year went to seventh grade there. Speaker 1: Now was that the first integrated school? Speaker 2: Yeah, J.D. Smith. Speaker 1: Okay, and then where did you go from there? Speaker 2: Valley High School [Las Vegas, Nevada]. Speaker 1: Valley High School okay, is that where you graduated? Speaker 2: High school at Valley um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated what in '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: Seventy [1970]. Story_ID: 314953 Speaker 1: Were you really struck by the difference between Nevada and Louisiana when you got here, I mean did it really seem like a prayer answered when you actually got here? Speaker 2: Oh, yes certainly, I remember the day being in Mexico [sic. New Mexico] in the snow and we were driving through the snow, I knew then that it had been answered, I, I knew. As a matter of fact the way it came to me said, here's what you asked for and that's, and that later I looked back and said, "Oh that's, that's faith, just ask for it." Hey man, I was, I was a guy who had lived, born and raised in Louisiana have seen what was going to be in Mexico that day when I woke up and we were on our way out here, and, and pro and cons to it also and I gained a lot from Louisiana but it kind of help prepare me. The, the good side here is that it was nice, but people weren't as tough. Like none of the guys who I had moved in with were my age, they couldn't do what I could do because I, I was you know from the country so they did--they didn't think the way I thought either, and of course maybe some other people in the country didn't either, but, but at rate that, that was, I could see the difference in that. I, I tended to have passions for things. I didn't see a lot of that--I still probably have that. Now that could just be a characteristic. If I, I find myself doing something I tend to be compassionate about it whether it's you know being in shape or reading or spirit or pursuit of spiritual endeavors, those passions and probably being by yourself and living out in the country you learn to develop a focus. I won't say you learn, you develop a focus just by the environment that you're in and I didn't, I didn't see that. Some people say being from East Carroll Parish [Louisiana] which is where you know Louisiana's the only state that has parishes or the only state that ever had them. They said that--they say we're a different kind of fabric anyway. I, I couldn't say for sure you know. I just kind of know myself but tend to persevere. So there was a big difference--accelerated education I was behind educationally though when I came into fourth grade. It took me, I was probably about the sixth grade, actually it was very interesting. About the sixth grade or seventh grade I started reading comic books and Marvel, we would watch the 'X-Men' and stuff like that, I read them as comic books and that, I think that accelerated my understanding of conceptual thinking because then I could, I began to see different ideas and so like probably about the seventh or eighth grade my whole focus about education--you know and puberty was coming in there. Also time shifted, I began to notice that I understood history you know. My first fascinating event about history was the Third Reich, it was an interesting thing to read about, but I--all of a sudden I knew all of those guys, I knew every last one of 'em that was involved in the plot, you could see it unfold and the whole works. Now I attribute that to having a vivid imagination and having had read comic books then, that was transferrable into other social aspects in particular. You know kind of shaped me as a social thinker like pretty, pretty much early. The retention aspect I remember going to Sunday school and I was always the person that to speak, to summarize the Sunday school lessons, and I you know I thought it was normal which I'm sure it is in many regards and I also learned there that people really weren't listening to what I was saying because they always said amen. So I decided one day to talk in mumbo jumbo and they said the same thing. I said oh, okay I see y'all ain't, y'all ain't really doing this right here, and that's where I developed a close relationship, I remember a close relationship with this guy name Tommy Jones. Tommy was in Catholic school, kind of interesting kind of guy, old Catholic school guy so Tommy kind of crazy anyway in Catholic school so when he in Catholic school he's always liked chasing girls and stuff like that, that's his whole emphasis. Anyway Tommy later became the chairman of the Black Panther Party here in Las Vegas [Nevada]. I met him in Sunday school (laughter) and he was there chasing girls, we was probably about thirteen, fourteen years old. He was there chasing girls, we became friends and a real close friendship there and played some high school sports together. That's where I developed some of those relationships that lasted for a while. I met Randy Carter [ph.] who was the best man in my wedding. Don Pittman [Donald Pittman] who we played high school football together, he coaches now at Savannah, Savannah State [Savannah State University, Savannah Georgia]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: He coaches at Savannah State in Georgia. So met people like that you know along with Nolan Curtis [ph.]. There I met a lot of interesting white guys who I've developed--we still live in the same town so we still have relationships. A Jewish guy that I, I knew in high--we met in high school and I--a company that I last ran his daughter came over and spent a day with me on a school-to-work program and it was very interesting she looked just like him. I had to tell her, "Girl I been knowing your daddy since he was about x-amount years old," so those type of experiences. Story_ID: 314954 Speaker 1: Are there any memorable events in high school [Valley High School, Las Vegas, Nevada] that you want to tell us about? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), I remember Coach Curtis almost knocking me out one day coming out of P.E. [physical education]. I-- Speaker 1: This is Overton Curtis (Simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Coach Overton Curtis yeah, I hit, hit a--playing basketball and somebody scratched me over the eyelid and I dropped the basketball and you know--short tempered, so I hit the guy a few times, as many times as I could before Coach Curtis got there. So he turned me around and pushed me off the guy and I don't know if I made a flinch toward him or what, and he hit me right in the solar plexus, knocked the wind out of me in front of everybody. You got about forty people out there and I have an image to uphold which doesn't include being knocked--having the wind knocked outta you by your P.E. teacher, then worse than that he sent me out on track and made me run during my lunch, to be concluded by the fact that I can't go home and tell my mother [Elizabeth Harris] 'cause I'd be in worse trouble at this point in time and he told me I better not get in any fights about it, talking about big I mean because you know if forty people heard about it you know everybody in the school knew about it after lunch, right? I'm out on the track running so they probably was looking out the window talking about, "Yeah man, there he is out there on the track running. Coach Curtis knocked him out and made him run." I mean I'm--my imagination's putting it all together. He goes to lunch, calls me back after and tells me, "Now shower and go to class and if I hear about you getting in any fights this afternoon, I'll see you tomorrow." Now, I got a problem on my hands, 'cause going from lunch and going from up to the hallway, how many people was laughing at me in the hall (laughter), but I can't do what I wanna do 'cause you know I wanna go over and oh, you think it was funny, let me give you some of this, but then he's gonna hear about it right, and you know Coach Curtis was not one to be taken lightly. Man, it, it couldn't get, get that guy outta my life. He taught me what you gonna deal with that bad temper, he also told me about making excuses. Now, I was a wide receiver and if I dropped the pass it was somebody else's fault. He made me run one time with the football he said, "Whose fault is it?" "Hey, it's my fault, man," and got over that situation. Coach Curtis also revealed to me that as an African American man I have to work twice as hard in order to make it. He gave me that, 'cause in high school football I was closer to a god as you could get in your own mind, and Coach Curtis realized it so me put me on the second team and told me I gotta be twice as good as anybody else out there to play, so I kept that one also, got to be twice as good cause sometimes as African Americans in America the old saying, you may not get all your worth paid for but you surely gone pay for all that you get, that's the way it is for African Americans in this country you know, you may have to work twice as hard in order--but even in history you see people who, who we memorialize in history, they had to be twice as good. Helen Keller had to be twice as good. Her condition that required that, scripturally Joseph had to be twice as good, I mean the guy didn't do nothing, got undermined by his brothers, thrown in a well, while he was in a well he was sold off into slavery, while he's in slavery he's accused of something he doesn't do and he ends up going to jail to protect himself, so it is historically those who have challenged the most are gonna, they are gonna develop the, the best fiber. So at the end of Joseph's sojourn in prison he comes out and becomes virtually the chief operating officer of all of Egypt. So that connection is there, Coach Curtis just said, "You gotta be twice as good, don't think that you can just go out here and do that this white kid do and you gone make it, you gone be on the starting team, be twice as good." So I've had some roles here, even in Nevada where I've been able to reflect. Story_ID: 314955 Speaker 1: I remember driving once, headed towards Fallon, Nevada. It was raining so hard until the, the windshield wiper couldn't even keep the rain off. That means we're up in the northern part of the state right, and I heard Coach Curtis [Overton Curtis] whisper to me as I drove along in the rain and he was gone, he said, "Remember you have to be twice as good." Man, I had to fly up north, land in Reno [Nevada], get a car and drive out to Fallon and speak to some people about an issue that the governor had directed me on, but just at that point and time, you gotta do this right here. Now, would some other staff member in the governor's cabinet have done it? I don't know. One time one newspaper said you know that Ramadan [HistoryMaker Mujahid Ramadan] guy came out here and went all through the rules, state officials normally weren't doing things like that so, but that was Overton Curtis saying, "Don't just try to be as good, be willing to go out and be twice as good." So, having, having those benefits I, I think has certainly has played on me you know from a mother [Elizabeth Harris] who taught me what faith was, to a father [Johnny Young (ph.)] who I inherited a spirit, to a father [Ramadan's stepfather, Flenorte Harris] who raised me who just taught me what being a man and being responsible was to people like Overton Curtis who said, "Don't make excuses." I remember Ms. Ruby Duncan used to--the Welfare Rights [Nevada Welfare Rights Organization], man I remember for three presidents there wasn't from the time of maybe at least Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] all the way up through Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], Ms. Ruby had a picture with every president in the Oval Office, that's how prominent she was in the welfare rights movement. There was a fight, we were having a fight one day outside of Kit Carson [Kit Carson Elementary School; Kit Carson International Academy, Las Vegas, Nevada] on her lawn, man Ms. Ruby came outside, Ruby Duncan and picked up this hose and was whooping hind--Ms. Ruby was a pretty big woman too, and she was whooping hind parts out there, everybody. I remember I was hit twice, you know once across the back you know because we're not, we wasn't gonna break it up, she broke the fight up by herself you know and told us, "Y'all gotta learn to help each other, don't be fighting, and furthermore I'm gone beat you with this hose." So I mean just being around people like that, really is you know. Her son is an attorney here in town just--he was a school board regent up until a few years ago so. Story_ID: 314956 Speaker 1: From what you're saying it sounds like that the black community here in Las Vegas [Nevada] was really strong, you know? Speaker 2: At that time, it had to be, you know they say what is it, necessity is the mother of all invention, that--we had to be because you know Nevada--you use to hear people say sometime, "Hey man Las Vegas, the Mississippi of the West?" I said "Don't insult Mississippi like that (laughter)," shucks because you know that's the way it was out here, that's the way it was and so the people, it produced a certain type of fabric and maybe it's not so much like that anymore, not overtly, but more covertly now so we're not really not producing anything. In that sense I'm, I'm troubled about the challenges that we see with young people growing up and their sense of irresponsibility, want it quick, want it now. It's gotta be expensive, no, no you know having a--the freedom of thought doesn't matter very much if it doesn't mind--if you're not selective in your thinking, and the human being is given the freedom of thought and so a lot our children are affected by that. Story_ID: 314957 Speaker 1: I wanna get you out of high school [Valley High School, Las Vegas, Nevada] here, but were you a good student in high school? Speaker 2: In things that I had an appreciation for probably yes. I would, I'd probably say so. I, I was certainly probably considered by many as, as a leader; had the ability to always to influence people in terms of their decision makings and things like that probably because I came out of a preacher-type-deacon-type background, I always the ability to articulate ideas and thoughts. Growing up in the church environment produced that. Also had the ability to transcend the idea of biracial barriers because I developed some relationships with many Caucasian students and, and people. My--actually one of my first early mentors I believe was a white guy named Dan Earl [ph.] in the work profession. Went, went to junior college in Oklahoma, was there a semester and then Oklahoma wasn't for me. I was transitioning in terms of my thinking then. Speaker 1: Now, you were an athlete in high school, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When you graduated and stuff. You played football and didn't you play basketball too or? Speaker 2: No football and ran track all-state. Speaker 1: Ran track? Speaker 2: Football and, and all-state in track. Speaker 1: So, when you graduated did--now you ended up in a junior college, was that because you weren't prepared like to go to a bigger school? Speaker 2: Yeah, wasn't prepared for a bigger school, probably athletically I had the ability, but wasn't prepared for it, and. Speaker 1: So what school did you go to in Oklahoma? Speaker 2: Northeastern Oklahoma Junior College [Northeastern Oklahoma A&M College, Miami, Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: And what, did your coach [Overton Curtis], was he able to hook you up with that or how did that? Speaker 2: Aw yes, well actually you know there was this idea that I could eventually be at Oklahoma [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma] but I needed to go through a junior college because academically I wasn't ready for that, so somebody had saw me and said, "Well you know good athlete but you know it's like this right here." Speaker 1: And the school again is what, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Excuse me? Speaker 1: The name of the school? Speaker 2: Northeastern Oklahoma A&M Junior College (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Northeastern, okay, okay. Story_ID: 314958 Speaker 1: And so then I was also transitioning from--that was the era if you remember, that was the height of you know the black awareness had really began to blossom at this time, Vietnam conflict [Vietnam War] was going on I mean all those events and all those issues were going on and it was affecting--that probably right at, during that time. Right after that I remember major novels--somebody gave me the book 'The Godfather' [Mario Puzo] I read it as a novel before I read it and saw the movie ['The Godfather'] so I had already knew who Vito Corleone was and, and Marlon Brando just filled in the blank, but I also began to read you know things like I remember reading Mao's [Mao Tse-tung] 'Red Book' ['Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung'], Che Guevara's 'Diary' ['The Bolivian Diary of Ernesto Che Guevara'] Speaker 2: Yeah, the Panthers [Black Panther Party] were really reading that then. Speaker 1: Yeah and so that's where I through my relationship with Tommy Jones and those people I started reading things like that and still you know read things like George Jackson's 'Blood in My Eye' and began to--Malcolm X literature and then began to see, see a different perspective in life and then probably I, I remember reading Kwame Nkrumah's 'Axiom' [sic. 'Axioms of Kwame Nkrumah']. I remember the quote that crystallized something that I had been seeing for a long time in my life. In his book 'Axiom' Dr. Nkrumah said, "That the degree of a country's revolutionary awareness is measured by the political maturity of its women." And I thought man, that's powerful. I didn't know exactly what it said exactly, but it just sounded so good, "The degree of a county's revolutionary awareness is measured by the political maturity of its women." Then I thought hm, Malcolm X had said, "If you're an education man, you're an educated individual, but if you educate a woman you educate the whole family." But my grandmother had started it by saying, "The hand that rocks the cradle rules the world," and then I began to see ideas and concepts that had started out when I was young coming together. Speaker 2: Now was this--was these ideas in, in contrast and conflict to what you were seeing in the black movement in those days? I know the Panthers have been criticized for being very chauvinistic and to the point of you know oppressive you know? Speaker 1: Very much so. Speaker 2: And some--same can be said for many Muslims in those days too, I mean. Speaker 1: Probably significant-- Speaker 2: Hebrew Israelites and some others. Speaker 1: Right and but significantly I mean in the Black Panthers. I didn't, I, I was, I, I read and studied and affiliated with the Black Panther Party-- Story_ID: 314959 Speaker 1: Something that really began to shape me after I came back from junior college [Northeastern Oklahoma Junior College; Northeastern Oklahoma A&M College, Miami, Oklahoma] also is I went to work in the boys club and that also gave shine to another dimension of young--I began to see myself in these little kids that I was working with, worked at the West Las Vegas boys club and it was you know in college, worked at West Las Vegas, met a white guy named Dan Earl [ph.]. Dan Earl, and Dan Clayton Earl said, "Yeah you a white boy with three first names," (laughter) so but Dan came from Ventura, California, had been a former [U.S.] Marine, and really knew how to connect with people. He just knew how to connect with people across race lines. He's the first mentor I had as a--at that stage probably that I can look back and say yeah this guy was a real strong mentor. He showed me a lot of things, and the experience of working with young people also began to show me other things. So I, I could see the benefit of organizations like the Black Panther Party and what it did, and so what I did is that I maintained a relationship with them while working in communities and that, that really began my public service life as working at Boys Club of Clark County [Clark County, Nevada], and that's the place where I had the first opportunity of bringing African Americans together on a, on a you know as an adult maybe on a mission. The boys club had a board of directors, all, all European American, all Caucasians, nice guys. You know the head of Desert Inn Hotel [Las Vegas, Nevada] and several other--Jackie Gunn [ph.] who was prominent downtown, all of 'em semi--mostly retired now. I'd go to the board meetings, it was kind of new for me and mostly all whites were there. So I decided I was going to form an advisory board for the boys club that I was running and I asked Dan Earl he said yeah, sure. So people who I knew, who I thought were prominent I was able to call, like Robert "Moon" Mullen who was a judge, his wife was my sixth grade school teacher. Cranford Crawford who went to the same church as my mother [Elizabeth Harris], he was an assemblyman. Mr. Woodrow Wilson who we banked at the credit union [Westside Federal Credit Union, Las Vegas, Nevada] with, Mr. Jimmy Gay [James Gay] was the first African American hotel executive. His son was a member of the boys club, and I remember calling them and telling them I needed their help on something and we had to watch black men--I remember Judge Mullen got on the phone and called Bat Reynolds [ph.] and told him, "Look I want you to do this," and it affects me now 'cause it gave them somewhere to be in their own community. It gave them somewhere to exercise some clout in their own community. I remember watching Judge Mullen talk to this guy Bat Reynolds on the phone and it was just so--I was about nineteen maybe twenty, good to see a black man say, "Look, I want you to do this," and because he was a judge the guy came out man, sent a whole construction crew out, gutted the old swimming pool, came in and did the whole renovation. It was in a high low-income black neighborhood and we provided swimming for the kids in the neighborhood, they didn't have to leave the neighborhood to go swimming. The health department came out, lent their support to get everything done. I remember Mr. Gay calling people in gaming and tourism to get uniforms and things for us. So it gave them a place to do some boys club work. Dr. James McMillan [James B. McMillan] who's an elementary school named after him, he had been my dentist, I came said, "Doc I need your help on this right here." Doc not only became the chairman of the advisory board, he went on to the board of directors, the Boys Club of Clark County. He was the first African American on the boys club. And Dan Earl like really liked the idea and I was giving in a neighborhood that I had a relationship with. I had--as an athlete I had ran the Boys Club of Clark County track meets and did a lot of things with them and so it was a good opportunity, then working with young people I was able to finally see my, see myself. I was able to finally see what my mother had seen because I was now seeing myself all over again replicated in Bo-Bo [ph.] and Ricky [ph.] and Darnell [ph.] and Sedgwick [ph.] and Brian [ph.] and all of those young guys and Tony Hines [ph.], Bob Ray Dorsey [ph.] and all those guys. Story_ID: 314960 Speaker 1: We had you at Oklahoma--the Junior College of Oklahoma [Northeastern Oklahoma Junior College; Northeastern Oklahoma A&M College, Miami, Oklahoma] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Now how did you get from--what was--what happened between the college, junior college and the boys club [Boys Club of Clark County, Clark County, Nevada]? Speaker 2: Just was disenchanted probably being in Oklahoma in that environment which was different. Was successful playing sports and, and I was in love too. My, my girlfriend was living here and, and 'cause I was in love and but I think it was really more just that the long-way environment in Oklahoma wasn't for me. Read a lot, started, had started reading more philosophical, political things and seeing the, the oppressive nature of sports, and remember it had only been a few years early as the black glove [1968 Olympics Black Power salute] in New Mexico City [sic. Mexico City, Mexico] so we were all kind of swept into that momentum and it, it remained around and so then coming back here and decided not to go back and enrolling in UNLV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], then I--and how I ended up with the boys club was a guy who was a Croatian. Now I didn't have no idea what a Croatian was at that point in time. He was the photographer for our high school [Valley High School, Las Vegas, Nevada] yearbook. His name was Paul Malenrick [ph.], God rest his soul. And Paul through me was able--he wanted to get in touch with the Black Panther Party because he saw this parallel between the struggle of African Americans in America and his Croatian people in the country but I didn't know where, where in the heck is Croatia? I couldn't figure out why this white guy wanna come around us? And so I had facilitated a few meetings for him I think even in high school with Tommy Jones who I knew and to hear about, have him talk to us about his peoples struggle. Well when I came back from junior college, I think somebody had made him aware that I had came, moved back to Southern Nevada. He was volunteering for the boys club and he told them about me, so that's how I ended up getting a job was through this guy from Croatia. Now I grow up and become a Muslim and some thirty or forty years later I begin to hear about the Croats, the Serbs, and the Bosnians who were Muslims and oh, that's what Paul Malenrick was talking to me about because the Croatians still have a--they suffer a lot of abuses but that's who Paul Malenrick was, and so my light is like that I can look back and you know those dots come together, so Paul Malenrick was put into my life intentionally, wanted to help me get into the boys club and then all of the things I grew out of that outta there, then to become a Muslim later on and then find out oh, that's who Paul Malenrick was, he was a Croatian. Now I know what Paul was talking to us about 'cause at that time Croatia was not on the radar screen because it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right nobody really knew much about it, right. Speaker 2: It was under the Soviet Union. Speaker 1: Right, we saw them as Russians. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Everybody over there is a Russian. Speaker 2: Right, but I would hear him talk about their experiences, so those type of things. So then I enrolled in UNLV. My then girlfriend who I had been dating since she was fifteen years old and I was seventeen--I'll say we got pregnant and I went to see Coach Curtis [Overton Curtis] and I was thinking about playing football in UNLV, and he just told me, he said, "You know it's time for you to go ahead and do some other things." I thought well you know all the other guys I played were playing and he told me something else. Then he said, "They need that more than you do. There's some other things that you can do, but they're really gonna need to play sports, but you, you know you really never really had to," and so it urged me on you know and so I became really focused on the boys club work. I was a unit director first and then became--I was a physical director then I became the unit director and we did a lot of creative program (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 314961 Speaker 1: This is while you're still going to school in UNLV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I found out what love was, I mean real love through a kid who was a hydrocephalic named John Dorsey [ph.]. We use to call him Bookie [ph.] and I use to see him, for years I had seen him standing on the street being a hydrocephalic and he was different, and you could tell quote, unquote we knew he was retarded and people had seen him over the years and then when I worked at the boys club [Boys Club of Clark County, Clark County, Nevada] his brothers were members of the boys club. So I told them why don't they bring him to the boys club and they said, "Well no 'cause my mother think he'll get hurt." I said it's more of a chance--'cause he was always standing around on the street around construction sites and stuff I said he'd get hurt like that. So we brought him to the boys club and gave him a card and he was really very challenged and I told my psychology instructor about him at, at UNLV and she came over to see him, and with all the programs that we were doing, UNLV decided to come over and study him as a boys club member. So man they gave staff and everything--we, we with the swimming pool open in summer I remember we taught him, we couldn't teach him how to swim 'cause he, he couldn't hold his breath. So all of these professional people I mean UNLV had about three to five staff people, doctors and had some people working on their dissertations as doctorate and a doctor on the program who that was studying how boys club was doing this. It was just something we were doing, and remember one day a kid, he's dead now; he was killed. He and his brother were shot up on Bonanza [Road], Rickey Collins [ph.], Rickey and Terry [ Terry Collins (ph.)]. And so all these doctors around there trying to teach John, every time they put his head in the water he'd come up screaming. So Terry Collins was walking past the swimming pool who was the boys club nuisance right? Terry was always into things, smoking cigarettes and doing little stuff. So Terry said, "Well--," he was about ten years old, he said, "Have him blow a whistle." So he's walking along the pool deck and somebody said, "What did he say?" Somebody said, "He said, have him blow a whistle." He said, "Well blow a whistle for what?" He said, "'Cause if you blow a whistle you can't breathe in when you're blowing a whistle," (laughter), very basic. You can't blow in breathing a whistle. John could blow a whistle--'cause every time he got one you always had to say, "Would somebody go get that whistle from John, he's been blowing it for two hours now." Put the whistle in front of his mouth, John blow the whistle, John learn how to swim. John was physically unappealing and I remember I took him home to my mother's [Elizabeth Harris] house to have dinner one night and it frightened her but my mother was a strong person so--and his saliva glands weren't under his control, but he had dinner with us that night and that's how I found out what love was. 'Cause I grew up, hey I'm a young guy, I thought love was connected with my eroticism probably is what I thought. I knew it was something else but I didn't know what it was, but I, I loved John and that's how I knew what love was 'cause John had nothing that, that I had known what love was. That's how I found, it's John, that how far I knew what love was through Bookie, Bookie Dorsey we called him, and he became a--he was a boys club member until we left 'em down there and man you know come to the club by his self, check things out. Of course he was a nuisance on the pool table 'cause he wanted it by his self but through those guys--I remember I had came up for the draft during that time and I went for the physical and I didn't pass it for whatever reasons. Those guys keeping me up drinking all night long 'cause some of my friends were in Arizona so they decided, "Well Negro we ain't," they didn't say Negro, "But we ain't gone let you pass this physical," so they just kept me up all night long. Man, and they, every--they would, they would sleep in shifts and they kept me up. I went there the next day my who system was shot, one thing we wanna take your card from you, you should have anything, 'cause just disoriented. I remember coming back to the boys club and Terry Collins ran out and jumped up in my arms. He said, "Man, how'd you do?" I said, "I don't think I passed the test." He said, "Good, we sure did miss you." And it was really interesting, here I was about twenty years old and Terry's about nine or ten years old. He was small enough where he jumped up in my arms there and it felt good. It, it felt the road towards learning what human connection was. I remember how bad it hurt when he got shot to death, he and his brother--but I remember another monumental experience at that old boys club. They had this federal program where they were having elected officials to come and live at homes in low-income neighborhoods. So the lieutenant governor of Colorado was assigned to our boys club and we had a home. He stayed with the Collins was Ricky and Terry and that family. Ms. Collins was a single woman from Arkansas, owned a home on the old west side. I remember I dropped him off and they--you know she had got out her best dishes and she was cooking a meal in the middle of the week which--a big one which she normally would do on Sunday and I remember, you know he was a little bit stiff when I left him and everything, but I said, "Yeah Ms. Collins you know, her sons are here," you know. I came, I went home and I came back to the boys club and came back by there. Man, that lieutenant governor had took off that shirt and took off that tie, rolled his sleeves up. She had fed him cornbread, greens and he was eating cake and ice cream and they was slamming dominos down. I said, hey this lieutenant governor--man, the next morning he, he said this was the most powerful experience he had in his life. I mean and they--when I left finally that night, late that night he and Ms. Collins was up having a drink and a beer and talking and he was just you know he said he only slept for a few hours he said but just the experience of being in that environment like that. It did her so much good, I mean she felt so good, and she probably didn't even know what a lieutenant governor was until maybe some time later on, but it was--that type of, you know those type of things. Story_ID: 314962 Speaker 1: You've described now at least five or six instances where you've been able to bring people together from different back--either different ages, different physical conditions, the stages of life, I mean you know-- Speaker 2: Just time, I was there at those times. You know someone said, "How did that happen?" Well, there by the grace of God go I. I think that did it, just, just having been there but it was wonderful for me because of the experience that has come out of it you know. Coming out of high school [Valley High School, Las Vegas, Nevada] is where I met my wife [Sumayah Ramadan]. I can't help but be remiss if I didn't mention that and that was another learning experience because she told me when I turned forty-seven she said, "I remember the first day I saw you. I went home and told my mother about you." I said, "I saw you first," and that was an epiphany in itself because I realized something I had been saying was true, we do the asking, but they do the choosing (laughter), so I finally learned it took me about thirty-five years but I figured it out you know, the dots keep coming together and, and that, that's probably was another major turning point in my life because you know she was fifteen, I was seventeen and, and we now have a three-year old granddaughter. So that was, that was big because from that there's been another, that's allowed me, you know two daughters in between which has given me a learning experience. Story_ID: 314963 Speaker 1: Right behind that maybe, in 1975, embracing Islam, another major turning point. Speaker 2: Now how did that happen? Now, '75 [1975] is the year after the death of Elijah Muhammad? Speaker 1: Before 'cause I came in before. But I came into quote, unquote Sunni Islam. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I didn't go into the Nation [Nation of Islam], but I-- Speaker 2: So when did you become a Muslim in the first-- Speaker 1: Actually you're right it was right after because Elijah Muhammad died in February and I came in April. So I came in--I met a guy who's a Sunni Muslim, Abdura Manbucardi [ph.] from Roxbury, Roxbury, Massachusetts where he's from, former [U.S.] Marine and he dressed--I'm gonna now say Arab, they call it Muslim dress, but this is Muslim dress right here. If it's Halil, it's Muslim but he dressed like that but anyway he introduced me, he introduced me to, to Islam. Then my wife [Sumayah Ramadan] came in too. Speaker 2: What attracted you to Islam? Speaker 1: Looking for something that's, that yearning, that was on the inside that I had probably been denying for probably about five or ten years. Looking, looking for something to kind of bring that into some type of harmony, not knowing what it was but having gone through church and having had that experience and realizing well, I don't think they're real with that. There's gotta be, I know there has to be something else, and then I met him just accidentally sitting up on Bonanza [Road, Las Vegas, Nevada] having lunch one day and I really was going through, I found myself you know I was a probation officer. I had left juvenile--I had left the boys club [Boys Club of Clark County, Clark County, Nevada] and became a probation officer, and I became--that through probation. There was a guy named Donald Kirkland, Mr. Donald Kirkland who was over the affirmative action program and he went to the same church a lot of those who I formed that advisory board with, he was in their church and he was kind of helping out at the boys club and you know they kind of saw okay he's done a good job over here, hey why don't we get this, you know, why don't we get him into becoming a probation officer. So that's how I ended up there and so have to mention Mr. Kirkland, grew up in the [U.S.] Navy, he grew up right down the street from Kit Carson Elementary School [Kit Carson International Academy, Las Vegas, Nevada]. His wife [Barbara Kirkland] taught school at Kit Carson Elementary School, so there's that Kit Carson connection again, and neighborhood, neighborhood again so. Donald Kirkland talked to somebody at the county so I ended up there, and so then as a probation officer watching certain situations had--I remember I worked as a youth counselor and I had this experience once that was just very powerful. I was playing like in a--like a summer league basketball and guys at that age play and I'm no longer--I'm no longer playing in any college sports and I took off half a shift to go and play in basketball and afterwards I was leaving out and we stopped by a lounge. I didn't have anything to drink. I drank the pop 'cause I had to go back to work. It's very interesting when I was leaving work, I lived--I worked for a year in a halfway house, it was like for abandoned, abused and neglected children. I remember this little white kid came in when I was leaving. He was checking in when I was taking my four hours comp time and he, his family was desolate and destitute, from here from Oklahoma just so happened in Texas. Anyway he had a bad cold, a viral infection and so when I came back they had in the shift log give him his medication, wake him up and give him his medication. Well when I was at this lounge I had an argument with somebody over something trivial. I lost my temper and they had to restrain us, and I really wanted to hurt the person. So when I left because they had restrained us I still got this high level of adrenaline and I go back down to Chattel Haven [ph.] and I'm trying to put it behind me but in my mind it's like, I'm gone bust his head the next time I catch him. I go in; I read the shift log to give this kid the medication. I go to wake the young kid up and he, he's wet the bed. So I look--now, I'm already mad and he done wet the bed. I looked at him he said, "I wasted some water." "Um-hm," I said, "Go in the bathroom down the hall," took a deep breath, "Go in the bathroom down the hall, first go down the way down there at the hall and get some linen, no get you some pajamas, there's some more down there." He said--I said, "You know where that's at?" He said, "Yeah." I said, "Go in the bathroom and change." I went and got his linen and changed the linen for him. He came back out, now he's got on some fresh pajamas, put the new linen down for him, got him straightened out, put him in bed and gave him his medication, and just as I gave it to him I just you know patted him on the head and said, "Okay go on back to sleep," and I walked out to the turn the light off and he said, "Hey mister?" I said, "Yeah," he said, "Thanks." Man I went back and sat in the office and cried so hard and when I finished crying I wasn't angry no more. That kid taught me something else. He knew I knew. He said, "I wasted some water," but God somehow helped me to not take that out on him 'cause it would've been displaced hostility. I really was probably mad at the other dude, and but to get through it and then to have him--when he said thanks man, it went through my heart like a knife, 'cause he knew I knew, but just lending somebody that. You know his parents are down--the way he, he's here in this isolated place and the thanks was, he said thanks, but it was more that, more than thank you and then more was revealed to me because of that. That was, that was big because I'd, I'd grown--I lived my whole life with a bad temper. Up until that point in time I lived my whole life--very few times had I gotten past my temper. If I get I get into a debate it's gonna turn into an argument and if we get early argument there's gonna be a fight, that was the first time I had gotten past it and then I started pursuing that. That became a--okay, let me just push past this right here. So it was very, my work has been revealing experiences also. Story_ID: 314964 Speaker 1: Now back to your first introduction to Islam, when you tell the story about this neighborhood [in Las Vegas, Nevada] and how you were raised and all that it seems that probably the most natural thing for you to be a member of the church with all the Woodrow Wilson and all the men that you described you know. Speaker 2: Oh, very much would've. Speaker 1: But you know. Speaker 2: They--what a lot of them gave me and really emphasized was a, a freedom and an ability to think for yourself. So with Robert "Moon" Mullen, Mr. Commissioner Woodrow Wilson, Cranford Crawford, Reverend, Reverend Donald Clark now whose also a student of Dr. Howard Thurman, all big time on think for yourself and Reverend Clark was the one I think who later kind of help me begin to even see my way even Islamically because there was when I became a Muslim, there was this disconnect that happened somewhat in my own family, but in the African American community because--I, I realized much later because I think they felt, I think that some of the people felt a sense of betrayal because not so much that I asked them to invest anything in me but they had invested, they had invested you know. I was that, that guy in the neighborhood, the kid in the neighborhood who grow up here and we watch 'em come along. I was that guy. Speaker 1: So they were feeling they were losing you I guess in a sense, but was that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were really gaining me but you know what they say to, to the caterpillar, what the caterpillar calls death everybody else calls a butterfly. They were really gaining me but I think they thought initially they were losing me. I think they thought they were losing that guy that I had been and, and really they were, and then it was only, only Reverend Clark, I won't say--that I knew of who, who made the connection, because it really, it, it disconnected me you know. He changed his name, I mean I was the guy who grew up you know high school athlete, know everybody, come from the family, father [Ramadan's stepfather, Flenorte Harris] in New Jerusalem [Greater New Jerusalem Church, Las Vegas, Nevada], mother [Elizabeth Harris] Zion Methodist [Zion Methodist Church, North Las Vegas, Nevada], involved in situations--"Oh, that's the same boy who ran the boys club [Boys Club of Clark County, Clark County, Nevada] down there," yeah. "The one that use to drive in the old truck with the kids and took 'em to play basketball," yeah, him. The one who use to be in Sunday school, "Yeah him," and so I, I felt it and Reverend Clark kind of helped me see it later you know how it was but what it was. So it was--it was that, that was an interesting time also. Speaker 1: Well what was it that really created the change you know I mean, or change--I mean or got you involved in Islam? Speaker 2: It was, it was as I noted earlier it was that looking for something that was missing, some of the spiritual aspects was missing--married, got a daughter who's about two and a half years old, three years old and just kind of going through that stage you know twenty-five, twenty-four, twenty-five years old. Grew out of a spiritual environment anyway, it was the seeds of the deacon surfacing, it was those seeds from when I was a little boy, those seeds began to pop, burst on the surface which then began to compel me to start looking for spiritual dimensions. And then of course (laughter) it was very interesting also--then that was my first stage of Islamic development because it wasn't until seven years later and I'm moving away ahead that I, that I heard Imam Warith Deen Mohammed that's when I began to understand what Islam was because initially I was introduced to Islam from a cultural perspective and it wouldn't, it, it--I couldn't digest it, 'cause I, I struggled the first five or seven years. Story_ID: 314965 Speaker 1: You were introduced to it as a Sunni Muslim first (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, which, which is a distorted cultural misnomer and when I heard Imam Warith Deen Mohammed I said, "Okay, that's it." Because here he made the statement, "We don't wanna be Arabs, we wanna be Muslims," and I said, now that's what I been trying to say, and I couldn't tell if the people introduced me to Islam, you know it's like, "You have to wear a robe." "Why?" "Well because the Prophet wore a robe." "Well, the Prophet wore a robe before he was a Muslim," so it tells me it could--that's not Islamic dress, that must be Arab dress, but you know that's what people got into, you got to dress a certain way and that, that's not Islamic, that's not Islamic and so. Speaker 1: Well did you do that in those days, did you-- Speaker 2: I didn't, no. Speaker 1: Did you change your dress? Speaker 2: I didn't make it--only inside my home. I didn't make the--I just, I just--my system, and I always had you God help you to understand you that I always had one of those kind of minds--that don't taste right, and so now I mean I can understand, I can explain it to a person culturally now, but so I struggled with it and so then--but I went though you know, hey you cut the alcohol out your system, you take the pork out your system, you increase your values for your own self, for your family for your fellow human beings. You know all of those things I was able--the principles I loved. It's just, I just you know I didn't feel like I had--I should eat certain foods and long as I don't eat no pork everything else should've been okay, but you know people sometimes--the immigrant Muslim tends to sh--he doesn't know, he doesn't know the difference between Islam and his culture so he'll pass off his culture, that's very easy to pass off. It really takes a lot to give--help people understand Islam, but the cultural part of it is not very difficult. The Arab culture that's, all you have to do is tell somebody put on a thobe [thawb], put on, put on a thobe, put on a jellabiya and put on a keffiyeh or an agal and wrap your head up but you're still gone have the same problems that you, you could be a crack, crack head, you could be a dope fiend just dressed up like an Arab and calling yourself a Muslim and so I, I didn't think it could, you know I didn't think those two and I would question people about it so I kind of, I didn't waiver, it's just the fact that I had no place really to interact. In '75 [1975] when this was happening though, W. Deen Mohammed Imam, Imam Warith Deen Mohammed was transitioning his father's [Elijah Muhammad] philosophy into its quote unquote orthodox Islam. Story_ID: 314966 Speaker 1: What did you think about the Nation of Islam or I know a lot of black people in the 19--early, late '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] especially young men admired Malcolm X. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And we were, yeah we were swept up in that, but, but the Black Panther Party gave us perspective that, that was, that was in somewhat of an antithesis, they were antithesis of one another because in the Nation of Islam remember the black man was seen as a God, but the philosophy of the Black Panther Party is that oppression didn't have any color, you know it was more universal in its nature and I think that was legitimate there. Remember Malcolm spawned the Black Panther Party, so I had this thing with the Nation that okay, y'all say the white man is a devil but you know in the Black Panther Party I've read, I read more of a broader language than just the cultural language of the Nation of Islam. So I, I--that's why I didn't come into the Nation of Islam, I had some spiritual yearning, it was the just the problem of calling somebody a devil I had a problem with, and so then, so I didn't--but I remember though when I was a newspaper boy, I--one of the sergeants in the Fruit of Islam, I was--I threw papers to him and I remember sometimes we'd sit around he'd talk to me about the Nation of Islam and what it was about which I could appreciate, you know, the respect for family. He had two twin daughters, I won't forget that they were little girls and the respect he showed for his wife and then of course we knew about Malcolm, we knew about Muhammad Ali so that was very infectious at that point in time, but I just couldn't get--the hate part never did sit very well with and, and so that was it. Then I came--then I saw the sp--and I knew but I had all--I had heard of [HistoryMaker] McCoy Tyner and I had heard of a few people like a basketball player--Kareem Abdul-Jabbar obviously who was Ahmadiyya, but we just knew him as a Muslim. Walt Hazzard who had also converted to Islam I think right behind that Ahmad Rashad who I'm not sure if he's a practicing Muslim but he did choose a name and several others. So I knew there was something else that was out there and when I met this brother Abdul Rehman Bukhari I said okay, this is it. I, I remember the following spring I went down to Sea World and took my wife [Sumayah Ramadan] and daughter down there and I saw a basketball player from the Houston Rockets and he was dressed up like an Arab and I thought dang that seems to be an uncomfortable dress out here in Sea World but his wife was dressed with the veil and everything. And so even then as a Muslim, I didn't even, I didn't even introduce myself--no, I think we did. I gave him the greeting I said, "Assalam Alaikum," he said, "Wa Alaikum Assalam," but I was thinking--and one thing told me I'm not as good a Muslim as he is, but the other thing told me, I don't that's Islam, I think that's something else, and so my, my own deductive reasoning was telling me all the time. So I stayed aloof you know for five or seven years, didn't practice, but said I was a Muslim and then in about 19--I'm jumping ahead again, 1982 there was a--some people here who had been in the Nation of Islam who had somewhat successfully made a semi-transition to Islam proper, and they came to see me because I was the quote, unquote the only quote a Sunni Muslim that they had known maybe who lived here and I started interacting with them that's how I heard the teachings of Imam Warith Deen Mohammed and that's when I became comfortable with Islam. I understood that I can dress like this. I understood that I have my own diet, I have my own culture. I began to understand things like the U.S. Constitution gave me rights that Muslims did not have and that America really was more maybe the most Islamic country in the world. Now I really began to understand the freedom that we have here. I didn't become an American until after I became a Muslim and heard the teaching of Imam Mohammed, that's when I became an American. Speaker 1: Now, yeah he did link the two and can you tell us how they--well, just give us your analysis how they link? Speaker 2: Well, I, I remember hearing him make the observation. He said America he said, he'd always--he talked about that there's excellence in everything. There's excellence in everything, you just have to be able to see it. He says and the excellence that you see in America that you can vividly see is the, the freedom for everybody to reach their human potential. America will not restrict you in reaching your potential. If you, even if you want to be a savage, America will allow you the freedom of being the biggest savage that you wanna be, but if you want to reach the pinnacle of excellence that God has ordained for you, America also gives you that. So he says, and we can see now that Islam is the fuel and America is the car that you put the fuel in to make it drive. And America has--that's the excellence that's in America that you won't find anywhere in the, in the Muslim world, you will not find it anywhere in America. So he, he was able to make the connection but also through making the connection I think he revealed to many of us if we come through the door of Islam and not Arab culture, we will come through the door of America, and so many of us that's what we've done. We, we couldn't come into America unless we came in for us. I mean I'm not saying others can't, but we could not enter into America unless we'd come through the door of Islam. And so he--that opened up the, probably was after that I really began to see you know Islam in the scope of a social active movement. I was saying to some friends of mine who are in a religious labor organization in Chicago [Illinois], I was speaking there and Kim Bobo asked me, she said, "Ramadan [HistoryMaker Mujahid Ramadan] what about being a Muslim?" I said, "Islam really is the natural progression of the Civil Rights Movement, Islam and America is the natural progression of the Civil Rights Movement, i.e. we go from civil rights to human rights." So we become advocates now for the, for the big picture, not just for the rights of African American people or the right of women, the rights of all the poor, the rights of all children, the rights of the disenfranchised, the rights of the prison inmate, and then also then you begin to see the connection between Islam, Christianity and Judaism so it, it that, that has been just monumental. It just so happens that I have the luxury of being in the city that I, the town that I grew up in so it adds, it adds another dimension to my life that say for instance this dimension kind of sets me aside from the people I grew up with and that becomes--because I've been Mujahid Ramadan now for--matter-of-fact if you go ahead my mention my name most people won't remember what my name was and if somebody remember it they'll say, all right so they've known me for over thirty years, but I'm the guy who grew up here then converted to Islam and changed his name. Story_ID: 314967 Speaker 1: On that note we neglected to ask you what your former name was when we began, can you tell us what it was? Speaker 2: Edward Warren Turner [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and-- Speaker 2: I was named after I think about two Caucasian guys. Speaker 1: By two--the doctors is one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well no actually they were about; by--they--were named for them. One, one was a doctor and the other one was a soldier in Korea or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so one had to be a doctor (laughter) for some reason I always know that's true, but and you changed your name in '75 [1975] was it '75 [1975]? Speaker 2: Actually I change--I didn't change my name until about 1981, '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1981. Speaker 2: Legally in a legal sense. Speaker 1: And what does Mujahideen or Ramadan mean? Speaker 2: Well you're probably on track 'cause you said Mujahideen, it's Mujahid. Speaker 1: Mujahid, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: But how you became affiliated is when you heard it first it was Mujahideen, so you begin to see the connection between the words Mujahideen but they say quote, unquote the holy warriors, but Mujahid being the root, and it's not that, I mean it is that but it a holy warrior against yourself and Mujahid is the derivative of that as a single, single Mujahideen would be the plural many, Mujahid is one who's that by himself. The root word to Mujahid is jihad which means to struggle, the root word to jihad is jihadu, which means to push against. So the name means to exert yourself almost against yourself, and the root word is an adjective that's talking about physically exerting yourself. Really you exert yourself against your ego. Speaker 1: You're talking about like self-control? Speaker 2: Yeah, and so that's what the--now then but if you put it out commercially you got somebody talking about a holy war, and he's confused he doesn't really know what he's talking about because the root of the word tells you, the adjective tells you what, what is, what the direction that it's going, and so the middle name Abdul Khabir, Abdul is servant of, so you'll find if a person, if a Muslim chooses a name that has an attribute of God in it, like Khabir, God is el Khabir, he is the all aware, he's the all-knowing. If a person chooses that name you have to put servant in front of it so, Abdul Jabbar. Jabbar is a powerful, Allah, God is al--El Jabbar. Abdul, the human being can only be servant of that attribute, the human being can't be that. I, sometimes I hear people call, "Hey Jabbar." No, no don't call 'em that now, now he ain't that big. You should say Abdul Jabbar, or Abdul Khabir, servant of the all-knowing. Ramadan really is more like a synonym of Mujahid and it's in a sense that they'll have the same proclivity that is struggle. The month of Ramadan comes up probably in about another two weeks, and it's about fasting, but fasting both physically and psychologically and the psychological part being the highest and most important part, is, is largely a, a spiritual so that would be just like to the name Mujahid. Muhammad the prophet prayers and peace be upon him said once they had come home from a battle and he after the prayer he led them in prayer, he said that, "You've come home from the small battlefield. You've come home from the small battlefield to the big battlefield," and they said, "Oh Messenger of God, we just came from the battlefield killing and being killed in the path of God and we've come home to our wives and our families." He said, "You come home from the battlefield against men to fight against yourself," and that's Mujahid is one who fights against self, his own shortcomings. Ramadan is an institution where the whole Muslim nation gauged together to do that. So they get together to fast, both physically and psychologically so in that sense now the whole nation of Muslims then are engaged in a twenty-four hour cycle and that's what they call spiritual jihad and that's really the big jihad. If you don't fight that jihad--one of, one of the primary reasons and I'm not gonna say it's one, I'm gonna say it's a primary and a major reason to the decay and the dark ages of Islam that we're living in is that Muslims refuse to, to practice jihad against self. It's called jihad an-nafs, so we can never win--stop and think of the last time you remember a Muslim country whooping anybody. Heck, the, the Ottoman Empire was dismantled World War I [WWI] (laughter) because they fought on the losing side, but if you go back three or four hundred years before that you'll find the same continual defeat of Muslims by anybody including Western powers because Muslims stopped practicing, stopped engaging in jihad an-nafs about five hundred, six hundred years ago. You will not find Islam having any significant, effective presence in the world since Islamic Spain and that's when the Muslims stopped practicing jihad an-nafs. They stopped fighting their own shortcomings so they got overrun by the, by the world and the Western world in general. So, and that's, that's a vision that we have in America, that it's--and American really affords me an opportunity to do this. There's nothing in America that'll say you can't fight against your own shortcomings. As-a-matter-fact America will advocate for that. So at any rate that, that was been my transition in terms of Islam. There is much more in between that but I--excuse if my soapbox showed up there. Story_ID: 314968 Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you if, if as a Muslim if you are saying you don't equate Islam with being an Arab or Arab culture necessarily, it's not necessarily the same thing but most Muslims take Arabic names, and you described what your name meant which does have a very specific meaning but could that name--I never hear of anyone you know using that name in the English translation to mean the same thing and you know or is it necessary to take an Arabic name to become a Muslim? Speaker 2: No, it's really not, it is not--particular reason, so what's the benefit in it? We'll call it a name but when you, when you call me [HistoryMaker] Mujahid Ramadan you're really talking about a concept. So it's a reminder of what, what my function is. It's more important for me to see myself as a verb than as a noun and the noun mean I'm locked in, but a verb means that I'm fluid, so Mujahid Ramadan is something I'm always trying to be. Now I'm not gonna say, I won't deny that it's in some of the English language you know, certain names have certain meanings. We get away from it and just use the name, we don't think about the meaning, but the language does afford us that. Now, we also some people say these are Arabic names. Well quite frankly the names really didn't exist in this form because the language of the Koran [Qur'an] has, has purified the Arabic language but the names that we choose as Muslims, those names really didn't exist in the Arabic language before the Koran was revealed. So people out of not knowing will say their Arabic names but the names didn't exist before the Koran was revealed like the Arabian stallion did not exist before the revelation of the Koran. So, now does it mean one would have to? Probably knowing what I know now I could have probably kept my name and just freed myself spiritually, but the name did help in terms of that and being named after who was named after. I mean it would've been great., they didn't name me after my father [Johnny Young (ph.)] or family members or whatever my mother's [Elizabeth Harris] decision happened to have been, but I think that would've been more significant but I think that having a name that has some--and then I try to be Mujahid Ramadan, I'm always trying to be that. I'm always trying to make sure I'm struggling against myself. I'm always trying to make sure that I'm sacrificing as much as I can. I'm not saying I couldn't have done that another way, but at this stage I couldn't have gotten here. I got here through this vehicle here so, you know. Now in terms of as you can see now if I didn't tell you what my name was wouldn't you think I'm a Southern Baptist? Don't I look Southern Baptist? Don't I talk Southern Baptist enough? I know I quote the Bible enough. So I could have been that without it but just had become a Muslim and really began to understand. The Quranic language though that I--the Quranic language, not the Arabic language, because Arabs don't speak Quranic language, they speak colloquial Arabic, you know like we speak English? The, the Arabic of the revelation of the Koran is quite frankly is like, it's like King James English, like the English that the elite and the British speak, that's the way the Quranic language happens to be. It purified the Arabic language and then it, it had purified and then it be--the Arabic language became the vehicle of expression for that but it was without the--only seventeen Arabs could read when the Koran was revealed. They were ignorant, they were ignorant. Speaker 1: So Islam basically formalized and structured I guess a lot of the Arabic written language anyway. Speaker 2: Well they didn't have a written language. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter-of-fact they had to have somebody had to go back and teach them that once and history because they, they didn't write Arabic, they just spoke it. Seventeen could write. Speaker 1: It's like, like Russian before Pushkin [Alexander Pushkin]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, so that's what it actually did. There was no history of the Arabs being significant in any things. The Koran itself says they were, "Jahil Abir," they were ignorant Arabs, the dessert Bedouin Arabs, they were ignorant people. They were worse than Europe was in the Dark Ages, and Europe had, had revelation. The Arabs had, had no revelation so they were utterly in total darkness. Seventeen people of the whole nation can read; they had no centralized government. Daughters were buried in the sand in the desert because of their gender. Women were no more than chattel. The poor was oppressed and they were totally ignorant. After the revelation of the Koran, there were more books written in Arabic up until the 18th century than written in all languages combined. So something happened that was cataclysmic out there or phenomenal out there to produce that so that's what produced it. Story_ID: 314969 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this in light of a lot of the world upheaval is going on now over what--I mean--and it's--I guess we hear a lot about fundamental Islam, Islam fundamental--I mean Islamic fundamentalists being at the root of a lot of bombings and, and terrorism and that sort of thing now. Is there a--do you think that and you know when you see looking--we think of Taliban and Afghanistan for instance. Speaker 2: Um-hm ignorant. Speaker 1: They're supposed to be fundamentalists or they're called fundamentalists in the press and the women are, you know wear the--those? Speaker 2: Burkas. Speaker 1: Burkas you know and they seem to be oppressed you know. In Nigeria you got a Nigeria Taliban now you know raging across Northern Nigeria you know and small parties trying to convert. I think they adopted Sharia law in Nigeria a couple of years ago (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They been advocating for it, yeah. Speaker 1: Nigeria a couple of years ago in Northern Nigeria at least where a woman as to be executed for-- Speaker 2: For adultery? Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: They didn't bring the men up on trial though? Speaker 1: No, and I think it was her uncle who was the father of a child of hers that that an older uncle. Speaker 2: Sounds like misogynism to me. Speaker 1: Yeah and she was like a minor at the time that she was she, that she conceived a child. So it seems like a well you know there's a public outcry. I mean is there a--are--from what you're saying it would seem that maybe people's perception of what fundamental Islam is, is wrong? Or I mean even on the Muslim side? Speaker 2: Oh, very, oh very wrong on both, both sides, you know Muslims who think it is and non-Muslims who are confused by it and some propagandas probably there. I, I would probably you know coin it more, I don't know if you want to call it Islam but it's certainly ignorance and it is really not knowing Islam that produces that, that is really not knowing Islam so it, is virtually ignorance. There was a time in Islam that we practiced what we call ijtihad. Ijtihad is where we, we get together we get general consensus and we debate and we discuss the issue and we look at it from its varying perspectives and about in the--let's see what century, probably about the 11th century they introduced a concept called taqleed. Taqleed means that we no longer investigate the phenomena of creational human beings, we just keep replicating what the previous scholars have said, so they embodied the Islamic thought into five schools, Maliki, Shafi'i, Hanbali, Hanafi, and Shia. So you guys can't come up with no new ideas now beyond the scope of what these five scholars said. We were only gonna have certain hadith that we're gonna follow: Muslim Bukhari [Sahih al-Bukhari], Tirmidhi [Jami' at-Tirmidhi] and Ibn Majah [Sunan Ibn Mjah] and maybe there's one or two others. So when you--African Americans, when you Americans come along later on, you guys gotta always look back to the past to find solutions to your problem even though problems like you're experiencing like crack cocaine, like pornography, like violence, like the media, like television, there was nothing to address that by these five scholars. Oh, by the way you guys can't come up with no ideas for that. You must be crazy, we have to come up with a new, using the Koran [Qur'an] in Asunda [ph.], but we have to have a current application to it. What has put the Islamic quote, unquote not the Islamic but the Muslim world in the decay that it is in is that they keep trying to use habitual blind imitation to resolve problems that there really weren't, didn't exist when they came up with those solutions. So they're trying to put a, put a salve on something--man, that may, may have been a little blister but it's a cancer now. So the salve is not gonna help it anymore so they're practicing what we call taqleed: blind imitation. Just go back and look at how Bukhari [Muhammad al-Bukhari] addressed it; go back and look how Muslim addressed it. That won't work today. When Islam went into that stage right there, then stagnation set in. Story_ID: 314970 Speaker 1: Is that similar, can you see--do you see a parallel in the Christian religion with Christian fundamentalism (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dark Ages, Dark Ages, very much so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now so then you have stagnation set in begins--stagnation set in about the 14th century because it was the 11th century that the idea was instituted as public policy in the Muslim world. No more creative thinking. There was a reason that they had, I won't go to that detail, and I won't say the reason wasn't legitimate. Then the stagnation set in and then the de--after the water is stagnant for a while, decay set in, now we're talking about 17th and 18th century, 19th century the Ottoman Empire collapsed after World War I [WWI]. When they came out of the colonialism now they all, they're still practicing taqleed, blind imitation. So if you listen to Muslims from different countries talk, you're not getting a new idea. All you're talking about, "Hey man Sheikh Okebookie said that how long ago? The 11th century, if you bring him here and introduce him to crack cocaine right now he won't handle it and that idea that he handled and his idea would go down to the crack cocaine also." So you're using antiquated, outdated concepts, in many regards also like with the Taliban which means student. That comes out of Wahhabism. Abd al-Wahhab [Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab] was the spiritual teacher to Abdulaziz [Ibn Saud] who founded the Saudi Kingdom [Saudi Arabia]. That ain't nothing but local religion, that's all that is, that's just local Arab religion trying to be masquerading around the world that this is the way that Islam happens to be. It's not Islam, now that's what some Arabs don't like hear from us. They don't like to hear from American Muslims. What you're practicing is not Islam. The era that we're living in today is the era that Elijah Muhammad had told us about, he said--not, not that he was a prophet or nothing like that, he was a social engineer. He said one of the days the Muslims in America are gonna have to go back and teach the Arabs their religion 'cause they done forgot what it was, and that's what you see in the Muslim world today. That's why you don't hear now from indigenous Muslims in America because they don't want the message of true El Al-Islam [ph.] out, they wanna keep promoting Arab and Pakistani and, and their, their backwards, antiquated, outdated, prehistoric, dysfunctional, oppressive, misogynistic, illiterate and I can add a whole bunch of other adjectives into there for that. Go back to Kwame Nkrumah's quote, "The degree of a country's revolutionary awareness is measured by the political maturity of its women." If there's 65 million illiterate people in the Middle East and 85 percent of them are women, what kind of children are you gonna raise? Ain't hard for the Taliban to sneak in there; ain't hard for Al-Qaeda to sneak in now. The Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration is--it's as awkward as the Arabs are in terms of its approach, because what we should be trying to do with them is bring them into a modern concept of Islam. They're talking about we're gonna give 'em democracy. No, no, no Islam is democracy. Where you think we got democracy from? We hold these truths to be self-evident that all human beings are created, endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights among which are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. God says in the Koran [Qur'an], (speaking Arabic), "Surely we created all of you in the most excellent mode," that's the constitution for you. So it's, it's all, it's already there. What the Arab world fails to realize is that America does have the right concept, but what America has to realize is that you can't give 'em democracy, they just need a new paradigm of Islam and that will be the renaissance for Islam because now Islam is in the Dark Ages. Story_ID: 314971 Speaker 1: Well, as I said for the record, you are an imam [at Masjid As-Sabur, Las Vegas, Nevada]. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: And you're just not--I mean not to say that you're just an ordinary Muslim, but you are a teacher of, of Islam (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: So and what would you say--you're a member of--well what Warith Mohammed [Warith Deen Mohammed] use to call the American Muslim Mission and now it's the--what is it called now? Speaker 2: Muslim American Society [American Society of Muslims]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Muslim American Society. Now he's an interesting figure too, and just before maybe we just leave the discussion of Islam. Now how--what's your relationship with him and when did you first meet him and? Speaker 2: I probably first met him in probably about 1984, 1985, personally met him by? Speaker 1: Now he's the son of Elijah. Speaker 2: Of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. Speaker 1: Elijah Muhammad. Speaker 2: Yes and the one who actually brought the Nation of Islam through the transition period and, and a, a-- Speaker 1: He was often in conflict with Elijah Muhammad-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah actually was kicked out before Malcolm [Malcolm X] was kicked out. They killed Malcolm, they just didn't kill him because his father was their leader, but they, there's a lot of people that killed him because he saw what his father was teaching and while he wouldn't publicly say anything about it, in private sessions he would tell people, "No that's it, my father's not messenger, he's not a prophet of god and Fard [Wallace Fard Muhammad] wasn't God," so he was always preaching that, and he was the, the prodigal son that they said, but a mystic, very mystical in his perception. You know looks at the higher dimensions and the essence of human personalities and really helped bring me to that type of thinking and helped us to begin to see the whole human family. It's a shift of paradigm, he's been very--he was able to shift the paradigm of that entire million plus people which is sociologically one of the greatest feats in the history of this nation and we haven't even written about it yet, because he, he--they were a racist group and he transitioned them from, from the racist doctrine of the Nation of Islam of the black man is God and white man is the devil to mainstream Islam of how human beings are authored by one creator and they all find a relationship in their humanness, their human family. Speaker 1: Now, the--just for those who are watching this and may not know the history of this. When Elijah Muhammad died in '74 [sic. 1975] the Nation of Islam split into different factions, I mean the, the-- Speaker 2: Not right away there. Speaker 1: --the original group though I mean Wallace Muhammad was chosen to lead the original group. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I guess about six months after the death of Elijah Muhammad or-- Speaker 2: No, right after. Speaker 1: Right after, okay all right. Speaker 2: Right after, um-hm. Speaker 1: But then shortly thereafter they were like maybe in the--I guess a few years later or within the next year you had Silis Muhammad's group split off, and you had. Speaker 2: Right those, um-hm in the first year. Speaker 1: Then later on, I guess a couple of years later Farrakhan's [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] group split-- Speaker 2: With Silis Muhammad but which wasn't really significant. What was significant was Minister Louis Farrakhan, but that was in 1978 and he really went back and said he was gonna rebuild the Nation and, and then at this point in time now he's wanting to bring them through another transition. He's trying to now get them to, to make that move to mainstream and some of. Speaker 1: Yeah they seem to be coming more mainstream, right. Speaker 2: Yes and no, yes in the sense that they may advocate for mainstream issues. There's still the challenge about this, this, this thing that God came down in the form of a man. I mean that's an institution we have to protect also is how people's--how people perceive God now that we can see him and that Elijah was his prophet. That's still a challenge but, but I think more than, more, more so he's trying to move them to mainstream at least in terms of the other events Muhammad really is the prophet of Islam and not the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. It doesn't take away from the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, god rest his soul 'cause without the seeds that he planted I don't think we could be where we're at today, but certainly Imam Muhammad is probably the most you know noteworthy social, social leader of faith of anybody in this era that we've lived in. Speaker 1: Would you say that most of the members of the old Nation of Islam ended up following? Speaker 2: With Imam Muhammad. Oh, he'll tell you sometimes he said, "You can measure the magnitude of the message by the old folks that's here." 'Cause you know old folks don't have no time for foolishness and they don't have no time for somebody who ain't being truthful with 'em. So you don't find 'em following Farrakhan now, they're still associated very closely with Warith Deen Mohammed. Story_ID: 314972 Speaker 1: Could you comment briefly on the--I know the other branch of Islam that's really taken hold in the black community or took hold way back a while ago in, in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] was Ahmadiyya Islam from I think from Pakistan originally, but-- Speaker 2: Um-hm probably, yeah Pakistanis 'cause they're not considered, the Pakistanis don't give 'em that benefit, they don't call 'em Muslims. Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause it means that they think that the Ahmadis come--the name means that they think that the Ahmadi or the Messiah of Islam has already showed up, right? Speaker 2: Right, well this guy, there's a guy, I'm drawing a blank on his name but it'll come later who said that he was--and also that he was the prophet after the prophet so, so that, that produces there--now when you say it has significance, there's a sprinkling of it like Kareem Abdul-Jabbar was Ahmadiyya. Speaker 1: Yeah, a Hanafi-- Speaker 2: Was he a Hanafi? Speaker 1: Yeah, Hanafi under a man who use to be the head of security I think for the Nation of Islam. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Who split off from and was killed in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in that horrific. Speaker 2: In D.C. yeah by some people out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], dispatched by the--by some people out of Philadelphia. It was a gangster Islam or whatever they wanna call it, but yeah, but there, there was a small sprinkling so you, you don't find the lar--the larger portion (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well they're big in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And Ohio where I'm from a lot of Ahmadiyya's are there. Speaker 2: And the, but the part of the larger portion will be and somewhat affiliated out of directly or indirectly with Imam Mohammed [Warith Deen Mohammed]. You know Islam in America really it's, it's a subtle thing that's happening and I don't America realizes it. Islam in America really is under attack. Not so much in the world as in America because, and I say Islam is under attack, it's under attack by immigrant Muslims who want to enforce their concept of Islam upon the indigenous population here and, and that many of us have a problem with and we're really not gonna accept that. We're not gonna accept their culture, we're not gonna accept their politics, we're not gonna accept their way of thinking. It has done nothing for them, certainly it's not gonna do anything for us and we became Muslims and learned how to practice Islam quite well without them, so we don't need Arabs to teach us Islam. Virtually we don't really need Arabs for anything. Speaker 1: Now, well with an increasing, with a growing Arab population, Arab-American population in the United States now especially in--I mean in a lot of the major cities. I know in the East most of the businesses in the black community are run by, well a lot of them you know--I mean I don't know. Speaker 2: Detroit and places like that. Speaker 1: Detroit and--Detroit has the largest concentration of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Arabs outside of Arabia in the United States. Speaker 2: In the Western Hemisphere. Speaker 1: West Hem--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, they're selling as much pork and alcohol as they can, they'll say they're Muslims. I mean that, that just kind of sums it up right there. Now why you gone come in the black neighborhoods and sell pork and alcohol? You don't eat it and you don't drink it. Well I can't say you don't eat it, but you don't suppose to. So why you gonna sell something to somebody like that? Where's your Islam, where's Islam when it comes to exploiting poor people in America. It ain't no Islam, so where's your pride, what did you come to America for? To make money; that's what they come to America for, they didn't come to America to spread Islam and along with them making money in their spare time they wanna pass off this warped dilapidated, antiquated dysfunctional concept that they call Islam. It's not Islam, it's really a disgrace because you know it doesn't show anything about the exce--it makes no contributions to neighborhoods. It makes no contributions to society, it makes no contributions to families, it makes no contributions to reclaiming the human personality that many people and neighborhoods need who are combating drugs and alcohol and family decay and poor education. Having me put on a robe and, and putting a, a towel over my head is not gonna make a lot of difference in my life. I need to understand how to see myself in a different light. I need another dimension of me, I need to--I had need another paradigm that will help override my compulsive behaviors and dress is not gone do it. That's like saying if I get a different pen I'm gonna write differently, or if put on a different hat I'm gonna think differently. It's not gonna work. Story_ID: 314973 Speaker 1: But has there been dialogue between black American Muslims and, and Arab Muslims you know especially during this time of heightened suspicion of Islam in America. Has there been any dialogue between the two groups about you know? Speaker 2: I think that possibly we may be moving further apart and, and, and there may be some pros and cons to that. One, many of us don't want to be identified with and or as Arabs. I'm an American who happened--I'm a Muslim who happens to be an American. I'm an American so I don't want to be identified with Arabs. I, there's no benefit, there's no gain and I may as well be identified with the American white man first because at least he's an American, but an Arab, there's really no benefit or gain in that because he brings nothing to the table other than you know the, the Arabic language. I can maybe benefit from that but other that there's really nothing. There's no contribution that he makes that I think I can borrow from, and as an American I can benefit from Islam in terms of myself, in terms of my family values, in terms of my political infrastructure, in terms of my economics, in terms of decision making, in terms of who I vote for. Islam gives me all of that without Arabs so there's really no need so I think we're moving further apart because the conditions of 9/11 [September 11, 2001] have, have allowed us to look at the fact of the role that we play in America in the world and the role that they play in America and the world and we certainly don't intend to see them come here and, and the warped concept that they have in the world bring that to America 'cause that's gonna destabilize both America and Islam. So, no certainly we're not looking for a shake from the Middle East to come in here in a holy robe and try to explain to us how--the dysfunctions. I think also we, we can best help our own country address how--but how do you deal with the Muslim world? I mean this is something that current administration [under President George Walker Bush] certainly is missing out on and I'm not sure if any other administration is gonna recognize it, because the indigenous Muslim largely being African American, the paradigm we have is that we won't really be seen as Muslims. When you hear issues being discussed today about Islam in the world you don't find the indigenous population included in discussion now, we're not crying about it, we're not victims as a result of it. You eventually gonna have to come to us for input anyway 'cause you can't deal with that guy. Interesting thing a, a person asked me. I was speaking recently at, at a Rotary Club [Rotary International] and somebody asked me, "Ramadan [HistoryMaker Mujahid Ramadan] why do, why do Muslims hate America," and I had been saying that wasn't true but I was answering it from my perspective. I'm an American so how could I hate the country that has given me the rights to be--the civil rights that I should've had anyway and the rights to be a Muslim. So I love my country. But I said to him--I think I got it 'cause I've been asked this question numerous times by Americans who are non-Muslims and it is, there's something factual to that because Muslims have the moral high ground in the world. When you talk about moral high ground in the visible sense, I won't say in the invisible sense, but in a visible sense there's certain things within a quote, unquote Muslim society that you just not gone get the opportunity to do publicly--moral high ground, but Muslims are politically and mili--or economically and militarily inferior. Morally, high ground, low ground on the other side. The two dimensions are causing a conflict--there's a split in the Muslim brain. I got all of the moral values that, that I'm invited to that, that really are good for the whole world but my economic and political situation or military situation is decayed and out of date. We're dysfunctional, we're weak. Well that would make you hate this group over here who got the economics and the military might, 'cause you got something that you--Islamically if you look at Islam history when Muslims had the moral high ground the economic and the military or political side they had the high ground in also. Now they think they still got the moral high ground but you're losing over here. There's got to be something not right. So if this right here is not right, it must mean this over is dysfunctional, so you really don't have the moral high ground, so it will make for a hate situation. It's kind of like if I, if I had wealth, if I had good looks, if I had talent as a quote, unquote as a man, but I just got quote, unquote what the whole world see an ugly wife? It would kind of be a little bit of a conflict there. I mean I'm all about this--looking in the material sense and I think that's what Muslims see. Story_ID: 314974 Speaker 1: They see themselves as, yes we follow what God say, but the outcome is that the West dominates over us economically and militarily. Maybe you need to go back and look at what you say you believe in, not that it doesn't work, but your perception of it probably is not consistent and I think that, that's what we're seeing. America now gives us an opportunity to see that because America gave us the freedom to think. America will give you--everybody got their freedom to think, so we can think and look at that and say, oh wait a minute I see what the problem is with that. Now, America won't know what his problem is. George Bush [President George Walker Bush] over there trying to solve a problem he don't even know what the problem is. He on the other hand he hates America and he don't know what the problem is either. So you got, now--then you got the people in America who are Muslims. They say, "Okay I see what his problem is. He don't understand his own religion." This guy in America he's never really known it anyway and the concept he had of the religion was distorted from the get go dating back to the Crusades so they're kind of bumping heads with one another and they both have the same problem not knowing. This one here is dysfunctioning what he should be doing, making him hate this one, and this one think you know that, that he's made at him and he hates him. Well really he, you got everything he think he should have. You on the other hand want to give that to him in the form of democracy. No, help him understand what his religion is, he'll come to democracy. That's how we can--well how do you know that, because that's how we came into America, I didn't get into America until I began to understand what Islam was which gives me a human freedom that the [U.S.] Constitution says I have, inalienable rights. Islam helped me see my inalienable--now, so when I see my inalienable rights I no longer see myself as a victim. I have now--make a free--I have a free will to choose and actively pursue. Look, I'll give you an example of how I saw it once from another person. I, and I still maintain a relationship with one of our U.S senators [Harry Reid] here from Nevada. Well, I worked for him for a number of years. This guy is from Searchlight, Nevada. He's from Searchlight, man it's about thirty-nine people in Searchlight now. Poor mining community; went to school in Henderson, Nevada. His family was so poor he lived in Henderson on the weekdays and then went home to Searchlight on weekends. He's Nevada's Democratic senior citizen--senior senator and he is the second most powerful senator in the Democratic [U.S.] Congress. Now, wait a minute America, no I'm not gone say 'cause he's a white guy he hasn't had some had privileges that would get him there because of his skin color, but he still had to exert himself to become there, he still had to exert himself to become there. America gives you that, nobody can say you don't have the right--now you may not reach it but you have the right to go for it. You can't do that in no Muslim country. If you born in a poor class you gonna die, more likely, you gonna die in that class. America says we gonna--No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001], it's a warped concept that Bush pushing on us but the reality of it is he is saying we gonna--had do something for education. You ain't gonna find that in no Muslim country. So America really is there. I, myself now I hope you had seen it you know if you're not a Muslim and I'm not saying you have to be a Muslim to see it, but myself I saw it most visibly as a Muslim that man I'm in the ideal situation--as a Muslim I couldn't, I couldn't be in a better country as a Muslim being in America, especially being indigenous here 'cause I understand America's frustration with Islam and I understand Islam's frustration with America now--or Muslims. I understand those two but I and those who think in this forum right here, who come into Islam and see Islam as a concept of living that's connected to Christianity. I have a Christian heritage that I draw from so Islam is--Islam is not a religion that fell ex nihilo into society, it was a foundation laid in Judaism and Christianity. Islam did not come from them but they all spring boarded up as connections, like the human brain has three different compartments to it, that's the way those three faith groups are. You can see that in America because you have all of them here. And I grew up in a Christian environment that gave me the value system to when Islam came I could see the benefit that was in it, but the value system of Christianity is the foundation from our understanding. If I don't have that now I'm missing something. It would be like being in high school but you never had middle school, or it would be like being in college but you never had high school. That's some of the disconnect you see with Muslims, they may have this moral high ground but the other parts that go onto it they don't have and because they don't have that, they are virtually dysfunctional. That's who America would see as Muslims, but anyway that covers it. Story_ID: 314975 Speaker 1: Now we left you career wise-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with the Corrections Department, I mean the, no, the Clark County Juvenile. Speaker 2: Right, Court Services [Clark County Juvenile Court Services; Department of Juvenile Justice Services, Clark County, Nevada] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Services, yeah. Speaker 2: As a probation officer. Speaker 1: And you'd become a, a Muslim around '75 [1975], '76 [1976] and so career--you're now a cultural diversity specialist. Now how'd you make that--how did you--I see the path but you know but tell us how you made that? Speaker 2: Well, becoming active as a Muslim here one thing that I saw happen is that because there was really no place as a Muslim to interact within the faith community among African Americans (cough) still had that challenge, African Americans you know if there were discussions going on and stuff like that Muslims weren't included. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's really true, preachers don't want to hear Muslims come in and talk. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You're not invited. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: There's no cultural diversity like or religious diversity. I mean what they call diversity is Baptist talking to a Methodist. Speaker 2: Right, well what happened as a result of that--well along this time also as a probation officer, just and I became active in the Muslim community actively and, and working in it, we began to direct us as early as an imam towards inter-faith work. So based on the concepts that I saw from Imam Mohammed [Warith Deen Mohammed] nationally we began to, to, to engage in interfaith work. One of the vehicles we used was the NCCJ, National Conference of Christians and Jews, but now the National Council of Community and Justice [National Conference for Community and Justice]. So as an African American Muslim I began to get involved with interfaith work. The interfaith work allowed me to interact and verbally enter into discourse with Jews and Christians who were not African Americans, and all of a sudden I found--the way they see the human spirit is similar to the way I see it. Well maybe sometimes the black church we don't see it necessarily in the similar--the human spirit. And so getting into that interfaith work really opened up a new avenue for me to interact with people through faith and, and then from that I, I went on from the Interfaith Council [Interfaith Council of Southern Nevada] to being on the local board of NCCJ to now being on the national executive board which I've been on for about six years, and so that afforded me that opportunity to go ahead and move in that direction which moved Islam for us more into the mainstream of religious life instead of just being isolated into the black community, it moved into the mainstream of religious life. So you know we speak in the synagogues and we speak in different Catholic Churches around the Valley [Las Vegas Valley, Nevada] and also Latter-day Saints' [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] facilities also. So as a, a, a African American Muslim we tend to interact with all of the groups with no problem with their--and you'll find the indigenous Muslims in America are the one who are really engaged in the interfaith work. They're the ones who are big in that be, because we are in a cultural environment that lends itself to us to be able to share and to interact so that, that became an excellent vehicle and I think because of that its really changed, because of that outreach its really changed. Go to some churches right now and see how the message is starting to change. Moving from the emotional message now more to the rational intellectual message, people had to stop preaching and start teaching because the imam at the mass general Friday, he's talking about the human experience and its day-to-day life in introducing formulas and introducing medication to heal the flock of the ills and the social influences that are destroying individual lives and family lives. Now quite frankly I have found that the more predominant Christian community outside the African American community look, I discovered they were doing that all the time. The message that I would hear in the black church ain't the same message I would hear when I'd go out to the Lutheran church or the Catholic church. Same Christians but a different message, so we really began to see this European American Christian, he's on a rational plane now he's not just emotional. We, we tend to approach religion more emotionally but the European American approaches religion when he can; he approaches it from the, more from a more rational perspective. Speaker 1: Well there are some that do, I mean there's a growing group that does but there's still, you still have like these fundamental megachurch people that talk about a nine hundred foot Jesus and send your money in for the prayer cloth and. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean there's--Oklahoma's full of 'em and I mean of the headquarters of a lot of 'em and there's--they have TV network (laughter) and-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's big. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But there's a growing, there's a growing desire for deeper, deeper dimensions of spirituality and those, those are gonna keep growing, and I think that other stuff its peaked. For the, for the uninformed masses the quasi-illiterate there's--what the Bible said, the poor shall always be among us, so there's always gonna be a message, there's always gonna be a message that Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] can pitch and there's gone be an audience out there for him, for that, that for that low-level of consciousness that just maintains us against them, fragmentation. The us against them, we're the only ones going to help heaven and everybody else going to hell. You'll find that among Muslims also. I, I met some Muslims outside the country tell you real quick, every American who's not a Muslim is going to hell. It sounds like the old Christian message to me, everybody who ain't a Christian going to hell. All y'all could get together and y'all would make a great religion together. Story_ID: 314976 Speaker 1: I think Islam is--Islam and Christianity really is bigger than all our theology and I think it's really, really much, much bigger than that so it, it allowed us to you know work and inter-faith work and, and-- Speaker 2: So do you think that there's a spirituality that goes beyond religion? Speaker 1: Oh, no doubt, no--actually it's the spirituality that the religion comes out of, but the origin of it is spirituality. Von Goethe [Johann Wolfgang von Goethe], the German philosopher and poet, he said that if Islam means submission to the will of god, then in Islam we're all born and in Islam we all die--people like Meister Eckhart [Eckhart von Hochheim]. Speaker 2: You're talking about Gert right, Gertha or Goethe or-- Speaker 1: Von Goethe? Speaker 2: G-O-E-T-H-E? Speaker 1: Yeah, I may say--I'm saying it ebonically. Speaker 2: Goethe, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's so he, he, and a friend of mine, a German Muslim, Murad Hoffmann [Murad Wilfried Hofmann], we often have some discussion about. He said in Germany he'll see his German brothers and sisters putting on long thobes [thawb] and long, long you know flowing robes and everything like that. He calls 'em cultural parasites. They're parasitizing from somebody else's culture, that's not Islam. Islam is really more about human spirit. It sent as standards to help regulate the human spirit 'cause you ain't got to worry too much about your body, your eyes gonna bat without your help, you gonna breathe without. Your heart gonna beat, so the physical things you ain't gotta worry about. What God has had to send prophets and revelation for was to help the human being understand how to regulate the human spirit 'cause if you don't regulate that everything else is gonna go outta sync anyway. So what Muslims have gotten caught up in is just regulating physical life, but not really dealing with the spiritual side and that's what religion is about. Listen to the message of Jesus, "The Kingdom of Heaven is within." "Seek ye the Kingdom of first." You know, this world is not, "I'm not with this right here," what was another term, "The battles are not against the principalities of"--"it's not against the physical world, but it's against the principalities of spirits and evil demons in high places," so he's telling us where the struggle really is at and Islam gives us the same concept also, but when you get people in a position who see it physically, now it's into how you dress, and do you believe you know if wear a thobe and if you ain't Mary Cary Ms. Walker [ph.]--if you wanna personalize Jesus as your institution for your salvation and everybody else go to hell who don't believe that, that's where the human dimen--that's where we, that's where things begin to break down at. So Islam is inviting us to, as Christianity, as Judaism is, really its inviting us to higher dimensions of thought, higher dimensions of understanding, and Islam in its essence that's what it was doing and that's what, that's what influences do help, help promote Europe out of the Dark Ages because the renaissance that occurred in Europe in the 13th century, that renaissance, that was the second renaissance, the first renaissance came out of Islam. It, it produced a, an impact of intelligentsia that really impacted the world even to the modern era that we live in we owe to the emergence of, of Islam on the Arabian Peninsula. I mean space flight--it was the Koran [Qur'an] that first spoke of space flight, not just air flight, but space flight. It was the Koran that taught the world was round, it was, it was Islam that really brought science into the dimensions that it is now, because remember the church was in the Dark Ages. So what produced the renaissance in Europe? It was the interaction both, both intellectually and through the Crusades between Muslims and Christians bring--Richard the Lionhearted [Richard the Lionheart, Richard I of England], why did he return from Lebanon, did anybody tell about how Saladin saved his life, cured him of a fever? Where in Europe at that time fevers were considered to be curses of God and you were supposed to die. Islam came and questioned all of that and invited man's intellect to a higher realm and dimension of thinking to advance the human cause. Story_ID: 314977 Speaker 1: Now can you give us sort of a chronicle for us your, I guess work experience in cultural diversity? Speaker 2: Okay, well actually I went to work in probably the early '80s [1980s] for U.S. Senator Harry Reid. Interesting experience there which gave us other added dimensions. Then went to work for, after about three years, went to work for Governor, Governor Bob Miller [Robert Miller] as his drug policy director and all of these were added dimensions of human ex--both professional but also the human and spiritual development that came out of that. Speaker 1: So they were calling you a czar or something like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, the drug czar (laughter), yeah it was actually state drug policy director but the media kind of came up with one of those little attractive cliches that they put out there, so the drug czar, and (laughter) which I never, I never bought into that idea. Speaker 1: Is that a tough job to, in Nevada? I mean you know Nevada has a reputation around the country as a anything goes place you know. Speaker 2: Hey, not for us who live here (laughter), that's for people who come here to visit, but that's not for us who live here, and I, I guess maybe I, I suited the role of being able to balance the equation and how do we talk about drug and alcohol issues, you know really without being offensive to anyone? How do we talk about these issues and realizing we're in a state that's driven by gaming and tourism but be able to get the message out there but won't get the governor voted out of office, and that was pretty much my responsibility along with some people and so it, it really and, and my own faith as a Muslim, see I had already been, I had already picked up a method. As a Muslim in, in talking about Islam, it was--I was always most affected when I didn't talk about Islam when I just talked about concepts, so I learned how to talk about Islam without talking about it. So when I became the drug policy director, I think that just kind of naturally filtered in. We could talk to you about drug and alcohol problems sometimes without really emphasizing. So I'm in a hotel talking about drug and alcohol problems, so am I gonna roast everybody in the hotel when there's alcohol flowing throughout the hotel? No, but we need to get the message out, so we need programs in place. So you begin to address it from a different dimension. I think it made it, it was safe enough for the governor to, and you know it was kind of interesting also 'cause the Muslim guy and in rural parts of the state they say that the governor's chosen a damn Iranian to be the drug czar. They said, "No, he's a black guy (laughter)," but any rate so it was a method, a method of balancing how you, how you present issues. A couple of years after the role of drug policy director it was a major riot [West Las Vegas riots] here in Southern Nevada. Speaker 1: Now what year was that? Speaker 2: I was--1992; after that riot I remember there was some, I remember I was in Boston [Massachusetts]. I was working on a project at Harvard University, JFK School of Law [sic. John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. That's where I met Mikhail Gorbachev, my, my--sometimes my work experiences has given us some real good opportunities there by the grace of God go I. So we went to JFK School of Law together and he was, he was there speaking the same time I was working on a national drug policy strategy and I remember the governor had called me. I had left after the riot and he called me and asked me about some information, somebody on staff, not the governor but one of the staff members called and I, I shared the information with him with what happened, well what I saw happen with the riot and what were some of the issues and what we needed to address. I said well what is this about? He said, "Well the governor just told me to ask you the questions. They didn't tell me." Which was really kind of unusual because you know if the governor wants to know something he's gonna say, "Well tell Mujahid [HistoryMaker Mujahid Ramadan] it's about this right here," so I can really build it up maybe more but they didn't, I just gave him the basic information, I gave it to him. Later on he and I were--it must've been '92 [1992] because we were in New York [New York] at the Democratic National Convention. We were walking along and he says, "You know I had a meeting with the guy who, who was interested in doing some things in Southern Nevada and he, he wants, he said that you know he'd be willing to fund this project, but he wants you to manage it," and so he says, "Now you don't have to leave, but I just want you to know about it." And I said, "Okay, well when we get back to Las Vegas [Nevada] we'll talk about it". When we got back to Las Vegas I think he and I went to lunch with Kirk Kerkorian and it was through Mr. Kerkorian that Governor Miller and Mr. Kerkorian--I won't say myself, I was the shepherd of building a, a facility called Nevada Partners [North Las Vegas, Nevada] which is probably somewhere in there. The Nevada Partners was the program that Mr. Kerkorian funded it and from about 1992 through when I left in 2001 he probably pumped about $15 million into that program. Story_ID: 314978 Speaker 1: Could you explain just briefly again what Nevada Partners [North Las Vegas, Nevada] is? Speaker 2: Nevada Partners was an organization that was founded by Governor Bob Miller [Robert Miller], our former governor in the state, probably I'd say design and directed by myself and funded by Mr. Kirk Kerkorian who was the builder of the MGM Mirage [MGM Resorts International] now Mandalay Bay [Mandalay Resort Group] probably soon to be Mandalay Bay Corporation and Mr. Kerkorian was at that time building the MGM and, and he had met with the governor about this idea of his philanthropic role of his foundation here in Southern Nevada and the governor in, in with this idea of Nevada Partners came up and then they invited [HistoryMaker] Mujahid Ramadan to, to be a part of the discussion and it was concluded that we would come on board as the first director and to design and shepherd the program through, and the idea behind it was to work on disenfranchised populations who were, had re-occurring unemployment and for new people moving to Las Vegas [Nevada] to help them into the work force because we were having this population boom to help them become you know job ready sometimes in, you know helping them understand their transferrable job skills if you just moved here, if you've been downsized and you're moving to Las Vegas or relocating. Speaker 1: Now, let address that for a second 'cause this is something on the other end of Chicago [Illinois], social service programs in Chicago, and neighborhood groups that do community organizing you just ment--you mentioned Midwest Academy [Chicago, Illinois] a few minutes ago and some of the people Kim Bobo and them. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean we run across people all the time in Chicago now and the neighborhoods on the West Side and the South Side where they're knocking down projects and people are telling us they're coming to Las Vegas, that's where they're going. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The poorest people. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Who can't find a spot in Chicago, can't get those vouchers, they're coming to Las Vegas. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this is something that, I mean can you talk about why and you seem to confirm that's true 'cause I've told people in Chicago this and they say, aw no they're not going. Speaker 2: I say, yes they are, they seem to (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, that is, it is. I mean one, the, the major you know what you hear about when you talk about population growth and job opportunities while they're service industry jobs they are jobs that don't exist in many populated areas that are--and the Northwest and those areas in the Midwest you've also seen depopulation in those areas and African Americans are not only moving here and other people moving here, but some are moving back to the South. A lot more are moving back to the South. Our population here also has been heavily impacted by the Hispanic, Latin American population which makes up about 22 percent of Southern Nevada now, 37 percent in the City of North Las Vegas [Nevada] among which most are Mexicans and we have a significant amount of Cuban, Dominican Republic, and Puerto Ricans also live here. Our largest growing population in the next two decades though will be the Asian community, which will probably in the next two decades will almost be equal to the African American community, we're really now probably at about eight point, about 9 percent. The Asian population probably is at about 4 percent and the way the Asian population's growing they will surpass us here in Southern Nevada, in the country probably not anytime soon, but in, in Nevada it will and then of course because we're a service-energy town, the population that we attract may tend to be lower income and so you also--it has an effect on your social infrastructure. So you know it means taxes and things like that are always behind the needs that you have in terms of population. People like Governor Miller and Mr. Kirk Kerkorian they saw that and saw a need of how to address it, and I had been again the drug policy director so all of the money that generally we, we generated if it didn't come from feds it came through state government which means that I always had to go back before legislators and I remember in the discussion Governor Miller said to me as a, as a piece to make this role attractive to me he said, "And you won't have to come back before the legislators unless you just wanna come back and report to 'em what's happening, but all of your funding will come from the private sector," which was in--which was (laughter)--after three years in state government, you kind of appreciate not having to deal with those legislators. Mark Twain who lived in Nevada in the 1800s said, "Nevada legislators meet a hundred and twenty days every two years. It would probably be better if they met two days every hundred and twenty years." So you know we have this kind of situation in Southern Nevada, but at any rate so Governor Miller saw it as an opportunity, Mr. Kerkorian was willing to back it, they put together a small board, appointed me to direct the board into the building other than we built that. While we were doing that we saw many of the employees we were working with including gaming and tourism were doing poorly in what we call understanding diversity and cultural sensitivity. So one thing that we began to do is provide a service to the private sector. We'll provide a certain type of training for your staff but when you get ready to hire we also get people ready for the workforce, hire from us. Speaker 2: Now this harkens back to what you were saying about this being the Mississippi or the--some people thinking this is the Mississippi of the West (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of the West right. Speaker 2: And you're saying it's actually worse. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 314979 Speaker 1: So we have this influx of diverse people, poor people looking for economic opportunity doing these service occupations and they're, and they're coming to a place that's really not all that tolerant right? Speaker 2: No, very, very much not so and they're not even aware of it because much of this intolerance is unconscious because they grow up in the environment, so it's normal. Most behavior that people learn in America is, is socially, we, we learn socially and that means it's unconscious behavior. I mean people are gonna walk a certain way 'cause they see people walking a certain way. We teach what we are taught, and so most people grow up and they're moving here from places where they may have been largely, not monolithic, very close to being homogenous in, in a sense that--well, not homogenous but monolithic in the fact that you know it's just one community and if you come here from Montana, you come here from Idaho, you come rural parts of the country, you're not gonna be, you're not really going to really have an association with Asian Americans, African Americans, Hispanic Americans. Then you come to a town that is not really conscious of its own disparities in terms of race and ethnicities you have a toxic environment going on there that people won't become aware of so we're providing a service largely at no cost and then after a while it began to have a bit more value so even as a company [Nevada Partners, North Las Vegas, Nevada], a non-profit we were doing okay. When I decided to leave and make a transition in 2001, the board agreed that, that component because I had designed the entire program, but I, I wanted to take that component because I had mainly managed and done that with myself while I had a staff of thirty people. The diversity and management program I had done and so that really took me into turning in and I formed my own corporation [M.R. Consulting, Inc.] and began, began to work in that capacity, but I think the work that I had been involved with NCCJ [National Conference for Community and Justice] had amply equipped me and then I think more importantly being a Muslim and understanding the universality of the human spirit. It gave me a different dimension to provide the information with so, we, we got engaged in that and been able to--actually, one company Terry Lanni [Joseph Terrence Lanni], the presidency of the MGM [MGM Mirage; MGM Resorts International]. Now he gets there on that concept. The MGM has--their whole--which Mr. Kerkorian [Kirk Kerkorian] is the major shareholder in, their whole company has gone through that project from top--well they're still processing through it but, but Terry Lanni gets it. I mean over the years when I was running Nevada Partners I guess, but probably about four years he and I work closely together because the MGM--while we were funded by Mr. Kerkorian's foundation. The MGM was you know he's a major shareholder in their property there. So there wasn't you know we, we had a relationship in the sense of discussion and communications and employment and those type things. We talked to all of his head--Terry Lanni happened to have been the head of it. The MGM Mirage Corporation was listed number fifty-one in Fortune 500 on dealing with diversity. It's increased their stock value, so Terry Lanni gets it, but the sheriff, Bill Young here, our company's under contract with them also. He gets it, he understands now that he's policing not only a diverse population that lives here, he get ninety thousand visitors here a month, ninety thousand visitors a day. They're also the same type of people that he has to deal with. So his offices have to understand that. The Clark County School District gets it. We're going to Henderson, Nevada their police department gets it. We're gonna be out there for them the entire--for the bulk of the remainder of the year. We'll be with Henderson. We were just with the police department's correction facility yesterday. They start out--I think we're looking at starting their program out at the end of the year because we've done all of the street officers so now we're going into the corrections facility, they have another nine hundred people. We've completed almost three thousand on the street; the MGM, there were almost eleven thousand that went through it. So we took that component with us and formed my own corporation and then I, my--our corporation merged with Ballard Communications and I manage the diversity labor relations issues and political issues and then of course we have several other areas that we concentrate in, but that kind of gives you an idea about how we built it but my experience both in terms of professional and volunteering I think was a base for, for me to, to see the need for this and--and it's a growing industry here in Southern Nevada but around the country and we're, we're hoping to be a part of that because while this is an industry that I invest in for earning my own livelihood and I often say as Dr. Howard Thurman said, "God help me see your grace and the things I do to earn my keep and the keep of those who are dependent on me." It also is very eye-opening in terms of my own experience. In terms of my own personal growth, in terms of my growth as a Muslim who has a Christian background and who has a lot of Jewish friends who have Hispanic friends who you understand what they are challenged with when they come here culturally but who have Bosnians who come here from Muslim countries and, and they're Europeans and the struggle that they have and the Asians who have something culturally that they bring here but the challenge they have of coming to America with new language and not knowing the nuances of the language, all of things that are dynamics that we're experiencing in our rapid growth in Southern Nevada along with the, the traffic congestion that we're experiencing but if we can deal with the human dimension I think these other rudimentary or superfluous other things I think that we'll, we'll probably won't have as much of a challenge with. One of the former Mayors, Mayor Jan Laverty Jones [Janis Laverty Jones] and a discussion once and she was on the board of Nevada Partners. You know she says, "You know if we don't deal with this human issue it won't matter about the water, we have to deal with the human issue," and that's something I think we're, we're trying to--and I think some are embracing the idea, it's a slow process because Las Vegas [Nevada] is, is a town that it's like many cities in America, it's not conscious of itself, it's not and we're still trying to find out who we are now when 60 percent of the people have been here now less than seven years. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I meet people who have only been for two or three weeks. Story_ID: 314980 Speaker 1: Now there's a growing group, now I don't know how large they are in terms of numbers, but I keep hearing this over and over and over again, a growing group of black professionals, especially educators. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That are coming here, who have a nice retirement income and-- Speaker 2: You hit a great point there and that's a great point because I made an observation. Sociologists tend to do that when it talks about the human experience. I told some people say about ten or fifteen years ago if the population growth continues the way it is here like we have start getting more and more African Americans here like we had stars being moving here, the benefit that African Americans are going to get is that we're going to have a new intelligentsia that if it had of been our educational institution that was gonna produce it, it would've taken us another fifty to seventy-five years, but because of the population increase we're now getting more and more educated professional minded business--not only retired people but also new, young people that, that are here also. I mean, CAAN, the Caucus of African Americans in Nevada [Caucus of African Americans Nevada]. I'm one of the locals that's an indigenous person but CAAN is made up of significantly, of people who are from outside of the State of Nevada. 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.] that I'm a member of, 100 Black Men are largely, if we have like a 100, we got the largest chapter of 100 Black Men in America right here in Las Vegas, Nevada, most of 'em are outside of Las Vegas, well over two-thirds. So we've, we've grown, we've gained immensely from the new population growth that it, not as much as we like to we still hope to get more benefits but it's, it's been a big growth, very much--and we benefitted from it. I mean the African American Urban Chamber of Commerce [Urban Chamber of Commerce] man, 60 percent of the members are from outside of the state been here only three to five years, and so it is, it is really about that and it gives us an opportunity to redefine who African Americans are in Nevada, and, and in Las Vegas in terms of business, in terms of education, in terms of having a presence. We haven't got the formula down just yet, but we're, we're working on it, we're working on it and I really embrace it. I tell 'em sometimes the benefit that you all bring to us is a new energy. The benefit we bring to you is that we have a history of the community, so new energy without the history you have to make all the mistakes. You know what we are the indigenous population to the people who move here is what the mother's milk is to the baby. It passes its immune system off to the baby in one dose so we can help new African Americans moving here because we can say, "Hey look here are some of the subtle nuances of the language of Southern Nevada. Here's some of the predilections of the populations that are here. Here's predilections in terms of politics, here's predilections in terms of culture. Here's predilections and proclivities in terms of education." So we can let you know, you know what they say, "Where the dead bodies are buried at?" We know where all the skeletons are at in the closet. You, you bring the new ideas from people from Ohio, from Detroit [Michigan] from Chicago [Illinois], from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] from Washington, D.C., even from California. Couple that with the indigenous population that knows about the dynamics. We should virtually produce a whole new culture for African Africans here. That's my hope. Story_ID: 314981 Speaker 1: In terms of culture diversity training and--what's your biggest challenge? Is there a class or age group or a cultural group that's tougher to deal with than any other or? Speaker 2: I think the toughest group that we've, we've and we've been with them maybe trying to get the whole department through this training has been law enforcement. They are a very tough group. I mean the Sheriff [Bill Young] bought off the program, sent all of the senior command through it. We have one of the largest, you know it's a pretty large sheriff department [Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department] here for a growing population. We now have a new tax initiative to hire some four hundred new officers. Man, we open up like five to seven elementary schools every year. Three to five middle schools and two high schools on a yearly basis on this town and then the police department is, you know while we have security at those irresponsible there so, so working with those police guys, because police have a--it's a real interesting culture if you get in it and stay it as a non-police officer you can begin to see the dynamics of the culture. So not only can you bring your--sometimes you can bring your racial prejudice there, the police culture will reinforce that sometimes. Speaker 1: Yeah they say, criminologists say the police culture is the toughest culture to change. Speaker 2: Yes, very much so, so we've been able to get through and their officers--the white guys it's very interesting end up saying, "He doesn't make you feel like you're bad 'cause you're a white man." So that's effective, but I have to ask 'em, "But are you getting the point of what I'm talking about though?" Well if you get the point but I don't have to beat you up and I don't think that should have to happen in, in the cultural sensitivity, you know the white guy shouldn't get beat up 'cause it's not his fault. We all inherit certain situations so law enforcement can be a very challenging one, because law enforcement people also tend to know everything. It's the nature of the culture to tend to know you know--I sometimes I'm asking them questions, they looking at me like, "Hey, well you don't ask us questions, we ask you questions." So, it's, it's working through that but the climate is changing when you have a bow from the sheriff you know people like that you know. The, the new sheriff, the sheriff out in Henderson [Nevada], he now sees the benefit in it. People in private corporations see the benefit. Joel Arthur Barker and his book, 'Paradigms: Discovering the Business of the Future' [sic. 'Paradigms: The Business of Discovering the Future'], he talks about the benefit America's gonna gain from what he calls the new human resource, and this new human resource will be a people of color because the transition of people coming to America--the largest population boom that we had in America in the last century was from about 1890 to about 1920, about 15 percent population increase in that, that thirty year period and this time period which has been close today, we've had about a 12 percent. The difference happens to be is that from 1890 to 1920 those people came from Europe and they were European Caucasians. This population boom is coming from Mexico, Central America, South America and Asia and they happen to be people of color. So it's presenting some new dynamics and new opportunities, for instance by the year 2020 California will be majority-minority, quote, unquote. What it's gonna be is majority people of color. There'll be several states across the Southwest and the Western United States are going to experience that. Cities like New Jersey will continue to grow along with New York [New York] and Puerto Rican population, but the Puerto Rican population that initially moved to America, moved here after you know the, the Spanish American Wars up through World War I [WWI] and World War II [WWII] for labor, so they moved to the Rust Belt and places where there's manufacturing. The more recent populations coming from Central America, South America and Mexico moved to where there's growth bases at, Texas, Nevada, California where there's growth at. Now, of course many Puerto Ricans are moving outta the Northeast and begin to move places like, like, like Florida, like Nevada so you've seen that happen. The interesting thing is that so this population is a population of color. The only thing they have in common though with the indigenous African American is color, because the way we think is very different and the challenge for African Americans in the next two decades and if, and the test definitely for the next two decades is how do we compete against people of color or with people of color who sees America as an opportunity, if we have a leadership that's telling us that we got a big problem. We do have some, but how do you, how do--see if you, if, if you take an indigenous person of color that's historically had three or four generations of America, let's just say particularly African American and you take a guy from the Honduras and the guy from the Honduras say, "McDonald's pays me--willing to pay me six dollars an hour. In the Honduras I only made six dollars a week. Where do I sign up for overtime?" So you'll find that very dominant among people of color who migrate here in this era. African Americans I'm just gonna focus on now, we on the other hand, we many times will complain about America as we're the victims and America's holding us down. You can't compete against that guy who sees America as an opportunity and you are, you are both people of color? So the question becomes what, what's gonna happen to the African American population in America with more people of color moving here and you're now supplanted in the workforce? Mexicans now make up a larger portion of people of color than African Americans do and this is not an argument against but it's, it's a projection or hypothesis as to how we need to be sure we understand how to approach this thing because if we don't we can end up with a major conflict on our hand. Story_ID: 314982 Speaker 1: Would you say that's your major concern for the African American community these days is a-- Speaker 2: That's my, as--very personally, that's my major concern. We are now the second largest population of color, so now when you start talking about minorities, now, we may not come to America's mind anymore. Speaker 1: What's your major hope for African American people? Speaker 2: That we're gonna realize our challenges and opportunity, my faith says in the difficulty is the relief. My grandmom, Ms. Nellie [ph.] use to say, "In every dark cloud there's a silver lining." The Bible says, "Count it all as joy." So how, how we perceive this is gonna be the most important thing that's gonna determine the next two decades of African Americans' lifestyle in America is gonna be predicated on what's gonna happen for us in the whole next century. How do we understand, see, understand and embrace and envision ourselves and the fact that we're no longer the population of color on the radar screen anymore in America? That is the Hispanic population, so the question becomes now, what do you do with a population of people that you don't need any more, but you can't afford to take care of? What do you do with that population? Not only what do you do with that population, what does that population do with itself? Speaker 1: Now, there's a, when I came in the airport [McCarran International Airport, Paradise, Nevada] I noticed it was named after McCarran [Patrick McCarran] who was the sena--I believe the senator who wrote the McCarran Internal Security Act [Internal Security Act of 1950] back in the '70s [sic.] which was a solution to what to do with that population. Speaker 2: What to do with them see, and so we, we may not be--and I'm not sure if the African American leadership is thinking about that. What do you do with a population of people who you don't need any more? You needed them in slavery, it was free labor. You needed them in the Industrial Revolution because you needed workers. You needed them during your wars to fight your wars and to work in factories, but now technology has changed and you have a new population of people of color who are willing to work at entry-level jobs that we will say, "No that's not for me," and I agree that's not for me. I--the other guy six dollars an hour at McDonald's, that's legitimate for him in that perspective. I have to look at myself in terms of valuing myself probably at another level though because no, that's not the six dollars an hour, but how do we as African Americans see this? How do we compete 'cause everybody's not gonna be an executive whose had my working experience, my educational background and my working experience. So how does that guy, which is gonna be the majority of us, there's only going to be a few of us who are, you know only a certain amount gonna be in any given place and the higher up the continuum you go the fewer there are. What does the Bible say? "Straight is the gate and narrow is the path that leads into life thereby few find it." So that path that leads up to the top is gonna be narrow and you're gonna find fewer people, but what happens to the people down here at the base now who are gonna be severely impacted by the new Hispanic, Latin American and Asian population who sees America as an opportunity? We're not addressing that. I think Bill Cosby has made--he's, he's talked about one aspect in the recent months, the frustration he's seen. That's just one component of what we need to be looking at, how well we raise the next two generations of African Americans because faced with the light that we're faced with, if we can't get a new prospectus in with the new, next two generations we may look up and America may say inside of the next half century, whatever happened to the black people that use to be in America you know, they're no longer, we don't see their presence any more. The Mexican population now is the population of color and the Asian population is now surpassing the African American population. We don't need African Americans for work anymore and we can't commit genocide on 'em, we can't, we can't gas 'em, we can't lynch 'em, we can't line 'em up against the wall and shoot 'em, but if we can't employ 'em and we don't need 'em anymore what do you do with those people, and it's somewhat a rhetorical question. We may need to start asking that question. I think you know they say the answers in the question. So we may need all the African American quote, unquote people not just the leaders, now I don't know who they are but we may need to start asking that question you know. Speaker 1: Well we have this disproportionate prison population now which seems to be an answer to some of this. Speaker 2: You're starting to think and see, see how. Speaker 1: I mean the negative answer to it. Speaker 2: There it is though, see that's somebody else's plan. How do we plan though? And see Islam invites us to begin to look at that type of situation, (speaking Arabic), old human beings, (speaking Arabic), guard yourself, so we haven't been guarding ourselves. Guard yourself so we're consciously aware of the internal environment and the external environment and what is it telling me about the potential of my future, the potential of my three-year old granddaughter now? She has to understand how to compete in an environment that you ain't gone get no benefit based on your skin color no more because you are now going to be in the majority. How can you complain? If the majority--if the minority is gonna be the majority, then they can't now complain, not legitimately they can't, they still don't control the levels of economy or politics but you got the numbers though, so it makes it more difficult and so African Americans we're not gonna be included as the only people on the block anymore who inherit their situation. Story_ID: 314983 Speaker 1: Do you see an opportunity in the fact that other people of color are gonna be running a lot more business and enterprises in the future and that? Speaker 2: Oh, tremendous. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We should benefit from that, we've been here the longest we should be running--if the Asians are running one business we should be running two. If the Hispanics are running two businesses we should be running four. Well we've been here longer. Speaker 1: Well I guess the question I'm asking is that do you think there's more opportunity for African Americans in an Asian business job wise, than it is in a white business? Speaker 2: Well, we probably, yet to see. It's interesting, what will be the Asian mentality towards other people of color because they have distinct cultural sensitivities that they bring to the equation in America, which I think is still a question about how to Asians see African Americans and quote, unquote how we see them. How will the new Hispanic, Latin American, Central American population see us? How do we see them? I think it's yet to be lived out. I think that we should take the lead in forming the paradigm of what the perception is going to be because as Imam Mohammed [Warith Deen Mohammed] say, "We may be the most original American of all Americans, we may be more original than the Native American Indians." Somebody said, "Well how could you say that right they were here when we got here," but they have an origin somewhere else and the African American black person don't have another home outside of America. There were no African Americans before America. You can go somewhere and find more Africans, but you can't go nowhere else and find no African Americans. You see African American in America but particularly outside of America you'll know who they--(unclear) that's African American going there. "So how do you know?" "Look at his walk, look at his mannerisms, you don't have to hear 'em talk you'll know that." So we're very distinct people. When we begin to realize the distinction that we are, not that we're special but we're distinct because of our historical experience. The experience of slavery gave us something nobody else in America has. What is that? The experience of slavery, that's a distinct experience. Story_ID: 314984 Speaker 1: So do you see African Americans as part of a Pan-African kind of world view or not? Speaker 2: No, I see African Americans as part of a new Africa, not a Pan-Africa. It becomes a part of a new Africa, like we have a New England, like we have a New York, like we have a New Hampshire, now we're talking about a new Africa. It's a new mindset of Africa, not the old mindset of Africa, that's in Nigeria, that's in Ghana. The best of Africa is in America, the best of Africa is in America. Stop and think of the African Americans who you can think about in the last one hundred years that have hit international acclaim in various fields of endeavor. Now stop and--now it's not superiority, experience. Now stop and think of an African who has reached international acclaim in the past fifty years in an endeavor, name me one? Which would be the first--which will come to your mind now? Speaker 1: Nelson Mandela would be one? Speaker 2: Right and it'll come to all of our minds, but if you start talking about African Americans man, you start talking about King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and Malcolm [Malcolm X]. Speaker 1: You can go on and on with Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] and Nyerere [Julius Nyerere] and you know you can, you could make a strong case for others. Speaker 2: In a country where they're the dominant group. Speaker 1: Plus it's a continent. Speaker 2: A continent, yeah but within those con--and in that continent you had these countries. Now I'm not saying better, but the experience of America, man you, you can't find a decade or a century up until recently where African Americans weren't reaching--you know you're talking about not only Garvey [Marcus Garvey], you know you're talking about Robeson [Paul Robeson], you're talking about Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, Booker T. Washington, Nat Turner, Denmark Vesey, Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew], look at the, look. American has given us a unique opportunities--produced an interesting kind of hybrid that the English philosopher and I'm trying to remember the gentleman's name, he said--what was the guy's name, the Frenchman who came and wrote what he saw in America? Speaker 1: de Tocqueville [Alexis de Tocqueville]? Speaker 2: de Tocqueville yes and he said, "That the African American may very well present," and he said blacks he didn't say African American, "May very well present a spiritual dimension that the West needs and without African Americans, thus black people, the West could not have this spiritual experience." He said that, "Seldom does history bestow an opportunity upon a group of people like it's been bestowed upon African American people, seldom does history bestow an opportunity." What was the opportunity? Slavery, slavery gave us something that is invaluable to us if we're just able to recognize it, and nobody else has it. Why? 'cause nobody else had the experience and quite frankly nobody else would want the experience. Well if nobody want the experience and I had it, I need to start looking at what's special in it? It's gotta be something in it. Speaker 1: What is it? Speaker 2: It's, it's much, much more than this will--it's there I mean it's, it's what was in Joseph being in slavery in Egypt. Speaker 1: You're talking about the determination or what it-- Speaker 2: Well it does produce that, well say for, for instance as a Muslim, it produces a, a viewpoint of life that immigrant Muslims don't have, and they can be Africans, they can be from Nigeria, they can be from Ghana, they can be Senegal, they be from Ghana, they can be from Mali, they can be (unclear) and you get them around African American indigenous Muslims and you say, huh they're immigrants, but this group right here now because it's out of this group that we'll--it's, it's this group will look at slavery and say, "Wait a minute, slavery gave us something." I would've seen that if I wasn't a Muslim, slavery gave me something. My birth is in slavery, not in Africa, my birth is in slavery. Go and talk to an African and ask them are we the same and they'll tell you no. They know we're not the same. The African American is not the same, he's unique, the slavery experience and then post-slavery. Remember, we were in slavery for thirteen generations. We've only been out for seven, made some big strides. The interesting thing is that we, we didn't participate in bringing slavery to an end, and the, the events of the Civil War and the sense of we're going to liberate ourselves, we're gonna rise up and it's gonna be some hell going on here? We didn't do that, the North was fighting against the South. It wasn't the black people against the white people. Story_ID: 314985 Speaker 1: 'Cause now it's no--I don't have no argument with you. I didn't say that, your own mind told you to treat women like that is wrong, to treat gay and lesbian people like that is wrong, to treat other human beings like that is wrong, that's the general idea, because America can ill-afford not to come to this kind of understanding. In about 2050 the majority of the nation may be people of color, it can't, it cannot maintain the mindset that it has and that's not including the events that gonna happen, that's gonna further--change, evolution, advancement is, is inevitable but whether we change or not that's an option that we have, but America is gonna go through a metamorphosis whether or not we as Americans are gonna be capable no matter what our ethnicity is. The European American white man is no longer gonna hold the role that he holds in dominance and shouldn't have to. Everybody should shoulder the, the load for making this country what it's going to be. It shouldn't just be him anymore 'cause while we talk about his dominance we also have to talk about he's contributed a great to the expansion of this country in terms of its function, but that's no longer a responsibility he should have to carry nor should he even want to carry because it's too big for him, it's too big for him. So it's not a matter of condemning or becoming exclusive but making America an inclusive nation that affords people of all ethnic and cultural backgrounds the equal opportunity to the things that the [U.S.] Constitution talks about. The human experience--it didn't, it didn't say that he created the white man or the black man or a certain group better, it just says he--among--he created the humans and gave them certain inalienable rights among which is life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. We're now, based on our population growth, we're gonna have to live up to that. We, we can't afford not to. Story_ID: 314986 Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently at this point? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm, I'm certain--Monday morning quarterbacking, there are some passes I wouldn't of thrown into the end zone and there's probably some things I would've done. I matured slow in terms of being a husband and understanding you know what my wife [Sumayah Ramadan] was really emphasizing to me. Speaker 1: Now when did you get married, when--how old were you? Speaker 2: Let's see, I got married in 1972 so I was twenty-two, so I, I would probably look at some of those things differently. There are places that I've shown a lack of patience. I, I waivered for a long time in, in hostility, not hate, but hostility towards others who were not of my ethnic group possibly. I was homophobic for a lot of years and that burdened me down. I didn't know I was homophobic, to me it was normal. I learned how to be homophobic hanging around with my friends so it was normal. I had a, had a way of seeing European American Caucasians as not necessarily as people, the human experience because of the oppression that I thought my people had gone through and didn't. So that means I was--it was us against them so I was fragmented. You can't be whole if you see another human being as other than yourself. You can't be whole like that. No matter how that human being may be you just can't be whole that way. I think those things, I think that I probably would've pursued neurology now. I've gained an increased fascination with the brain over the past ten years, so I probably would've pursued neurology instead of sociology, that, that would've been it. Story_ID: 314987 Speaker 1: I may not have changed my name. I may not have changed my named; now that I look back on that, and say what's the benefit in that? I think sometimes now people get so caught in my name, in particular since 9/11 [September 11, 2001], they can't concentrate on the essence. So, and that's six-to-one, a half dozen another. The other aspect of the name has helped me become who've I've become so I, I waiver, waiver with that one, but only in terms of the social aspect of it. You know say for instance sometimes a person could dress real odd, they can't pick up the message you know if I had on like a pink suit and you guys were trying to interview me, you they'd--who's that guy with the pink suit on I mean you know remember how the brothers use to dress at one time with the loud colors on and the high platform shoes? Speaker 2: That's--look (laughter). Speaker 1: You miss, you miss any message you had lowering the appearance so I think sometimes you know [HistoryMaker] Mujahid Ramadan, you know and also it gave me an opportunity to live Islam to the point people would say he's a Muslim 'cause right away when you hear 'em say, "Mujahid Ramadan" usually they're gone think he's a Muslim. I, I may not even be a Muslim, I could just wear the name. I've had a lot of black people 'cause you know we're very pop culture people. Names now, I mean you hear a whole bunch of athletes now with like Rasheed Wallace. You can always tell they're not a Muslim 'cause they have a Muslim first name and Western last name (laughter), nothing bad about that but I think those type of things. I, I think I--my father [Ramadan's stepfather, Flenorte Harris] who raised me--I didn't get really get to know him until after he was gone. I found out about the man that he was. I would have liked to have benefitted from knowing him. The man that I grew to know after he was gone you know I would have, I could've benefitted you know from that you know from that eighth-grade brilliance that he had. It was, it was more universal than the eighth grade. I could've benefitted from that, you know a person who didn't talk very much but passed off everything? I could've benefitted and you know, and, and it--so those, those type things I think, I think, and other than that probably I'm consider--considering, if Las Vegas [Nevada] doesn't afford it I'm considering, and it's because my family's here and one of my company's here but the school of theology I've been--have some colleagues at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and I serve on an advisory board there for the religious school and I've given some consideration to theology because of my own growth in Christianity, my Christian roots and having better understanding about that and I, I regret the fact that even as becoming an early Muslim, you become somewhat hostile in the first years because you know it's almost like the Christian is about a bunch of falsehood. I found out the truth that's in Christianity you know much more so now and I, I appreciate that and I, I benefit you know 'cause I'm, I'm firing with, with all kind of cylinders because I, I have a--I'm at home no matter where I'm at in faith. If I'm in a synagogue I'm at home, if I'm in a Baptist church or the Catholic church I'm at home and if I'm in the masjid I'm at home. I might be sometimes least at home in the masjid because you know the way, the way sometimes like I said the, the immigrant influence I see in our masjids is, it's not, it's not good. It's not good for our masjids, it's not good for America that this influence and the people that are doing the influence they don't know, so you'll find more and more around the country now. I'm hearing more and more about women are now having to fight to not be locked up in the small room and mosques, that didn't go on until probably the last five or seven years because the first wave of immigrants came here with the more of the intelligentsia. They came for educations and to make money. In the more recent years you had that more working-class people that come here with that culture, so they start trying to and then you know African Americans because we didn't have a culture of our own many of us really embraced the Arab culture and never get into Islam. So that is, that's very discouraging so we're having to combat the immigrant-Muslim influence on our culture because Islam doesn't, suppose to change a culture, it's suppose to, like it's supposed to address things culturally like dress, if, if your dress is un, un-Islamic. Not un-Arab, now un-Islamic, so my pants doesn't show my penis or my butt or anything like that, my body's pretty much covered and it's--Islam doesn't even require this much covering of a man. So for me this is Islamic dress. Now if you brought a sheik from Afghanistan, I wouldn't bring one from Afghanistan. I don't know if any sheiks are there, but if you bought a sheik from another country he'd tell you this is not Muslim dress. It's not his cultural dress but he probably won't be able to make the distinction between that so, now I'm finding more and more African Americans wanna dress up like Arabs with a Halloween costume of Arabism on and lose their own culture. I have too much history in my culture, not only my own family. I inherit the history of Frederick Douglass, I inherit the history of Denmark Vesey and Nat Turner, I inherit that whole history. So if I cut myself off from my history that, that's stupid. That's, that's dumb for me to--because that's what makes me who I am, and if I cut that a loose right there, I'll never be anybody. So the African American or the indigenous Muslim in general, but the African American in particular who embraces Arab culture does nothing for Islam 'cause don't nobody wanna talk to him. I can go get a real Arab. What I need a carbon copy of an Arab for? What do I need somebody who, who wants to call me akhi, which means brother but don't nobody know what it means. If I tell you I love you in a language you don't understand, does it have an effect on you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So if I call you by brother--if I say, "Hey, brother what's happening?" You can understand that 'cause I said brother, but if I said akhi and you don't know what it means it has no affect, so these--people get caught up in fad, that's the danger that we're faced with. Story_ID: 314988 Speaker 1: When you look back at your accomplishments what would you consider at this point, and you're still young you know, what would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: You know I really--probably not one. Well, I hope that my daughters you know longevity in marriage. Speaker 1: How many daughters do you have? Speaker 2: Two. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the prophet peace (unclear) says that, "If you have two daughters and you raise them well, he said you'll be like this with me in paradise." Now raising them well--there are standards that are in place, so I, I think that, I hope that major--I see my granddaughter growing up now and the way she talks and her three-year old assertives, I think you know and my wife [Sumayah Ramadan] is able to nurture that and with two daughters. I think that is it, I don't, I don't think significant--at this point now. I'm glad you mentioned it, I'd like that I, there's still some accomplishments to make. We have preparations in the process of one book and we wanna publish a couple of books on the subject, some of the subjects that we've talked about, and I think that I'd like to be able to make bigger contributions in the human--in terms of human excellence in terms of advancing our nation towards, that we live out the true meaning of our creed. I'd, I'd like to be a part of those who participate in that, but in terms of a legacy I think it'll, it'll be around marriage and, and, and helping to raise daughters, and being raised by my wife my own self. I, I think those will be the memorable things that I could probably--'cause outside of that I won't say I've made a contribution because I was just--a lot of--I've been in the right place at the right time a lot. Now of course you don't choose the place and the time, but I've been--you know when, when I became probably the drug policy director. You know somebody had heard me speak somewhere, and they said well you know if this guy--I think a friend of mine called me he said, "You know I remember that night you spoke at the university," and they had, they had to move some people back and I didn't, I didn't speak until at nine o'clock and they had been out there all day, and I think he said they left saying, "That was the best session that we had," and this guy we had been there all day. And he said, "Well who--why should be the drug policy director?" He said, "That Ramadan [HistoryMaker Mujahid Ramadan] could probably sell ice to Eskimos, he's very convincing," (laughter) so I, I think that it was time and place, I just had been doing speaking and people heard that. When we built Nevada Partners [North Las Vegas, Nevada] I think which people can probably look at. It's, it's gone on now, now that I moved on and the foundation has moved on to some other things. We were able to bring in some other programs that was compatible, we've expanded it. We've brought in new dollars for it; we've got the economic development grants into it to expand the training. We now can train cooks, we can train chefs, we, we can train people for any number of jobs. We laid the biggest portion of the foundation for that. Not saying that people will remember us for that and not that you do it to be remembered by, you do it 'cause it's a good thing to do and you're grateful that you had an opportunity to make a contribution that you know that somebody can say well you know if they remember, they remember and if they don't you know God always remembers, said no, no good deed goes un-unrewarded so you kind of look at those kind of things and you know. I, I think being able to be a product of so many good people in Southern Nevada I hope that, that Coach Overton Curtis lives beyond his life, earthly life in the form of--I always tell people about him. Reverend Clark [Donald Clark] is still here. I went to Reverend Thompson's [Abner Thompson] funeral a few, a few months ago. I grew up with his sons and his daughter; we graduated from high school [Valley High School, Las Vegas, Nevada] together. Reverend Thompson was that kind of man, so I hope that, that by remembering people like that and saying, "Yeah they all played an impact on our life. Reverend Coleman [V.C.L. Coleman] founded Second Baptist Church [Las Vegas, Nevada]. A guy said once Reverend Coleman was going down south he'd stop by the barbershop, get a haircut. They'd say, "Well, Rev. you got everything ready for trip?" He'd say, "Yeah I got the car tuned up; I just gotta go and get the .38 cleaned." They said, "Well Rev. you're a man of god, you don't need a gun." He said, "Look man you have to understand god answers prayers when he want to, but that .38 get immediate response so I'm a religious man, but I'm not crazy." So you know you had the benefit of people like that and Commissioner Woodrow Wilson, Cranford Crawford, Reverend Marion Bennett who just retired from being a Methodist--in the Methodist church, he's been there for about forty years, you know, so I can't say I leave a legacy I just leave the, I just have the benefit of having grown up around so many good people until--it'd been hard for me to just fall flat on my face. Speaker 1: Now, now-- Speaker 2: Because I had so many good people. Story_ID: 314989 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Elizabeth Harris] get a chance to see you become successful or no? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, she's right to the point, right, right now. I remember she called me and told me she had heard about on the news when I was appointed to drug policy director, there was a big press conference in Southern Nevada, then we went up north and had a big press conference up there, then the south repeated the north's press conference and so my mother heard about it 'cause the governor [Robert J. Miller] had sworn me to silence. He wanted to announce it and get the public bang out of it. So I called her later on that night when I finally finished a lot of interviews and stuff like that and I got home and said, "Momma you know this Nevada's--," they had talked about the drug czar so her friends called and said, "Girl." First they called her and said, "Your son in trouble, we heard he's the drug czar," you know elderly women at home listening to the news, "Lord, Elizabeth, that boy. I don't what he did girl 'cause I know you tried to raise him well but somehow he done got in trouble, he's the drug czar now, you'll probably hear about it on the news." (Laughter) So she finally got it that the governor had made this appointment right and so I got home, I called and told her I said, "You know yeah its Nevada's drug czar talking." She said, "I tell you what, you know Saturday's coming." I said, "Yeah." She said, "Well if you don't get over here and cut the grass," 'cause my father [Ramadan's stepfather, Flenorte Harris] has deceased then, and wash that car, she said I tell you what I'm gone do." I said, "What?" And she really, I mean it was the wake-up call from the whole day of the, the meeting, she said, "I'll drug your czar if you don't get over here and cut that grass," (laughter). I thought oops, okay here's a reality check again boy. You still the same person that I raised and don't let these titles get to you. So momma's a good--she's a good check there. Story_ID: 314990 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Helping bringing human spirits together. Helping us see our common human personality, our common origin and our common destiny. We see that right there, that's the principle of wholeness, that everything in this universe is connected, and all of us are connected, and we're connected to this universe. It's all there is together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That'll be the high point for me. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you sir. Speaker 2: Thank you...