 Story_ID: 12377 Speaker 1: Okay. So, what year is this? 2002. So, it's probably, probably in 2001. Okay, that is me, Cleo Parker Robinson, and I think that was a year ago, in 2001 probably, a little over a year. Taken in Denver [Colorado]. Speaker 2: [Portrait of Cleo Parker Robinson, Denver, Colorado, 2001. From the collection of Cleo Parker Robinson.] Story_ID: 12378 Speaker 1: And, that is Marceline Freeman, our rehearsal director. And she is in Ron [K.] Brown's piece. This was taken this year--2002--Ron Brown's piece, 'Ebony Magazine: To a Village.' And she's been in our company, going on, thirty years. Isn't that marvelous? She is our rehearsal director. She's awesome! Speaker 2: [Dancer Marceline Freeman performing 'Ebony Magazine: To a Village' for the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble, 2002. Photo by Rose Eichenbaum. From the collection of Cleo Parker Robinson.] Story_ID: 12379 Speaker 1: Oh, and this is Terrell Davis--and not the football player (laughs). Right, right, right, right. He's out of Chicago [Illinois] though. It's funny, 'cause when he came here, and everybody said, "Don't you play for the [Denver] Broncos?" Right. But Terrell is in a work called 'The Coming of Dawn' that we premiered this year, 2002. Speaker 2: [Dancer Terrell Davis performing 'The Coming of the Dawn' for the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble, 2002. From the collection of Cleo Parker Robinson.] Story_ID: 12380 Speaker 1: And this is a duet, and this is Ryan Leveille. Ryan, R-Y-A-N, Leville, L-E-V-I-L-L-E, [sic, Leveille] I think--is that right? Okay, good. And then, that must be--who's upside down? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's Terrell [Davis]. Speaker 1: That must be Terrell Davis. (laughs) And, they're in a work ['Three Too Blue'] by Kristofer Storey--Kristofer Storey. And those were duets. This duet, what is it? Yeah, we premiered that in New York [New York], in--it's the same year, though. We premiered it in August of 2002. I guess it had to be 2001--August, September, October, November, December of 2001. Speaker 2: [Dancers Ryan Leveille and Terrell Davis, performing 'Three Too Blue' for the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble, 2001. From the collection of Cleo Parker Robinson.] Story_ID: 12381 Speaker 1: Now, that is Patrick Peel, P-E-E-L. And, who is that, my child? Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: Let me see? Oh God! Can I bring it close? Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: Uh uh. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: This is Sheila. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Mackow. Sheila Mackow. And, Sheila was in my company last year. And that piece is 'Temple in Motion' by Rosangela Silvestre, out of Brazil--Brazilian choreographer. Speaker 2: [Dancers Patrick Peel and Sheila Mackow performing 'Temple in Motion' for the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble, 2000. From the collection of Cleo Parker Robinson.] Story_ID: 12382 Speaker 1: And, this is our company on the cover of 'Dance [Teacher'] magazine--Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble. And, this was a year--oh, my God, it was--September 2000--okay. Wow. We were celebrating our thirtieth anniversary--that's what we were doing, right. That was fun. Now the child in the middle is in--she's the only black dancer in '42nd Street.' The one in the back is in 'The Lion King.' This one has just joined the Met [American Ballet Theatre at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York]--Siobhain Mosley. (Laughs) So they're all over the place. Speaker 2: Would you like to name them? Speaker 1: Okay, oh yeah. Marceline Freeman is downstage, our rehearsal director--right in front, where you were. Speaker 2: Right here? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Let--let's start here, and move--. Speaker 1: Oh, okay--Leah--Leah isn't in my company now, but, I think she's back in California, and Marceline Freeman is still with the company, she's our rehearsal director for thirty years. Molly Sanchez is dancing here in Denver [Colorado] still. Carlos Venturo is from Peru, and he is now dancing with the Los Angeles [California] Ballet. Randy Brooks, who was with my company for twenty years, is a Pilates director, now--yes. And that's me, Cleo Parker Robinson. And this is Susan Richardson [-Baylon]--in my company thirteen years. Patrick Peel is teaching in New York, and not with my company now. That's Cedric Flynt, and, I think, Cedric was with Donald Byrd [Dance Company]. And, oh, that's my wild one--why do I want--Maryam--Maryam [Myika] Day--she is the only black dancer in '42nd Street' on Broadway [New York]--just joined them. And Siobhain Mosley--Siobhain Mosley--the--that one there--yeah, at the top. Siobhain is just joined the Met ballet. And that one is Sheila Mackow--that's Sheila Mackow, and she is teaching. And, that's Carlos dos Santos, out of Brazil, and he is dancing with 'Dance Brazil' at a major company in New York. Yep! Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)--Lisa? Speaker 1: And where're the--oh! Speaker 2: Because Lisa is--. Speaker 1: Oh no, you know what? That's Sheila Mackow down there, and down here, is--that must be--. Speaker 2: Is it Brigette? Speaker 1: Brigette Dunn--Brigette Dunn, and Brigette Dunn's dancing in 'The Lion King.' There you go. Okay! Woo-woo! Speaker 2: [Cleo Parker Robinson (center) with her dance ensemble on the cover of 'Dance Teacher' magazine; (L. to R.): Leah, Marceline Freeman, Sheila Mackow, Molly Sanchez, Carlos Venturo, Randy Brooks, Cleo Parker Robinson, Susan Richardson-Baylon, Patrick Peel, Cedric Flynt, Maryam Myika Day, Brigette Dunn, Siobhain Mosley, and Carlos dos Santos Jr., September 2000. From the collection of Cleo Parker Robinson.] Story_ID: 12383 Speaker 1: Now, this is work--a gift that Carlos dos Santos gave me on my thirtieth anniversary, and it's called 'Thinking Heart'. And that's where I dance a solo. And Carlos is right in the front, he's the choreographer--Carlos dos Santos, out of Brazil--Bahia. And, Randy Brooks is on the--your--right, and he was with my company twenty years. And, this is Jacob Mora out of Denver [Colorado]--he's in back, directly behind Randy; and Carlos Venturo is from Peru, and he's--he's also in that photograph--great! Look at me, trying to remember all these chil'ren. Speaker 2: [Members of the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble performing 'Thinking Heart'; (Front row, L. to R.:): Carlos dos Santos Jr. and Randy Brooks; (Back row, L. to R.): Jacob Mora and Carlos Venturo, 2000. From the collection of Cleo Parker Robinson.] Story_ID: 12384 Speaker 1: This is--oh, Terrell Davis, again, with Lisa Thomas. And, they're--this was this year--2002--in Ron [K.] Brown's piece that he created for the company, that now other companies do. His company does it, but he created it five years ago. But this is called 'Ebony Magazine: To a Village'--there we go. Yes! Speaker 2: [Dancers Terrell Davis and Lisa Thomas performing 'Ebony Magazine: To a Village' for the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble, 2002. Photo by Rose Eichenbaum. From the collection of Cleo Parker Robinson.] Story_ID: 12385 Speaker 1: This is our Rachael--Rachael Ashley. R-A-C-H-E-L, Ashley. H--I mean H----A-S-H-E-L-E-Y [sic, Rachael Ashley]. And, she is doing the choreography of one of my dancers, Nejla Yatkin, from Egypt--Egyptian and Turkish dancer, wonderful choreographer--doing 'Salome's Daughters.' And most of these photos are done by Rose Eichenbaum, who is a--an--a photographer for 'Dance' magazine. Speaker 2: [Dancer Rachael Ashley performing 'Salome's Daughters' for the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble, ca. 1998. Photo by Rose Eichenbaum. From the collection of Cleo Parker Robinson.] Story_ID: 12386 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, and observing is--. Speaker 2: Alexis Weltland. Speaker 1: Alexis Weltland, right Speaker 2: Wonderful. Speaker 1: Miss, could--could you state your name, and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Okay. Cleo, C-L-E-O, Parker, P-A-R-K-E-R, without a hyphen, Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Could you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Yes, seven, seventeen, forty-eight [July 17, 1948], Denver, Colorado. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: U.S.A. (laughs). Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, I wish I could. What is it? June the--I mean July the--. Speaker 1: June--. Speaker 2: June. What day is it? Speaker 1: June 21st--. Speaker 2: June 21st--June 21st, 2002. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Today is--oh my God, the summer solstice. Speaker 1: Yeah, where are we? Speaker 2: Oh, we're in Denver--we're in Denver, Colorado--yes. Where? At the Doubletree [Hotel]. Story_ID: 12387 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is cheesecake (laughs). I like cheesecake, you know. Oh, I don't know. I'm supposed to say salad, or something like that--I'm sure, but--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No, really it's--it's--. Okay, what's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue, you know--actually, it isn't. I will tell you. I like two colors. I like purple and I like orange--those two colors. So, I go back and forth--those two colors. But, I said blue first, because it's the color of Yemaya--Yemaya--the [African] goddess of the sea, so I like that one. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think summer. You know, I like it--I like it to be hot--love it. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, no. But anywhere near the water, near the ocean, is perfect for me. You know, I just came back from the Bahamas and I liked that. That was special. Hawaii--okay. Hawaii is the best place. That's the best place if you're gonna go somewhere--it's Hawaii, okay (laughs). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I think I--if I'm really moved by something, I say, "That's really deep." "That's really deep." [author, poet] Maya Angelou uses it now. Yeah, she likes to use it--we go, "Girl, that is deep!" We do that (laughs). Story_ID: 12388 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you some questions about your background. You say you were born in Denver [Colorado]? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: In 1948. Could you tell us something about your mother and father? Give us their names, first. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then, tell us something about their backgrounds, and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The background of your family. Speaker 2: Yes. My mother, Martha Mae Parker--I guess, it was Martha Mae Roberts before she married. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: M-A-R-T-H-A, M-A-E, and then, Parker: P-A-R-K-E-R; maiden name was Roberts: R-O-B-E-R-T-S. And Mama is out of San Diego, [California]. Her heir--her--her background is that her family came--they--they were developers. They did a lot of development. And brothers worked on the sea, and--but her stepfather was a major inventor and developer. And--and that was pretty amazing, 'cause her mother was really a sweet woman, and very, very small, and loved to fish for sharks in the sea, and, you know, would always show me these marvelous photographs of, of, of fishing with huge marlin. And she'd be this small little woman, and I'd say, "How in the world did she ever, you know, pull anything out of the sea, like that?" But, just a sweetie pie, Mama--and, and my grandfather--he was--he developed a lot of Waikiki [Beach, Honolulu, Hawaii]--the condos, that we see, are the new development that--that made up the new Honolulu. So that was kind of interesting--mother and father, very different. Story_ID: 12389 Speaker 1: Father is Jonathon Parker: J-O-N-A--J-O-N-A-T-H-O-N, Jonathon; Parker: P-A-R-K-E-R, out of Texarkana, Arkansas. And his father was a laborer, and--out of the South. And I went and lived with grandparents. I'm named after my grandmother--Mama Cleo; she's an amazing woman. Ninety this year [2002], and, just deep, you know, just strong--all these strong women, and--and family members. So, it's--so they--so they come from very different--different places; but they met in Denver [Colorado]. Both my mother [Martha Mae Parker] and father were musicians. And my mother was in the San Diego Symphony [San Diego, California] as a very young child. She was--I always call her child prodigy. At the age of about twelve, she was with--studying with the symphony and doing some workshops, and playing. She came to Denver [Colorado] with her family. She was playing music and went through Denver University [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] band room, and my father was in the band room. And he was playing--I think, like, I always wanna say saxophone, but I think it was something like trumpet. And they met then, fell in love, and--and decided to--she decided that she was going to date him--he was nineteen. She was like twenty-two or twenty-three, or something like that--she was older. And in those days, blacks and whites didn't come together at all. And it was heavy-duty segregation. She knew nothing about that--and they were young. I don't think they even understood what racism was all about--father did, a little more. But--so, they dated, and they--and they dated in Denver. So the historic area of Five Points [Denver, Colorado] was a very critical place--that's where they met. And--and, that's where there was a little more tolerance for people of different colors coming together, because that's where music was played--jazz was played there. So that's a historic place for us. And so they met, and somehow, she convinced him that--that she wanted to marry him. And he brought her home to his family, and that was it. So--but, their marriage was always very strained because of boundaries--physical boundaries, in Denver about where blacks could go, where whites could go, and so on. So, when I--I was the first-born of four children. And, I remember Daddy always saying, you know, "The coppers [police] are--are following us." And he would say, "Don't worry about it." He said, "You know, we're a--we're as important as the President of the United States. That's why we got folks following us." You know, so we were used to being followed and all kinds of--kinds of things. We'd go into restaurants and wouldn't be served, and hotels and wouldn't be served, and all kinds of thing. And, Daddy was--they--they were both really strong advocates for, you know, equal rights, all the time. You know, so they became very involved in the early days in that kind of movement here in Denver. And so, between the music world, and the social political world that I was in, I was in a very rich world right in Denver--it was wonderful. It was quite--quite marvelous. Story_ID: 12390 Speaker 1: Did they talk about their--their grandparents, and, you know, any--? Speaker 2: You know, they--they didn't talk about their grandparents too much. Although, I think, my, my mother's [Martha Mae Parker] family are Piersons, P-I-E-R-S-O-N. And they were real pioneers of the West. And so, I think maybe, one of them was a mayor of Colorado--one of the very small cities. And so, they were pioneers as well. Daddy [Jonathon Parker] talks a little bit more about his family in terms of knowing that--that we must have had Native American background. You know, that--between blacks and-- and the Indians-we--we know that he was always interested in the black cowboy and telling that story. So, he wrote about that, and did plays about it, and was always interested in--in finding out more about that history. He also feels like his mother must have been out of the Caribbean--that she must have--even though she was in Texarkana, Arkansas--she seemed rooted in--in some of the mysteries of the Caribbean and--and the power of that--of that area. And so I think she was Jamaican. So I always felt--he always had a Jamaican accent--feeling that that must have been some of his history. But he didn't know his grandparents. You know, I did--I knew mine. But--but my grandfather didn't really know his--his grandparents, and--and always felt a real sense of loss, and disconnect, because of it, you know--kind of a pain, you know, an internal kind of--like a longing to really know more. But never anybody sharing that kind of interest in it, you know. So, you know, always wanting to know more. Speaker 1: Okay, so, you're the product of a mixed marriage? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 12391 Speaker 1: Do you have any brothers or sisters, or--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I do. Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings, in--in--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, sure. Speaker 1: In birth order, and--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 1: Let us know where you fall in that--? Speaker 2: Okay. I'm the first child of four. My sister--no, let me see--my brother, John Whalon Parker; John:-J-O-H-N, and Whalon: W-A--W--W-H-A-L-O-N. Whalon, he was named after my grandfather. And so, my father, being John [Jonathon Parker], and my grandfather, being Whalon, he was named after my father and my grandfather. And so he was the second one, and they called him, you know, Junior, sometimes, John Whalon, Junior. And, Suzie--Leslie Sue was the third child. And, we were all two years apart--I don't know if they--this, you know, family planning, or whatever--we were two years exactly. And then, my youngest brother, Randall Belafonte Parker. I named him after Belafonte, because my father was an actor--he became an actor. And so, [actor] Sidney Poitier and [musician, actor] Harry Belafonte were his two role models, so we just knew, you know, that he had to be a Belafonte. So the four of us--my brother, who was next to me, two years younger, died in his sleep. He was an athlete--we were all athletes, and musicians, and dancers. But he--awesome athlete and musician and--and, wonderful, extraordinary human. He was a--he was a preacher. He was a minister when he died--he died in his sleep at the age of nineteen. So, that was a major event in our house and our home, it just kind of like, shook the foundation--that--that a child would die before the parents. So he--he died in his sleep and that was a--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Was he--was he sick? Speaker 2: No, uh uh. He was very healthy, and he just kind of had a massive heart attack. So, we didn't realize that he had a heart condition. So, I think, many of us--I mean, I almost died at--at the age of ten--that was a major turn, in my life--at the age of ten with a heart attack. So, we've had that kind of heart thing going. Story_ID: 12392 Speaker 1: Now tell me, what it was like growing up. Your--your father [Jonathon Parker] and mother [Martha Mae Parker], did they--did they continue to--as musicians, or--? Speaker 2: Well, my mother, as soon as she started having a family, we--you know, that--their history was that they, of course, fell in love. My father's family wanted him so much, to be a doctor. He would be the first black doctor in the family, you know, the first doctor. And, they--this was very important. There was no one who had gone to college, really. And so it was real important that he had this place in--in the society, you know. So, he went to Denver University [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] to study to be a doctor. But as soon as he met Mama in the music world, they then had to work. And, he worked at a packinghouse, like Cudahy--Cudahy Packing House [sic, Cudahy Packing Company]. And, the two of them worked, and as soon as they found out that they were married, they fired--they said they had to fire one or the other one, so fired Mama. And she then became the homemaker. And she--she worked then in--in the [National] Farmers Union. And so, there were unions that she worked in. But stopped her music training, and--and, all of that--always stayed in love with music--all kinds of music. And, Daddy stayed in love with jazz--Mama stayed in love with classical music; so we had those two worlds going on in--all the time, it was really amazing. It was fabulous, you know. Really, we got to hear everything all the time. And then, of course, we'd be in Five Points [Denver, Colorado], because, when I was born, their apartment was in a doctor's home in--in an apartment overseeing--it was over the Rossonian, and that's one of the famous clubs in Denver--like in Harlem [New York, New York]. So, they had an apartment above the Rossonian [Hotel, Denver, Colorado] club. And the club had people like--everybody in the world who came in and played, you know--[musician] Billie Holiday and [musician] Bessie Smith would come; and Jimmy Smith on piano; and everybody. So--so Daddy stayed with the jazz, in terms of his love for music, but he became an actor by chance. Story_ID: 12393 Speaker 1: He [Parker's father Jonathon Parker] became--well--there weren't any jobs for--for blacks in theater in Denver [Colorado]. So, he was really the first black actor here. So, that was really amazing. But he became an actor by working as maintenance--as a janitor in the theater--in the [Helen] Bonfils Theatre, when I was very young. And so--. Speaker 2: At what theater? Speaker 1: At the Bonfils, B-O-N-F-I-L-S. So, he was the first--well, he was a janitor. And, in those days, blacks went through the back door, we went through the back. And so, you never saw anyone of any color coming through the front door. And that was an amazing experience because we didn't--we were wondering why we were always going to the back door. But then, we never felt like we were not privileged. We felt like we were more privileged because by going through the back door, we saw everything. People who went through the front door only saw what you were supposed to see. Going through the back door, we saw it all! And, we went, "Front door, forget it!" You know, we felt like we could be inside the crevices of places that nobody even would go. You know, it was magic! There was much more magic. And we saw how magic was created. So, he became passionate about theater and I grew up in it. I grew up in the theater. And that was probably the most magical time in my life--was just as I was thirteen--twelve--thirteen, I had just come back from Dallas, Texas, having a very traumatic experience, living in the South, where it was very segregated. Even in Denver [Colorado], the segregation wasn't so great where you--because we didn't have such a large black population, so you couldn't--you couldn't see where the discrimination was as much. But, when--when we went to the South, where there was such a larger black population, it was a powerful experience for me; so I almost died. Story_ID: 12394 Speaker 1: So coming to Denver [Colorado]--back to Denver from Dallas [Texas], reuniting with my father [Jonathon Parker]--because we weren't with him for two years while we were in Dallas. His first job--he had to then stop everything, and get a job and feed us. So, that was at the [Helen] Bonfils Theatre [Denver, Colorado] and that's where my history began there. Because from that point on, that theater became the place where my father would become an actor. He would become--he would learn all about the technical aspects of theater. He read about the electricity, about how lights were created, about--everything about theater. He would build sets, he would--he would do it all. And then later, he would create--create my own theater--I would build my theater [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Theatre] later. But in the early days, after I started my own company, that theater would be where my--my company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble] would showcase. So then we became a major company in that theater. Story_ID: 12395 Speaker 1: Let's go back to--to when you were a child. Can you tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells and growing up, in Denver [Colorado] and, I guess, in Dallas [Texas]?. 'Cause you-you--you grew up in both of these places. Speaker 2: Wow! Well, Denver, you know, we thought we were poor. But I've been around the world, and I know what poor is, and I know what poverty is. But we thought we were poor--but, we really weren't. Working-class people, but because of that, we were with people of all different backgrounds and cultures. And, you know, down there near Five Points [Denver, Colorado], it was the most integrated area. And I think my parents [Jonathon Parker and Martha Mae Parker] were work--were connected to--a union which was for working-class people. And so therefore, there were blacks and Chicanos and Asians and Jewish people, and people who were gay, and it was this tremendous mixture. So I remember all the time, people being invited to our home. Our home was probably the most wonderful place because we didn't have like, fancy furniture, or anything that was--we weren't into any kind of materialism--didn't have anything, but we had this--this sense of community that was wonderful. Because people would come and dance, and sing, and we would party all the time. It was always a gathering. And we would hear, you know, like if we were hearing Joe Louis [boxer], you know, the big fight on the radio, or, you know. Then we'd turn down the radio, if there was like a commercial and we'd turn up the music, and we'd dance. And then, we'd turn it down, and then, we would hear where it was then. Story_ID: 12396 Speaker 1: Now when you were groing up there was a lot going on. Speaker 2: Oh, it was just--it was the time. Speaker 1: Are we rolling? Tell us what, what it was--? Speaker 2: Oh, during that time? Speaker 1: Was there a lot of diversity? Speaker 2: Oh! Speaker 1: A lot of different kinds of people. Speaker 2: Yeah! Speaker 1: Your parents' house was open to everybody. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was--it was--there was, at that--it felt open. Only certain areas, I mean, we were not--we didn't go into areas that were--didn't--I mean, now, I'm learning, that we were in--we, we created our own kind of world. You know, that was part of what took place. I mean, my--my parents [Jonathon Parker and Martha Mae Parker] wanted to live like that. They had a tremendous value for people, and--and story time, and, and sharing, and cooking, and, you know, being. And so, we were really--and, individuality--people felt like they were individuals, you know. So, we didn't--I mean, there was no name calling, you didn't call somebody a this or a that, or a anything. Because, we just felt like that's the way all folks were--they all came together, like that, you know. Story_ID: 12397 Speaker 1: Did you ever feel stigmatized for having a--a--a white mother [Martha Mae Parker] and black father [Jonathon Parker], or did any, anybody, you know--? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I think, it was confusing after I went to Dallas [Texas]. It wasn't confusing up to then because, it--it was rather natural. It was interesting, I mean, all four of us would be in the, in the car. Yeah--I remember one of the--what did we have? Like a Studebaker [brand of car], and then, we'd have, like the Chevys [Chevrolet, brand of car]--Daddy [Jonathon Parker] wasn't a Ford [brand of car] man, he was a Chevy man. So, the old Chevys with the four doors, and then the--you know, the runways, where you put your foot on it, before you get in the car. And, we'd open up the back seat, and he could get all four of us in the back seat. Well, sometimes, when we'd see a black man with a white woman, we would look back--be like, "What is that?" Because that's what people would do to our parents. They were always looking like, "That's strange!" So, if we saw it, we were looking too. I--I don't know why but that's what--you know, it was like it was a rare thing. So, even though, I think, Denver [Colorado] was rather--there was probably more tolerance for mixed marriages. They had to go to four different states to get married. They could not get married in Denver. And--and they had to go to Wyoming--couldn't get married there. They went to--I don't know the next state--Utah. And then they ended up in Mexico. And even after they married there, they had to sleep in two separate rooms married. And, I remember Mama [Martha Mae Parker] talking about--you know, I mean, Daddy was always connected to Hispanic people, but, he spoke a little Spanish and he heard them talking about coming into Mama's room and raping her. So, she--you know, Daddy had to--on the night of their wedding in Mexico, get a man who was coming through the--you know, how they have the openings in the--the doors, where they have the opening at the top? Speaker 1: The transom [window]--the--? Speaker 2: Right, right. He had to get this man, and, and wear him out. Story_ID: 12398 Speaker 1: So, Daddy [Jonathon Parker] has always been a warrior--I mean, a man who had to be a warrior, a chief. So, we, we've been always aware of that. I mean he's a smaller man; they call him 'Red', 'cause he's kind of a light skinned black. And, and so, you know, dealing with color issues all the time. But, he was always about--he was gonna be where he wanted to be with his family. He wasn't gonna ever back down. So, in growing up in Denver [Colorado], we, we liked to travel. He loved the mountains and he loved to be anywhere, that freedom. But, oftentimes, if we drove through the mountains, and got to a city in the dark--we didn't get into cities in the dark because that was always a problem, you know. I mean, so, there was always this energy of real freedom and spirit and open space and then there would be this reality check. We might not be able to go there because, you're not so sure--first of all, if you're gonna be welcome but, also, it was dangerous, you know. So, we were always aware of two things, danger, and how we had to protect each other. And sometimes we had to tell stories. You know, we had to say--if we were coming into a town, Daddy, maybe--Mama [Martha Mae Parker] would say, "Well, listen, we have to have a place to stay. We can't sleep in the car. So, I'm going to go in and I'll just say I'm here without, without anybody, you know, I'm here with just four, four kids and, I don't have a husband. And then, we'll let you in the back door." Daddy said, "You are crazy! I'm not going through anybody's back door." And so--but some--but that was the tension, the tension of knowing that, "Well, are we gonna sleep somewhere, or are we not? And, do we have to lie, and get through it this way? Or do we--," you know. So, we were always as a family talking openly as much as I think they could at that time--of what were the pros and cons of protecting the family. But, I think in Denver, you know, we had our issues, because the [Ku Klux] Klan was here. I mean the--Stapleton [Colorado] was named after the grand dragon. So, so, the Klan was very prominent and so we didn't--we also knew we couldn't buy in certain areas. You just, you just didn't. And, you couldn't cross Colfax [Street]. But, Daddy was crossing it all the time. And then, the policemen got to know him, they'd go, "Oh, oh. Don't, don't, don't mess with that brother," you know. So, Daddy would like that, that he had a real rapport with the police, 'cause they got to know that they couldn't--they weren't gonna mess with him--he wasn't going--he wasn't dangerous. He wasn't gonna do anything but, he wasn't going to change his ways. So, 'cause he was clear. So, for me, he became, kind of, a Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], or a, or a--more a Paul Robes--a Paul Robeson. For me, that's who he was. Because, he--that, that's who, that's who he modeled his life after. And, and he educated Mama all the time, 'cause she was like--she was very bright, but, came from an area that just wasn't as aware, you know. But she was such an open spirit, you know. She was always like, "Well, Daddy if, if you're angry about what the system has done, then, what, what did they do?" You know, "What did the man do?" You know, and he'd talk about white people, all of the time (laughs). So--and then, we'd be like, "Well, is Mama white? 'Cause, she looks white." You know, so, it was that kind of dynamics that was absolutely wonderful, growing up in, and talking about all the time. So, I think, in terms of dealing with Mama and Daddy, I was the oldest one, so therefore, I was like, the son, you know, 'cause it's always--you want your first child to be a son. Most men want that. So, I think Daddy [Jonathon Parker] took me everywhere. He showed me off everywhere he could, "This is my daughter. This is my daughter." So, sometimes people say, "Well, did he have any other children? Did he have like--?" I said, "There were four of us." But, because I was the oldest, I--he knew he had to give me everything that he could give me to survive and to make it. And so, I remember Mama said he'd take me to, like-anywhere--anywhere he was. One time he went to the pool hall, and I learned how to play pool very young. You know, 'cause he wanted me to know--never be afraid of any environment. Not, not be intimidated by rich people, or poor people, or prostitutes, or pimps, or anything--to know that that is the world and I'm in it and I belong in it. And I'm no better, but there was nothing to be afraid of. So, he left me in a pool hall, one time. Mama came home--he came home to Mama one night and she said, "Well, how was it?" He said, "We had a ball!" And he said--she said, "Baby, where's Cleo?" And he said, "Oh, my God!" He said, "I left her in the club!" Well, they had already locked it up at Five Points [Denver, Colorado] right. And, they had to call the proprietor, and opened up the place, and I was still sleeping in the, in the club (laughs). So, I was a natural part of wherever he was, and, and that was a wonderful thing. He didn't want to hide anything. There was a certain place of really protecting me, but letting me see everything. He said, "I want you to see it all. I want you to know." You know, "I want you to know about drugs so you never feel like you have to take them. I want you to know about alcohol, so you'll never be an alcoholic." I--so, it was an interesting kind of thing, 'cause we were around that, you know. We were in, in that life, where we were around music. And then, he also said, "I don't want you to ever be an artist, because they're not respected." And so, that was like my challenge. That, that was like--any kid--like, "Hmmm?" So, watching him become an actor, and, and dealing with theater as a young person, was wild. Because, the--what--the famous coffee hour is what we had. We had these famous coffee hours, no matter--we didn't drink coffee, but, when Daddy [Jonathon Parker] says, "We're gonna have a 'coffee hour." That meant, everybody stopped, and we were going to go over the script. We're going to talk about these characters, and we're going to hear who they are, and we're going to see how real they are. Story_ID: 12399 Speaker 1: Now, he [father, Jonathon Parker] was in theater, basically--? Speaker 2: He became--yeah, he became an actor. And in those days, there weren't any roles for black actors. So, he was playing these roles, which were very stereotypical. And then, he would talk about them. He'd say, "Now, you know what?" He'd say, "Martha, listen. Do you see--? Now the--now, now, the butler is coming in, and now, now, that doesn't make sense. The, the butler comes in, in the middle of this party." And, and, and, he says, "And the butler leaves, and we don't ever see him again." And he said, "Now you know these folks are drinking." "Now is it now--," and, and he would then analyze the play and analyze a particular part and then say what made sense or didn't make sense. And so he became almost like, you know you wouldn't even have to be in the theater and there would be magic going on. Magic, right then. And he'd wake us up at any hour, any hour of the morning. And, Mama [Martha Mae Parker] would say, "Sweetie, they got to go to school tomorrow morning." He'd say, "No, baby, they have--this is part of their education. This is a part of their education. That--school is what they have to do." So, we would sit up around the table at night, one or two [o'clock] in the morning and he'd pour coffee, or pour--we, we'd act like we were having coffee--he'd call us, you know. And we'd sit, and, and he would do a role. And, he'd say, "Now Mama, what do you think about that? Now, I'm gonna do it again--now, I'm gonna do it this way." So, it was really wonderful, to see us--we became his audience and his critics. So, so then we began to find out about [playwright] Ed Bullins. And he started doing underground theater because, blacks--there was no theater for blacks. So he created one of the first black theaters and that was exciting. Speaker 1: He created a, a comp--a company, here in--here in Denver [Colorado]? Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right. And even though--. Speaker 1: What was the name of the company? Speaker 2: He would--it was at the Green Spider. It was the--it was--it was--the theater company. He created it at the Green Spider and I can't remember the name of the theater group. But it was--it was underground and, it might have been called the Underground Theater at that point, 'cause it--. Speaker 1: About what time did this, this happen? Speaker 2: It was in the early '60s [1960s], late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s], you know. And it was wonderful stuff. But it was too scary, because many times, it was hard to tell what was real and what was, you know, what was not. It was hard to find that line between reality and the stage. Story_ID: 12400 Speaker 1: What plays would they [Jonathon Parker's theater company] do? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, I remember, I was introduced to one of the great--I mean, he would do everything, from musicals to, you know--he loved everything. There was nothing that he didn't want to touch, 'cause he was hungry, you know. And I learned to be hungry like that. But, some of those powerful pieces--I mean he was starting to do 'Finian's Rainbow' and stuff like that, where those were stereotypical roles. The butler, or the clown, or the, you know. And he said, you know, "We're so tired of playing clowns." He said, "But we can play a clown, now but we're tired of playing them." So, he would then write his own. But one of the plays was 'Blood Knot' by Athol Fugard, about the white and black South African half brothers. And that play, I think, had such a powerful effect on me, that later I created a, a piece about South Africa based upon that experience. And then, I went to South Africa and worked. But, I remember--what I loved the pathos, the pathos about seeing him work like this is that he, he had certain attitudes and anger about how blacks were treated in this country and that was very clear. And yet, he knew, he was about making change that he couldn't stay in his place of anger. But he wasn't always sure how to work that out, you know. But, it happened in the theater, that became very powerful. Because I remember in 'Blood Knot', he'd get so angry at his brother that--his brother, who was white, and, and, he's black and they're, they're mixed. He has all of these privileges in South Africa. And, he, being the half brother, cannot have a card and he has no past that he could--he has no freedom. And, and the way in which he is treated is absolutely bizarre. And that they get so angry, that he--that they fight. And, they have this physical fight on stage, where he almost kills him. And, I remember, that he broke that man's clavicle or something--he broke the man's--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The other actor? Speaker 2: Yes, the other actor. And, later they'd have coffee, you know at some point. And, I'd hear Jack Casperson saying, "Man, you tried to kill me for real on stage! Didn't you?" And, he said, "I did!" And he said, "It got away from me, you know, and I have to make sure that I don't let the theater--I mean, I have to make sure the theater stays on the stage and where I am, you know, get--work through in a way that's proper." And then, they became best friends. I mean, they would laugh about that. And I would see those kinds of things. I mean they became best friends. But at first, when they started working, doing the roles, they were--they really were a white man and a black man. They really were. And when they finished, they became brothers. And I was able to experience that as a child and I knew that was magic. Story_ID: 12401 Speaker 1: But I want to go back to when you were ten years old and you had a--you had a heart attack, right? Can you tell us about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, I don't know it's a very strange thing. I think there's a number of things that, that, that took place. So many, you know, and I look at young people now. I think that's why I'm so committed to them. Because you look at them and they look kind of whole, but if you really check out what's going on in their minds there's so many--especially now, I mean, we're looking at 9/11 [World Trade Center and Pentagon terrorist attacks, September 11, 2001]. We're looking at so many--we're looking at Israel--I just came out of Israel--they're seeing this stuff on CNN [Cable News Network] all the time. We're not asking them how this is really is affecting them. And a child is so impressionable, and, and so much that they can create their own illness. And that's how I'm really aware of--more of my, my philosophy about self-healing, and so on, is about being aware of what's giving you pain. But when I went to Dallas [Texas], my mother [Martha Mae Parker] woke up one morning, and she just said, "Well, kids, get in the station wagon," that Chevy [Chevrolet] station wagon, "--and we're going to be taking a trip." And, we all got in it and down the road awhile, we said, "Where is Daddy [Jonathon Parker]?" Now, with a family that has been that close, and that directed by such a, a leader, for him not to be with us, didn't make sense. So, she said, "Well, Daddy won't be coming with us." "Well, what do you mean, Daddy's is not coming with us'?" "Well, he may be joining us later." Well, two years later, is when we saw Daddy, so that was deep. So, so, so, I think, psychologically, for that--for my connection with my father, and for that separation to take place, and for no one to be able to tell me. They couldn't tell me. No one, I mean, no one could say why. Story_ID: 12402 Speaker 1: Have you ever found out [about the two-year separation from your father]? Speaker 2: You know, I think, they've [Jonathan Parker and Martha Mae Parker] tried to hint at it, but, you know, there's those moments in life, where they think, "No, this one, you probably don't need to know about." You know, but we always knew that black men were picked up and put in jail all the time. And then later, like, "Oh, that--it didn't even look like you." So, we think that's what took place, which made him very--that's why, when we then, saw him, he was even more angry than the time before. He already had an edge to him. But after that, there was this--there was bitterness, you know. So, thank God, there was the theater 'cause he worked through all that. I'm glad he didn't kill anybody on stage (laughs) but he had to work through that. But--so, in Dallas [Texas], that separation immediately, and also, being in the community where blacks and whites, and--like I said--I mean, I had a boyfriend who was Japanese. I had a boyfriend who was--who was Mexican, and, I mean, you know, Manuel Martinez. And, I mean, we all grew up together, and so, that what it was. But, going into the South, I didn't see any black--I didn't see any white people, ever again. I saw no Chicanos, I saw no Asians. I saw just blacks. And, I knew I was black, but, but I was a light-skinned black. I was, I was, then, a level of blackness and whatever that meant. I got to understand our, our high--our own hierarchy of blackness and what that was. And at the same time, white people were the enemy. They became 'the enemy,' and there I was with my mother [Martha Mae Parker] who was clearly white to me, in a all-black community, with white people being the enemy. Now, that was deep. Now, that was deep. So, here I am, with a mother I love, who I know is mother, and in a community where you fear white people, and you better, if you have any sense, you better fear them. You better know what they can do to you. So, that was outrageous. Story_ID: 12403 Speaker 1: Then, I went to a Catholic school with white nuns. Now that was outrageous. So, if you're going to fear white people, except, honor the white nuns, there's all these extraordinary discrepancies going on in a child's mind. But, I'm checking it out now. I am like, I'm reading it, I'm like, "Mm-hmm, mm-hm, mm-hm." What we supposed to do with all this? This is a mess. (Laughs) It's a mess. And went to a Methodist church, which I felt was Baptist. I don't care, they call it the Methodist--I know it was Baptist! It felt Baptist. Every day, every night. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: You know, that's right, every day and night. And Catholic school in the day, at--where, in the black community they're talking about the, the, the fathers they're gonna get and the nuns not giving them the reverence, but knowing they're the best teachers you're gonna get. Speaker 2: What was the name of the school? Speaker 1: St. Anthony's [Elementary School, Dallas, Texas]. I went to St. Anthony's. And at that time, it was an extraordinary thing because, I excelled. I was--I mean--I--the--I, I was an A student and, I was an A plus student and, I was an A plus plus student and, you know. I mean, that's all that was important to me, at--you have to be the best, the best, the best, the best. You know, like that. And, I had to be a role model because what it took for us to get in that school was major 'cause we couldn't go to school. That's what the first shock was--is that there was no school that would admit us. Speaker 2: Not even in the black community? Speaker 1: Not at first, because my white mother was taking us. So we then found out, Mama [Martha Mae Parker] couldn't go with us anywhere. We had to have my grandparents [Mama Cleo and Granddaddy Whalon] take us. So, if, if that was the case that we had black grandparents that we could--we could possibly go. But, we couldn't have, like, Mama take us. So, that that separation, a little bit, from Mama, was pretty amazing. Speaker 2: Did the school administration feel like there'd be retaliation from the white community if they admitted a--? Speaker 1: I just think segregation just messed with people so bad. I think people lied all the time, and finagled, and, you know. I mean, they did whatever they had to do 'cause I'm sure there were all kinds of mixtures of everybody, but people weren't dealing with that. But, I mean we really--we were in a very segregated community, very segregated. I was in (unclear). I've gone back to visit since then. And, it's been a--I mean I was honored there just, just recently. And to go back! And I went back to St. Anthony's and, I went into the parking lot with Anne Williams who runs the black dance company there Dallas Black Dance Theatre, [Dallas, Texas]. I sat there and I went, "This, this is the area where one day it was raining," and I had two girlfriends. One very dark and, one a little lighter and there I was in the middle. And we were--we just knew it was the end of the world because, when it rained like that, and the tornados happened, it was some powerful weather. And, and, and we were going from the school part into the chapel, and one of the--one of--I think it was Jessie, she wanted to choke me with my rosary. She was choking me with my rosary. And I said now that's, now that's deep (laughs). She was like--she just was--whatever, you know, I mean, whatever jealousies we would have, or whatever--whatever had conflict with somebody being this light, you see. And then, my other girlfriend was, kind of, protecting me. Tonya, who finally moved here. And so, we were having this--they both were my girlfriends, but there was some kind of something going on. It was like, whoa! And I remember the nuns came out and just beat us all. And I said, "I didn't have nothing to do with that." I'm being choked with my rosary, and then, the nuns gone beat me. Now, you know that's deep. So, I--it was those kinds of interesting moments, and, I think, they were difficult to handle, difficult. And so, one morning, I just woke up, and I had nephritis. My kidneys shut down. My kidneys just stopped. And, and I also saw so much. I saw a lot. I feel like the innocence of childhood had been taken then 'cause I had seen everything by then. I had seen all kinds of stuff, you know. Story_ID: 12404 Speaker 1: So you didn't have a heart attack, you had a--what was? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, but going to the hospital, again, trying to be admitted--where--what to do with this child that they don't know what to do with, you know, what to do with, you know. "You're not black. Yes, you are black. Yes, of course, you're black. You're black." Now, you come into a black hospital, "No, you don't look black. Now, is that your mother [Martha Mae Parker]? Is that your--is that the white mother?" So, I think it was a little bit of that confusion of where to go and what to do, during segregation that then the nephritis, then, went into a heart attack. And so, that's--see, it, it's in that time frame of, of--I didn't start with heart disease. But then, I found out that I had--I had a, a, a, a murmur--heart murmurs and that kind of thing. So, I stayed in the hospital, up there, for a while, in the hospital. And, they thought-and, and, I also was in St. Anthony's Hospital [Dallas, Texas]. It was kind of wild. It was an interesting thing, going back there. Speaker 1: How long were you hospitalized? Speaker 2: I mean, I think, I--'cause I remember, at some point, I was doing my, my grades, my studying there. I was, you know, you know, and, and we don't remember all of these things so, so, precisely--but, maybe it was, you know weeks, not months or years, or anything like that. But I remember a passage of, of dying, of leaving, you know. And--but, my grandparents [Mama Cleo and Granddaddy Whalon] were there praying, and so, I--so that was one of those exciting things about the creative mind that you can be in about two or three places at the same time. You really can be present, and you can be in another, in another realm, and you can be in those kinds of passages. So, that was kind of wild. I, I think, what I always remember, is that this huge marvelous light--going to the light. And then, being kind of forced to make a decision--the will, that part we call will, like, "Do I want to really be up in here, with all this madness that don't make sense? Or do I want to be there, where it seems much more blissful?" So, I know I was moving towards the light (laughs). I was moving towards the light, you know. But, I think grandparents, and Mama, you know; everybody was praying like mad, and came on back. And then, the doctors said that I would be bedridden and that I wouldn't be a normal child, and I could never be physical. And, I was like this, "I'm going back to where I just saw!" You know, like, you tell a child they can never be physical, they'd be bedridden. So a part of me said, "Well then, if my life, every amenity is like, on the edge of death, then I might as well dance on the edge. I think I really did that, I mean, you know. So, now, I've danced on the edges of volcanoes, and danced on mountains, and, you know, that--I mean, I just--on the edge. Speaker 1: Really! Speaker 2: I mean truly. Speaker 1: You're talking about physically on the edge? Speaker 2: I mean, I have! I've danced on the edge! I've danced on the edge, all the time now. 'Cause you figure--I mean, when I did Angela Davis [in 'Run Sister Run'] for ten years, I mean, I created a role for myself that was horrible, where I would get beaten on stage, and I went, "I'm not into S and M." But, I knew what she had experienced and I wanted an audience to know that--to know what her real experience was. And, in order to do that, you're on the edge, you know, you're--you're on the edge. Story_ID: 12405 Speaker 1: And, you said that at the age of ten you had a watershed on your life, that time when you kind of crossed over a line. Can you speak to that, and, you know, what you think about--? Speaker 2: I think something--I mean, there was--these are all surreal kinds of things. I mean when you're that young, eleven, going into, you know, pre-teens there--that when you have things that are so powerful happen to you like that--where you're near death, you're separated from what makes you feel whole, you're not so sure you wanted to live. I mean, I think that that's kind of what took place. And yet, the dance was the most important for me then, because I stopped talking--believe it or not--I became mute. And I didn't talk. I just danced. I didn't--I didn't because it was just too much--I saw too much, and I also saw death, you know. So I was afraid of death. Now, I'm like, "Well," I also loved death. I--I married it in a--in a way where I went, "Well--death is a part of life. I mean, and, if it's God's will that I go now." So, I became very spiritual--very--very connected to God. I mean, I could see God. I mean, it was like that was deep, you know. I mean, by--my whole spiritual grounding took place at that time. But it was connected to my body. My spirit and body were totally like one. And--and yet, I couldn't speak. Now, my voice was not a part of all that yet. So I think now I'm coming into this, like--like now I'm fifty-three, you know, fifty-four, I'm going into my--oh! Mind, body, spirit, voice are all coming together. It takes a long time, you know, it was a long time to unite all of that. But I think at that time, I let my body speak for me. And I also saw that where there was conflict--'cause I did see things where I saw, you know--you know, I--I--a sheriff come in, and--and--and shoot a young black in his back, you know. Seeing this kind of thing, and--and knowing that it's not, you know, I mean--this is--this is--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Where was this at? You said it's in the surrounding--? Speaker 2: You know it was just--he must have been wanted for something, I don't know, he must've been a kid that--. Speaker 1: So, where were you? Where--where were you--where? Speaker 2: I was in--I was--kind of--on my road, you know, it was right down the street from me. So we'd see some things like that. And, of course, we--there was a--there was a little place on the street that had--it was--that--we thought it was like a little hotel, but there were plenty of action going on there. So, we were like, "Whoa!" So, this--you know, we were kind of aware of--of lots of different lifestyles, but very extreme. And, we saw young children, you know, dying of--of diseases, and, and we would--you know, rape, and--we'd see a lot of things. So, life became really quite complex. And people weren't necessarily talking about it like you could solve it, they were talking about it like, you know, those were the things that were happening. So I saw a lot of conflict, and I didn't know quite, you know, how to deal with that. And, of course, my--my--my family became very protective of me, you know, like, "We could lose her any time." Because if you could just wake up one morning, and be that ill--close to death, with no preparation of a healthy child--almost like my brother's death, there's no preparation. You can't say, "This child's so sick, so soon they might leave us." It's like--(claps hands) one day (snaps fingers) you could be gone. So, for me then it was about being present in the way I knew, and music was it. The church was it. I could be in church and the music could fill me and make me happy. I don't know if I remembered the sermons--I remember the music. And the music, I mean, people would be getting happy, and I'd be going to the bathroom, moving, and snapping my finger, and they would sit me down, say, "You cannot move like that in church!" And then, I went, "Well, why not? It makes you move like that. It makes you move!" So then, I was like, "Oh, so there's this kind of movement, and there's this kind of movement." And so I began to sort where I could move, and where I couldn't move and how I could move and--and--but I always knew I liked movement. But I also knew that movement and music brought people together. And I saw a lot of conflict, so, it was being together that I really loved--that was--that made me the happiest. You know, and, I'd--Daddy--Grandaddy Whalon would have like a little corner store, and they'd play cards and we'd listen to the jukebox, and I would come in and I'd dance; I loved to dance in there. We'd dance, and I'd jitterbug with my grandfather. So, it felt like my father [Jonathon Parker], 'cause I danced with my father. So it was like, "Whoa! These are my roots," you know, so I felt rooted and connected on one level, and yet as soon as you've left that comfort zone, it was like, "Uh-oh! Can we take the bus across town?" "No, you don't want to get across town." So, it's all of that. Story_ID: 12406 Speaker 1: So, never thought I'd go back to Dallas [Texas]. But I got back to Denver [Colorado] and went to an all-white school. I then get reunited with my father [Jonathon Parker]. And we can't get housing in an area that we wanted to get housing in. And, and Daddy realizes that he wants me to go to a school where I focus on my studies and I'm not going to think about social kinds of things. So I end up going to an all-white school, after being in an all-black community--unbelievable! I didn't have anything to say to anybody (laughs). I didn't. Do you think I had to sit--well, I was gonna say that? Not at all, but I became very popular, like the most popular kid in the school. But I didn't say what I felt and I didn't say what I believed, but I knew what to say. I became very skillful. Speaker 2: Well, what kind of things were you feeling then, that you wouldn't say? Speaker 1: At that time, I hated the system, you know. Whatever system created that kind of relationships--unnatural relationships between people. But I didn't know what that meant. And so I knew, in the--in the social world you just go, "I hate the white man!" You know, it's the--you know--but--but you would see white people you knew you didn't--you didn't hate them. But, you then, "What is that? What is that essence?" So, that was--that was an interesting kind of dynamics--that I would become the head girl of my high school, and people didn't really know how I felt 'cause I danced it--I danced what I felt. Story_ID: 12407 Speaker 1: So, did you continue to make great grades in high school [George Washington High School, Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 2: I did very well, you know. But, I was with real scholars. I mean, I was with real academic achievers, where people really--they didn't--they didn't have social lives. You--you--you worried about your SATs [then called Scholastic Aptitude Test] and your--all of your academics, and most of them came from families with doctors and lawyers, and I knew my father [Jonathon Parker] was a janitor. And yet, I knew he was the most magical man I knew. You know, I'd go into people's homes, and they'd have everything, but they didn't have that stuff--they didn't have that--they didn't have the music, and the dance, and the joy, and the--and the conversations, and the stories, and the--so there was a bit of void in--in most of the homes I would be in, most of the time, you know. And wasn't always sure I was welcome, because if I came and I invited somebody else, who was black then, it would be two black folks, and I would be okay, but maybe not more than one or two. I always knew there was that kind of--that social ceiling that I would--I truly understood. But--but--but those kinds of things that came out of traumatic experiences, I began to work through in--in the dance. And so, I think, that was really the theater and the dance, 'cause then you got to play roles that normally you wouldn't play. And I began to be in school shows, and--and then, I always studied medicine--I always studied medicine. I was going to be a doctor--the doctor my father was not able to be 'cause he didn't have that opportunity. So I was gonna do that. So I was in pre-med, and--and then, I got a--a scholarship--the National Science Scholarship, so that I could continue in--in my work as--you know, in medicine. And I went into pre-med, and then, I went in med tech, and all that. But I always knew I wanted to dance. But when I--when Daddy [Jonathon Parker] got back to us, he was saying, "Now you can't be an artist, 'cause our--it--first of all, you have to understand the system that, first of all, artists don't make any money, and they have no respect. And, you're a woman, and you're a second-class citizen. And, you are--black, and so therefore, you are like a third-or fourth-class citizen. And so why choose a profession, that, that will not give you the kind of stature." And, I was like, trying to check all that, and I said, "But, Daddy, you love theater" And I would see the passion. So I went where the passion was, you know. And then, what I think I loved, is changing the way he saw what could happen. That you could really be respected and, and, and, and you could make change within something as simple as the dance. And I think that gave me such joy later, you know, just amazing amount of joy, because he became my technical director. As a matter of fact, in Nigeria, we took--he created a all-woman tech crew so that women would understand the theater--the technical part of theater, and trained them so well. So that was really--I mean, we've had these wonderful places of real joy of celebration, you know, and I think that that's what we all were, were about. Every time we came together it was to talk about, "So what is the perception of it now? Where is it we want to go? How can we get to a place of celebration, you know, how can we get through the struggle?" 'Cause I think we always accepted struggle, and I think I have a hard time with young people, 'cause they won't work so hard, you know. And maybe they look at us, and looking like, "Y'all work too hard--I'm not working that hard," you know. But I've been real blessed over the years. I, I started when I got back in junior high [Hill Middle School, Denver Colorado], I, I found a teacher that was this thing called Modern dance--Modern dance. I went, you know. It's not really the boys are on that side of the room and the girls over here, and then, we'd meet, and we'd do the whatever's popular. But we were able to create whatever it was. And we could take forms: abstract forms, or thoughts and make them very, very real, or, emotions and discover where they are, without hurting someone else, or without hurting ourselves. There was a place of safety in all of that. Story_ID: 12408 Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back to some--something you said earlier. Can you remember the--the moment when you spoke again, after two--two years? What was--what, what--? Speaker 2: Oh! When my speech teacher asked me to make a speech about myself, I thought I would die, absolutely die! And to this day, I, I know she has come up to me and said, "I never believed--." She says, "I always knew you were--you had talent and were very talented," and, you know, I mean that--that kind of thing. She said, "But, to see you speak!" And, she just started to cry, you know. And I really talk. I mean--I mean, now, there's this kind of liberation, but my son's like, "Mama, could you not stop--would you stop talking?" But I think for me, I--I observed people a lot--I observed. I tried to--tried to find out where they were coming from first before I would speak--tried to listen more. But then I think in junior high, I had to make a speech about my family. And that was hard because I had to talk about the complexity of family and then, I had just found out--think about sixteen [years old] that, my mother [Martha Mae Parker] had two other daughters, prior to our four--this like extraordinary--the four of us, the sacred four, there were two others? I was like, "What?" Found that out at sixteen. My father [Jonathon Parker] found out that he had a son--didn't know he did--at the same time that my mother. My--well, my--I think, my father--he had gone to prom in high school and met a beautiful young lady, and that was the first time he had ever been with her, and the last. And she never told a soul for sixteen years until she found my grandmother--called my grandmother, and said, "I have your son's--you know--well, I--you have--I have a grandchild, you know--I have a son--your--your--your son is the father of--of my baby." And she--I mean, my grandmother said, "I don't--I don't think so. I--Jonathon doesn't--Jon doesn't have any children, other than the--the four with Martha." And she said, "No, no, no, no really--I know this is Jon's son and he should know he has a son." So my grandmother speaks to my mother--they don't even tell him. They speak, and Mama says, "Well, he has to meet his son!" "Well, that's crazy!" "He has a son--he has to meet his son!" So we all come together, and we meet--my brother from my father's--well--well from--from his wonderful love--and my mother's two daughters, and we all come together. And I meet all this huge family. And then I'm furious that I have not had sixteen years of play and fun and everything. So when I have to speak about this, and tell the complexity of having a black brother, two white sisters, the mixture of all of us, and then we've adopted a--two--of--of--of a family that walked away from their children, and we took two more children. So I had to explain that where it looked like other families had this like, little normal--normal family. But having to speak about the family and my brothers and sisters, I finally began--it broke something there that allowed me to liberate. It just kind of liberated me. And then, I think being able to act and dance, use the voice and dance as well, not just use the body. Story_ID: 12409 Speaker 1: Do you think there's--the arts have a healing--? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely! I've been talking about that most recently--is the healing power of art, and it is--it's really liberating, empowering. And--I mean we can become anything and we can get through anything. And sometimes when in--in our own lives, we don't think we can get through it, in the character, you can get through it, you know. And then, it goes, "Well, this character got through it! Why can't I get through it and I just did that character?" Helped you tap in to some of the essence of that, you know. It was kind of--of exciting, you know. But, I've been blessed through the arts--never really wanted to dance for the same reason that most dancers dance. I just think I had to dance. I think some people learn to dance, or they're privileged enough to dance, but I think I had to dance. Story_ID: 12410 Speaker 1: Now, when you graduated from high school [George Washington High School, Denver, Colorado], you wanted--you were thinking of going into medicine? And, how did you end up in--in dance? Speaker 2: Well, I actually--as soon as I got back, my--my parents--because, my father [Jonathon Parker] worked at the [Helen] Bonfils Theatre [Denver, Colorado] and then, became an actor, and then became you know very, very involved in creating theater on his own. I, then, met two wonderful women there, who ran the Colorado Ballet, and, I saw one of the most magical pieces on that stage: 'Carmina Burana' and that blew my mind. I went, "I wanna do that--that extraordinary music by Carl Orff." I wanted to do that and I wanted to create it. But I also had met another woman who was married to a doctor. And she wanted me to be introduced to the dance. And--and through this circle, Daddy said, "Well this kid needs a job. She's sixteen, or fourteen, or fourteen, I think. She needs to work!" And so, they gave me a little summer job. And then she said, "I want you to take my classes in the summer." And she says, "Now, I'm leaving for about a few weeks, or--and I'm--I want you to take over my classes." And I said, "Like take over the classes?" So I ended up teaching her classes. And she--when she came back, she didn't take over her classes. I continued to teach them. So that was wild! Then I had a little car, and I would teach everywhere. I found out teaching was thrilling for me, because I could bring people together in the most fascinating way and the most extraordinary way and the most physical way. I mean, I love being physical. I was an athlete so I love being physical. So I loved to jump, and turn, and--and fly, and do anything. And doing all that, I loved it, but to be able to find this sense of harmony in dance with others--and it didn't matter how big or small, or if they were rich or not, 'cause you couldn't tell. You didn't know if somebody was rich or not rich, or whether they had--what kind of history they had. They were all--everybody was--there was a common ground, there. This was an extraordinary thing. So I started teaching and never stopped. And then I started my own school once I got into college [Colorado Women's College, later the University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. I--I started--because I found another kindred spirit, who, very much like me, was not in the mainstream, Chris Kusuma. And she--she didn't have the body of dancer. She was Japanese, and didn't have the body of a ballet dancer. But we studied then, classical Japanese and African dance and Spanish dance, and we--we brought it into our school. It was really a magic time. We had a good time. Story_ID: 12411 Speaker 1: I became introduced to gentile and Jew concept--didn't--I thought all white people were the same when I left the South, now, you have to understand that. And then, when I got to Hill Junior High [Hill Middle School, Denver, Colorado], and George Washington [High School, Denver, Colorado], then there was this division of all kinds. I mean, like the athletes, and the intellects, and--and I was both. I was an athlete and I was an intellect. I had just--I had just run in the Junior Olympics. So, I was a--I was an athlete. I always worried about my heart. I was worried about my heart. But--but, here we have the intellects, and then we had some of the kids who were--were bussed in from the army base who were of color. And so I was like, "There was segregation going on," just in terms of activities and classes. And then there was this concept of--I was invited to go into a sorority, but Jews were not allowed. And I went, "What do you mean Jews are not allowed?" I said, "Jews? What is that?" What did I know? I was young. And so, I then became very familiar with the Jewish culture. And I wore a Star of David, of course. I called myself Sammy Davis, Jr. The--you know, I mean, I went--that's that--that's my nature. It was like, "What? Watch me!" So, I wore a cross and a Star of David to make people understand that they are one--that early. I mean, that--that was how bizarre it was to me. And so, went out of that experience not understanding--I loved the rituals of Judaism--I went to a Jewish camp, and did all that. I loved the Jewish dances and I loved all of that. I mean I wanted to understand all of that. I wanted to understand, "Well, what is this--what--what is a culture within a culture?" You know. And so, then--then I realized we label so quickly, and just didn't understand all of that--but didn't want any of that labeling. Story_ID: 12412 Speaker 1: So here I am going into Colorado Women's College [later the University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] now, and with all women. And I saw how people discriminated between people who were, maybe, international students, with students who lived at home in Denver [Colorado]--like they could be a little better than folks who didn't have as much money and lived at home. I said, "Now, that is too deep." So it--I was always checking out how we treat each other. And I spent lots of time in the library, reading--that was like my apartment: the library. And I danced in the library. I would stretch, I would use the--the aisles to stretch in, and I would--it began--I would--all--I would have my visitors--my boyfriend would come and see me. I met my [husband] Tom Robinson earlier, but that's where--I mean, you would--if you wanted to find me, you'd call me in the library. And, I would choreograph there--I would--my whole life was in the library, you know, it was a sacred place. It was with books and I had loved that, you know. I loved to read. And I never found time, so I carried them as if--if I carried all these books, I would have osmosis, and they'd come on through me, you know, the words would come through my body. It was an amazing thing--I loved it! So--but I--I spent lots of time in the studio. Story_ID: 12413 Speaker 1: And when--this is the last thing I think that is quite wonderful--is that, when I was a student at Colorado Women's College [later the University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had just been assassinated and been murdered. And it was in Park Hill [Denver, Colorado], and this is the area we're in now. They decided that they were going to do two things. They were going to build a new performing arts center. And I had been taking classes, of course, like stretching in the library, doing my barre in the dorm rooms, or in the lounges of the dorm at the grand piano, but we had no theater. So this great theater was going to be built and I would be the first class to use the theater. But they put me on a committee to find out who would direct the new Houston Fine Arts Center of Colorado Women's College. So we did this national search--everywhere--people were getting--but Dr. King had just been killed. Now they not only wanted someone--they wanted a black professor--now they never had one. And they wanted someone who could bridge the gap in the community between the blacks and the whites. And I knew who my father [Jonathan Parker] was, but I didn't even think about him. We did all of the interviewing and all of the interviewing. And they were going to hire two people--someone to come in, and--and--and be a professor, and they didn't care what--probably someone to just heal the wounds between the students that were trying to understand what kind of world we're living in. And also, they knew they better start bringing some people of color in, you know. But, the other is this new performing arts center was being built, and we were looking at two different people. And I went, "No, you don't have to find--you don't have to find two different people. There is one person that can do both of those things." And they said, "Well, where do--where can we find him? Bring his resume." I said, "No--no, resume is not gonna do it. You have to meet him." They said, "Well, do you know how to find him?" I said, "Yes, he's my father." And so, I went and got my father. I brought him to the college. They said, "But he has no degree." I said, "He doesn't need one." "I don't know." "Does he need one? If he is--if we've been looking for all of the--he knows exactly what you need--all of the credentials that you were looking for, this is what he has. Now, if he doesn't have a degree, then, I guess he can't have the job." But he interviewed, and I mean people were overwhelmed. And he is now there thirty-four years. It is just amazing. He's been through three different colleges being bought and sold, and he's the only one who's sustained it--and loves it! And so that became my new home--that Colorado Women's College became my new home. And this week, it is being now sold and changed, now. And they're gonna build a new one. And I'll go into the new performing arts center at Denver University [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] Speaker 2: It must have been a wonderful feeling, being able to do something to reward your father. You know, that--. Speaker 1: Oh! I just--well, that was our house--that was our house. When we had to go to the back door, now we had our own house. And we could do it our way. Everyone could come to our house. And everyone would feel like a king and queen--everyone! That was exciting. That was thrilling. There would be no one that would not feel great. Everyone would feel equal and extraordinary--they would all be honored. And that was an amazing thing. So that's where I grew, and that's where I was able to create. I created all my ballets there. But I became a dance therapist first--I mean, as I had my school, and I was creating at Colorado Women's College. And it was a magical place, because Jonathon Parker ran the theater, and when I did my concerts, he gave me everything. You talk about magic and light. He said, "Now baby, I'm gonna bring in this blue--this blue is going to come across this--." The--the way we began to talk about light was surreal, you know, I mean, you know, light--what light could do--it's amazing. I mean, we'd have coffee hours with technicians to talk about lights for hours. So that kind of world that all these white girls who were quite privileged, to sit around the table with a black man and he would talk to them about light for hours. That was a powerful thing. Story_ID: 671731 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Matthew Hickey is the videographer. This is a completion interview that was begun in 2006 [sic. 2002]. Would you please state your name and spell it for me and tell me your date of birth, your place of birth and the location of this interview? Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Cleo Parker Robinson, C-L-E-O, P-A-R-K-E-R, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N. I'm the artistic ex- executive director of the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance, and here we are in our theater [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Performing Arts Complex, Denver, Colorado]. I was born in 1948, in Denver, Colorado and this is my home. Speaker 1: And the location is the dance studio in Denver (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance in Denver, Colorado. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today is November 4 nine- no, 2008. Here we are, November 4th the great day. Story_ID: 671732 Speaker 1: I'd like to go back a little bit and recapture some of the story that you told us previously. And, if we could go back to the time when you were fifteen years old. We know that at ten years old you were teaching the kids on the street to dance and by fifteen you had begun to teach dance. Can you start by sharing the story of how that happened? Speaker 2: You know I was very blessed at the age of fifteen. My parents [Martha Mae Roberts Parker and Jonathon Parker] really knew I had all this energy and you know knew I loved to dance. At this time they sent me to a wonderful woman, Rhoda Gersten, who was a marvelous dance teacher, a modern teacher. And most of the time there were ballet teachers around, but this was a modern dance teacher. And I began to study with her and one day she just came in and said, "Cleo [HistoryMaker Cleo Parker Robinson], I'm going to be going to Europe. My husband [Jerome Gersten] is a doctor and he'll be doing some work there for about a week, and I'll leave you my tapes and I want you to take over my class." And I thought, well I just--I'm in the class, but I said, "Well certainly." Her notes and her class music and everything and she left and didn't come back in a week, she left me with everything. And she wasn't there and finally when she came back, she said, "Cleo, guess what, this is your class." And that's how I began. I just started teaching and that was really college students, and so that was quite unusual. We were at the Kennedy Center for Child Development [John F. Kennedy Child Development Center; JFK Partners, Denver, Colorado], that's where our classes were, since her husband was on staff there. So we found space right there in this wonderful Kennedy Center for Child Development and there was a mental unit there, and what I loved about it is that there were patients that were in that building and when I'd go to the restroom, I'd invite them to my class, so I had no idea who was coming. So I found out early that this thing about who was mentally ill and who was not, who's normal and who's abnormal, I had students of all backgrounds in my first classes. So I began to be very interested in dance therapy very young. Speaker 1: And how long did you teach that class, that particular class? Speaker 2: I think I taught it maybe for a year until I was sixteen, and then I was offered a job in the community through the Neighborhood Youth Corps. And I remember Clarke Watson, he was so great, he loved young people, and he wanted to make sure that, especially young people of color, that we would, blacks and Chicanos and--that we would have a place of--of, just growth, that we would be nurtured and have a support system. And he gave me a--I guess a job to teach in Brighton [Colorado]. And I had my little car and I'd just drive over in the neighborhoods where they never had any dance, and I absolutely thought I was in heaven. I made a little change doing it. I thought that was extraordinary that you could be paid to do something you loved doing. Speaker 1: And you were in high school [George Washington High School, Denver, Colorado] at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: I was (simultaneous). Story_ID: 671733 Speaker 1: And tell me what high school you attended? Speaker 2: Well, I was at George Washington High School [Denver, Colorado], and I think right before then I was at Hill Junior High [Hill Junior High School; Hill Campus of Arts and Sciences, Denver, Colorado], that's when I started teaching at Hill here in Denver [Colorado]. But I went to George Washington and George Washington at that time was not very integrated. It had just become integrated and it was predominantly white and Jewish. And there I was feeling very different, very different, having a black father [Jonathon Parker] and a white mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker], I didn't know anyone who had--who was mixed. And I knew I was black and there weren't many black students and we had a student body of about three thousand. And I had just come back from Dallas [Texas]. I had just come back from living in Dallas and Dallas was an extraordinary, traumatic experience for me, having almost died at the age of ten of a heart attack, and it was pretty powerful. So I think movement was always my way of expressing myself, and freeing myself you know and becoming one with others in a way that seemed to be more powerful than anything I knew. Speaker 1: Did you--did, was your high school in the community in which you lived? Speaker 2: No. That was bussing. It was--it was some, I would say, forced bussing. We had to live in certain areas and be bussed into a community, but then we moved in that community. So that--and I wasn't happy with my mother and father, especially my father. He was very strong about branching out and not living in the ghetto in our minds, you know that kind of thing. But moving out of the community and living farther away from my friends and close to the high school, I felt isolated. There was a sense of isolation. And--but I think also it was wonderful because I learned to expand my circles and also focus, I think I needed to focus. Or I might have just enjoyed high school a little bit too much (laughter). I had to study and also learn to be a leader. My father was very interested in leadership- that we needed to provide that kind of leadership for others. And I didn't quite understand all that talk about leadership so young but I think I found it in the dance because in the dance there's the circle, and in the circle there is this sense of oneness, and anytime you stand in the middle you're upheld by that circle. And it's not like you're leading it necessarily but you're supported by it. I think I learned a lot about support. Story_ID: 671734 Speaker 1: How was your transition into that school, did you find leadership there, were you accepted, did you have dance there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: I think it was--oh, I think it was a challenge for me. I was you know I think like many teenagers, I was probably a little defiant and knew I--I knew more than anyone at age fifteen and sixteen. I think it's that age of independence, and not having the knowledge and not having the understanding of what--what racism was about and sexism. My father [Jonathon Parker] was always clear that I was a black woman, and women needed to really stand up for their rights and broaden their skills so that we never had an excuse for not being allowed to do anything. And the same way with being African American, that we could never use that as an excuse for any door being opened or closed. So I think it was very difficult for me in the very beginning. And I think all through high school, even though I partook in everything, I was very involved in sports and in cheerleading and in supporting my school, but I wasn't always sure that I knew where the support was, I was forever trying to find that niche. And the niche was bringing people together when I realized that there was a Jewish community and there was Protestant community. I thought everybody was white. I didn't know there was any difference. I didn't know there was a difference. Then I knew there were the jocks and there were the scholars or the nerds, whatever. And then there were those who were bussed in from the military bases and they were isolated. And I found that when I go into the lunchroom, people would sit in their own little categories. And I felt it was my job to make sure that people had a chance to talk to each other. I'd go from one table to another and--so I found a place for myself. Speaker 1: And you graduated from Washington in what year? Speaker 2: I graduated from George Washington High School [Denver, Colorado] in 1966. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I became the head girl. Speaker 1: So you did find-- Speaker 2: I finally found my niche and I became--I ran for office. One year I became the--they called it the patriot pair, it was the sweetheart couple and there was one young black athlete and we began to date. But the whole high school put us together because we were black. And so it was that kind of thing, you know, he was wonderful, but I had a boyfriend outside of the high school that was--was at Regis high school [Regis Jesuit High School, Aurora, Colorado], and I was his patriot there, so I was his queen. And so I remember one time being in the paper with Tom Robinson, who I married and Larry Jackson [ph.] was his best friend. But it was very funny because when I was Tom Robinson's queen for his senior year and here it is Regis High School, and it was a Catholic high school and I was his queen, they saw it in the papers, all my teachers at George Washington wouldn't even speak to me. They said, "How dare you?" I didn't think it had anything to do with school rivalry, or anything of that nature. But anyway I became head girl and I remember the day that I was announced, almost like a November 4th, people came from George Washington, I had not moved yet and came all the way to my home, and it was far from the school. And they came to tell me that the ballots had said that I had won. And I remember I hadn't even gotten up. They were all at my house. And my father and mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker] woke me and said, "There are hundreds of kids out here on your front lawn," and it was a wonderful morning and they got a chance to meet my father and my mother. I think that was the most important thing, to see that I was different and yet I was accepted into a larger village. Story_ID: 671735 Speaker 1: You also spoke--spoke about sports. Were you good at sports, and what, what did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I loved sports. Speaker 1: --what did you play? Speaker 2: Well, I always danced, and I think dancers are athletes, you know, we're athletes. But I, at the age of about twelve was invited to the Junior Olympics and I was a runner. I loved running and my father [Jonathon Parker] loved to run with us. I mean he was an athlete. His role model was Paul Robeson and we always knew about him being a scholar and athlete and actor and singer and so that was our role model, to be an athlete, to be strong and to be physically fit and mentally strong. And my mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker] was a swimmer, so they both were you know quite--quite athletic. But I went to the Olympics and I remember I was throwing a disc; that was the other thing that I was very--you know I looked at all the different kinds of athletic events and--high jump and running and throwing the disc, and I was chosen to go to the Junior Olympics. And I remember filling out the form of white, black or other, and I checked other. It didn't say black, it said Caucasian, Negro, other, and I put other. My father and mother sat me down and said, "You are not other." I said, "All right." "You are Negro, you are--," and explained. I think that athletic moment stopped me in my track and I learned more about our country and that element of race and race relations and racism. Story_ID: 671736 Speaker 1: Now you also, during high school [George Washington High School, Denver, Colorado], you said that you began to teach a class in Brighton. Tell me about Brighton, what community is that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, Brighton, Colorado. It is like--it at that time was a very lower class, or lower income area of mostly white or Caucasian people who really were not exposed to coming in black community at all. And of course Denver [Colorado] didn't have a huge black community, much larger African--much larger Hispanic community or Latino community, and Native American community, but not a large black community. But going into Brighton was sort of like you know, Globeville [Denver, Colorado] was like a--it had like the migrant workers and then it had the lower income whites. And so when I would come in doing my ballet, my modern, my African, and--it was almost like a foreign language. And so--and they were poor, so I realized that we have to eat first, I mean, so being a government project, with the Neighborhood Youth Corps, we would feed everyone first. So we would have cheese and bread and--all I remember were those big slabs of cheese you know (laughter). Speaker 1: That welfare cheese. Speaker 2: And I think then I realized that you can't dance if you're hungry. It's hard to dance if you're hungry. And it's hard to have a place of joy if you're you know, if you're in pain. And so it was--peanut butter, I remember peanut butter and cheese and bread and then it also made me realize we would break bread together that dance is part of the socialization you know, of us coming together and learning more about each other. Speaker 1: And so tell me more about the experience of dancing with these students in Brighton? Speaker 2: Oh, it was marvelous, I mean, it was such a journey. I didn't have to go out of Denver to think I was out of Colorado or in another part of the world. That was extraordinary. So I think even early I began to believe I belonged in the world, like I belong in the world, not just in Denver. Maybe that's where I began to think if I--if I danced I wanted to dance anywhere, everywhere. Because the joy of breaking through some of these boundaries is magical, it has nothing to do with me, it has something to do with the synergy and the energy of coming together and what you learn from each other the different stories and lifestyles. To know that just right around, not even a few miles away we had people who were toiling land and working in the fields, and I thought that was wonderful. I mean my father [Jonathon Parker] and mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker], father came from the South, so he would talk about that a little bit, you know, how he would work in the cane fields and the cotton fields and--but I never had that experience. But to know that people were really working with their hands and I thought that was wonderful. Speaker 1: So how long did that program last? Speaker 2: Well the Neighborhood Youth Corps, I think it lasted a couple of years. I remember one of the great moments was being able to choreograph. Then I found out I was a choreographer I thought, you know I can make up some dances, not just dance or teach movement, but create stories. And I remember one of the marvelous moments was I was going to choreograph 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents], bringing people together, you know, like gangs and have 'em come together and I didn't even want to look at Jerome Robbins' 'West Side Story' because I wanted to create my own. I didn't want to be affected by anybody else's idea and that was crazy. But that's that youth again trying to discover you know your own voice. And thank goodness I had people who really thought that was important around me. But I think that it didn't last much longer. All these programs were very short lived, and I think that was always difficult to deal with because just as you get your hope up high, your hopes get very high then it's over. And then you think, oh my god, the illusion of--it's dead, it's gone, what am I going to do, makes you reach deep down inside and say, "Well if it's what I want to do I'll figure out a way," and others around you also help create that path with you and for you. So of course I had met Tom Robinson at the age of twelve, when I came back from Dallas [Texas], and he was a--he was an athlete, he was a football player and basketball player and an all-star. And as a matter of fact next month he will go into the hall of fame, sports hall of fame in New York. And he was always very humble. I learned a lot from him from the very beginning. But he always knew that I had a love for dance. And even when these things would probably just crash in my life, in my mind, he would always say, ""Well, did you think about this," and he, "did you know about that? Well, I read about this," so there was always another door opening or another idea about where I could go or what could possibly happen. Story_ID: 671737 Speaker 1: Before you graduated had you given thought to going to college or was there (cough) any teachers at this school [George Washington High School, Denver, Colorado], you now have made your way and shown that you know who you were on you own, were there teachers now there to encourage or inspire you? Who talked to you about going to college and how did you decide where you would go to school? Speaker 2: Well college was never an option, it was always--had to be an absolute in my father's [Jonathon Parker] mind. It was like, oh, you're going to go to college, and he wanted me to be a doctor. I think that was one of the things that my journey, I've had two different paths all the time, one of healing and one of movement and arts and athleticism. But I figured out--well let me go back, I think the--the teachers that I had in high school were amazing. I don't--I think about how blessed I was to have teachers that were really brilliant, I had a lot of brilliant coaches and teachers. My brother [Randall Parker] was there, he was a marvelous athlete and I watched how he was driven and pushed and I thought sometimes a little too hard. But I was around a lot of very, very intellectually driven students. And I never thought that that was what I wanted to do, but I was always competing with them. I always felt like well, my gift is art and athletics and somebody else's that they're brilliant, their brains, you know, they want to be Rhodes scholars and that's not what I needed to do, but I was always competing with them and especially in student council. And I felt many times intimidated by knowing that their fathers were doctors and lawyers and professional people. And my father was a real working man, he was a--he had worked in a theater and was a custodian, and he didn't have that same background, but he had that same drive, and my mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker] being a homemaker was a musician and so she did everything she could to provide for the family, so coming from a working class and feeling like I was with people from an upper class, there was a classism that I felt was going on in my mind and that maybe I couldn't compete to go into some of the top colleges. But I had--sometimes I have a counselor that said, "You know maybe you shouldn't go to college you should do work, work as a beautician or work with your hands or something," and I'm thinking that's not gonna be an option because my father wants me to be a doctor, and I had to, the whole time I was in college, explore many things. I explored psychology, so I was in psychology a lot and I was in pre-med, so I tried to work in a hospital as a--even as I was dancing, I worked in a, a little hospital as a candy striper, tried to see if I had what it took. I studied Latin, 'cause I was going to be the first child that could graduate and go to college. There were no--there was no history on my father's side and very few on my mother's that had gone to college. They didn't have the dollars and they weren't encouraged. So I would be the first. Speaker 1: So how did you decide what school you would go to? Speaker 2: Well I applied to a number of colleges, I really thought as I began to get very interested in dance therapy because of psychology and dance, I thought Hunter College [New York, New York] or somewhere in New York. But in no way in the world was I going to leave Tom Robinson and my family. I love my family so much. We were very close because we worked through all of these challenges. So I--I think we found out that there was a college right in Colorado, called Colorado Women's College [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] and there was a marvelous--a department there that was a psychology department that I was very interested in and a dance department. And there we are, I got a leadership scholarship and so there I went to Colorado Women's College and it changed my life, it was fabulous (laughter). Story_ID: 671738 Speaker 1: Well tell me about your, your freshman year? Speaker 2: Well I think I was like any freshman, I was--even though I was from Denver [Colorado] and I wasn't going away to college, I was, I think just petrified (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you live on campus, or were you able to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I lived at home-- Speaker 1: --to come home? Speaker 2: --but I was never home. I lived at home, but I was never home. I pretty much lived in the library. I read and read and read, I spent a lot of time--the library was like a sanctuary, if I wasn't in the dance studio, I was in the library or in the chapel, there was a marvelous chapel that was built, right after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated and I spoke at that chapel. Speaker 1: So what year--you graduated in '66 [1966]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and so '67 [1967] is when you went-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Okay. All right, so '68 [1968], you do remember when Dr. King was assassinated? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Well I remember when--first Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated and I was at George Washington [George Washington High School, Denver, Colorado], and I think that was one of the first things that brought us together and then the second was another tragedy and it was so earth-shattering for our lives at home, I mean especially because my father [Jonathon Parker] and mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker] were so--they were activists, they were so absolutely about change and change for a whole society, but certainly starting with our own, African American situation in our country. So I think when Dr. King was killed, he was murdered, I was at Colorado Women's College [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] and it blew us away, and being a young student and again not many African Americans at Colorado Women's College it was very similar to George Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Many international students though. It was a little different because we had students, it was a--it had been a finishing school, but it became--it had a whole international arm and I loved that because students from Japan and India and all over Africa were there. So if there were black students, they were mostly African students. So that whole understanding of the African American experience in our country was really powerful. The pain was so great. But I think Colorado Women's College being in Park Hill [Denver, Colorado], the first community to integrate, and for that school to be there, one of the charges was that we had an opportunity that with this great tragedy to bring people together and the school had to be a role model for it. And so that was really where my father, he became (coughs) sorry. Let me see if I can get my little throat together. Story_ID: 671739 Speaker 1: --Tell me more about your first years there, your freshman year [at Colorado Women's College; University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] and the classes and some of the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --dance instructors, tell me more about that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Well I remember the first day, registering for class. We were in the gym because there wasn't a dance studio yet. And Rita Berger, I took my complication to her and I marked out that I wanted to go into the classes with her, and you had to have a certain amount of ballet before. So I said, "Of course I had ballet." And so she said, ""Well marvelous." She met my mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker] and, "We'll see her Monday morning and bright and early and she'll have all of her ballet things," and blah, blah, blah. And I had taken ballet class, but I had really had not studied ballet and I rejected ballet a lot, because I was just too free, I mean, that was just gonna stop all my creativity. And my sister [Leslie Parker-Wallace] had studied ballet, but I didn't want that little tutu and I didn't want the ballet shoes, I wanted my feet on the floor, but Ms. Berger was a professional dancer out of the Met [Metropolitan Opera Ballet] and I didn't know all that about her, but I soon learned. When I went to class there we were in the Foote Hall [Denver, Colorado] and there was a grand piano, there she was, "And one and port de bras and tendu," and she was speaking French, I said, "Oh my goodness, Lord have mercy, what is she saying." So it was first of all faking my way through that class and she asked to speak to me right afterwards, she said, "Miss Parker [HistoryMaker Cleo Parker Robinson], may I speak with you." So I said, my eyes were big, she said, "You know, I am impressed, not with your class, but with your tenacity, you wanting to be in this class and knowing you have not had much ballet." And she said, "And I did make it a prerequisite that you had to really have ballet." She said, "But I love your spirit, so I want you to stay." And I felt like, yes, but I was you know, I thought I would just die because I was exposed right away and I think it taught me something about young people who just have a spirit and love it, and if they haven't had the experience that we have to give it to them, we have to give them that opportunity; and I think that's all my life what I've done with the dance now. Story_ID: 671740 Speaker 1: And so who were some other influences at that time as you're really beginning to study dance in a college setting? Speaker 2: Yes, well my father [Jonathon Parker]--you know I think I should get water. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay. So let's continue to talk about some of the other influences-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --in dance-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and maybe other people that inspired you? Speaker 1: Yes. Well you know my father was my first dance teacher, my daddy, you know, but and then when he met Rita Berger it was all over, they were just joined at the hip, they just were too much. And then by that time my father had become a professor at Colorado Women's College [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], going from janitor at the Bonfils Theater [Helen Bonfils Theatre Complex, Denver Colorado] and then became the director of the Houston Fine Arts Center [University of Denver Houston Fine Arts Center, Denver, Colorado] after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been killed. And that was powerful, because then I was introduced--both Rita and daddy were very in tuned about the dance artists and Rita would bring everyone from Broadway shows, I mean they come in from everywhere, from classical Japanese dancers, so many dancers, from India, so I would learn Russian dances, I would learn Indian dances, I would learn flamenco, I would--I'd be in Spain. The dance took me around the world. I didn't have to leave that studio, I was everywhere and I loved it. So lots of great artists came through and inspired me so much that I created a school while I was in college and the school was Kutsuma Parker School of Dance [ph.], and it was my wonderful friend, Japanese, and she was short and kind of wide and here I was, we looked like Mutt and Jeff together, you know we were just like that (gestures). And I taught the African and she taught Japanese and we had classical Japanese teachers come who did not speak English to begin to teach our students; and then we had teachers from all over who would come to Denver [Colorado], and we began to work. Story_ID: 671741 Speaker 1: But it was [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham that really, as I began to read about her, of course I read about everyone; and then I read about Dr. Pearl Primus, both women were anthropologists and that blew my mind, 'cause I was always in psychology, I had a scholarship at Colorado Women's College [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] and I worked in the development office so I learned to write, and Rita [Rita Berger] was always about research, you had to do your research, you couldn't just dance, you had to know about dance, you had to read about it. So reading about these two great women, Katherine Dunham and Dr. Pearl Primus, I mean, I just knew I had to follow a path of that nature. So I ended up going to New York [New York] at about nineteen, going there and meeting Alvin Ailey and that was something else. Speaker 2: What was that experience like? Speaker 1: Oh, it was beyond my dreams. I would be in the studio and it was like a world that was beyond any world I knew. Dancers would come into the dressing room that were speaking different languages and again it was the world. And of course I was just a little girl from Denver [Colorado], honey, you know, I'm like, oh boy everybody on the East Coast really knows what's going on and honey I'm in the middle of the country and I don't have this kind of experience, and I was a little resentful. I was so overwhelmed with so many dancers from all over the world, and of course I went to [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell's and I met Arthur, I met Dr.-- Speaker 2: Were you still in college during this time? Speaker 1: Yes, oh yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Nineteen, I went to audition, you know, I was gon- I was gonna be on Broadway you know. So as all of us dream of that kind of experience, I came back very, two things, very depressed and very inspired, but driven. And I think it was that I felt that I'd been cheated somehow, that--why didn't I have everything that New York was, and why didn't I have that experience growing up with all of those classes that I could go to on Broadway and I thought that was not there, you know. And I had to decide whether or not I wanted to live in New York, so I realized that there was a New Yorker inside of me, I was really from New York and--but then I had to create that environment here, because I didn't want any other child to ever feel that they were isolated or that they didn't have access to all those marvelous experiences that I began to have, to go and study with some of the greatest teachers, to sit in a rehearsal and watch [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle choreograph 'Rainbow Round My Shoulder' on Alvin's company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and to see that and to imagine yourself dancing those works, and to this day we dance those works. Speaker 2: That's amazing. Story_ID: 671742 Speaker 1: After college--you graduated in what year? Speaker 2: In 1970. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I graduated. By that time the school had changed its name three times. (Laughter) It was Colorado Women's College [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], Temple Buell [Temple Buell College], Colorado Woman's College and I graduated in 1970 in the field of education and dance and psychology and a little bit of anthropology. I still was trying to find that journey out of it, [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham was on and Dr. Pearl Primus. Speaker 1: And what about your relationship with Tom Robinson? Speaker 2: I got married in 1970. That was amazing that I was finally able to marry him, although I was always married to him in my heart, always from the day I met him. He is my soul mate, he was my soul mate. And it was amazing that we waited all those many years until 1970. Speaker 1: Was there a reason for that, I mean, did you want to finish college before marrying (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: I think our--my parents [Martha Mae Roberts Parker and Jonathon Parker] were very clear, but he was clear. He was a very focused, very focused and athletics were his love. He loved--he was also a scholar you know and he didn't consider him that, but he was an A student and he studied Latin and was a great math student and became a math teacher and a coach and so on, but he was real focused on building a--being a man who could be a great husband and father which meant he had to have security. He knew that, he knew he had to be able to bring something to the table, it couldn't just be somebody I loved, and he was very responsible like that always. That--and I always thought that was crazy but--don't worry about it. I was always sort of like my mother and father, love is everything, you don't have to worry about all those practical things, (laughter) you know. Story_ID: 671743 Speaker 1: So after you married and you, you graduated from college [Colorado Women's College; University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], what happens next? Speaker 2: Well the next thing is I-- Speaker 1: Did you still have your dance school [Kutsuma Parker School of Dance (ph.)] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --I studied--I had my school, I had my school and it began to phase out because we had college students and we had professors with their children in our classes and at that point, I got married and my relationship with my dance partner, I think, I think we probably shifted because I began to teach school. I started teaching third grade and first grade and I loved teaching. But my husband [Tom Robinson] was going to play for the San Francisco 49ers so he got--he went to the football camp at--in San Francisco [California], and I packed my bags and my bags were right at the door ready to go, that's where I was going to be the wife of a football player and that was really wild because I don't know how I imagined I could do that because I was always needing to do my own journey. But for a moment to think that that would just be really fun and what would I do you know as my husband was playing football for the 49ers. I got a job--there was a job, I guess, announcement in the paper that the Model Cities Cultural Center [Denver, Colorado] was looking for a dance director, and while he was gone I applied. And still not thinking I was going to stay in Denver [Colorado], I got the job, and the job was really right here in Five Points [Denver, Colorado] about five blocks from where we are now. And it was in this little storefront and it was a little office, I remember they went--I came and they interviewed and they said, "We would like someone to come and really direct the department," department--it was nothing but a little old room, I loved it. And at that point I would choreograph and I would dance and I could build the department the way I wanted and it was just really a dream. So it was about a dream that was really marvelous and then I'd be paid monthly, a salary. But as I left there I called my husband in San Francisco and he said, "Well did you see the studio?" And I said, "No, I was so excited, I didn't even see the space." So I went back the next day in the room and I said, "You know I just talked to my husband, I was so excited about getting the job but I'd love to see the studio." And he said, "Well that's probably what you'll build, we don't have a studio, but we'd like to give you this room and we'll be moving out tomorrow and this could be your studio." I looked at them and I thought they lost their minds because it was so small and it had nothing, no floors, no bars, no mirrors, no nothing, I had to build it from scratch and no students. So that was the beginning and I learned that you have to know it all, you have to do it all and--if you want it. And I opened the doors and I remember not a soul walked into the studio, and I boohooed. I was just there and Tom was so sad when he came back, he was injured and didn't go with the 49ers and came back and taught at his own school at Regis [Regis Jesuit High School, Aurora, Colorado], and so our journey became really focused then on building the new dance theater which became the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance [Denver, Colorado], which is where we are now. Speaker 1: So you focused and this is not the first place that you opened a studio--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, it was really that little storefront-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on 20th [Street] and Welton Street. We're on Washington [Street] so Welton is about three blocks down, but it was a storefront and it was--the Model Cities were really quite marvelous around the country in the '60s (1960s) you know and the '70s [1970s]. The '70s [1970s], I was really coming at the end of it, but in my mind I was coming at the beginning of it. But it was being phased out when I came in, but I had no idea that that's what was really taking place. Story_ID: 671744 Speaker 1: So how long did you work for Model Cities [Model Cities Cultural Center, Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 2: It was about a year (laughter). Speaker 1: About one year, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Again, it folded. Right when I began in--right in that '70 [1970], 1970 we pretty much started it, began to develop it, lots of unbelievable dynamic changes going on in the country at that time with the Civil Rights Movement and so the arts reflected that. And so as we began to create, what was marvelous is there was a musical director, Joe Keel, who had just come back from doing a whole tour of 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] as musical director around the country and he was marvelous. So he became my musical director, and Bob Ragland who was a great painter and artist and he became my PR [public relations] director and Jeff Hart [ph.] who was our janitor who was a great silkscreen artist and he began to do our costumes. So we--we had Homer Bryant [ph.] he was great sax player and became our musicians. So we had departments of individuals that were very committed to their art and community, all together but for a very short amount of time. But even though it folded, we then became incorporated at--very early and had friends at the National Endowment [National Endowment for the Arts] because we were the first organization to become a part of Expansion Arts because we were crazy enough to believe we should exist beyond Model Cities. And to follow this dream of dance, of what dance could do, because I remember that first time and nobody would walk in the door and I loved it so much. Then I said, "Well if people would not come to me, I will go to them," and that's what we began to do, we went to the people. And going to the people meant I went into the elementary schools, I went into the high schools, I went into junior highs, I went into the prisons, I went into the [U.S.] Air Force bases, I--the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], all of our black organizations like the UNCF and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and they would all make sure that we were performing and that we got at least enough money for our food you know. So that was the beginning; that was a wonderful beginning. Speaker 1: So actually the Model Cities was the model for you being able to learn how to actually build and structure-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a dance company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance]? Speaker 2: Model Cities was my opportunity to really build the company and school. That was the foundation (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Now, you--now there, there is-- Story_ID: 671745 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There is a difference-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --between a school and--and a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and a company so-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Talk about that, and speak to that a little bit? Speaker 2: Well, I always had a school where we trained children and adults in--in the dance. But I had a company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance] right coming out of Colorado Women's College [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], and Colorado Women's College became my theater for my company, and it was a fantastic theater, and the dance studio that was built after I left became my home. So I had a little storefront but I was able to go back and use this marvelous theater and studio. So even though we had a little tiny space, we began to use the resources that my father [Jonathon Parker] then had because he ran that center. So I always called it my father's house. So having a dance company meant having a group of young people who would train every day and would create art and that we would then perform the works of my choreography in the beginning, and other choreographers and of course I wanted Alvin Ailey to choreograph on my company, you know. What was going to stop me, I mean, you know, that was it. I knew Alvin Ailey from New York [New York] and I thought, I want Alvin, I'm going to invite Alvin Ailey too, see my company and choreograph on us. So those were big ideas and very naive ideas but they were wonderful because later Alvin Ailey really did embrace me and my company, and it was really wonderful. But I would bring in people like [HistoryMaker] Eleo Pomare who just made his transition this year and Eleo would come. I saw him for the first time performing in the Houston Fine Arts Center [University of Denver Houston Fine Arts Center, Denver, Colorado] in our college and he had just come from Europe and performed, and that's when I was blown and I went, my god, art is powerful, it can transform your life and it's also very political that it can--art we say is not political but I think as artists that have had to come through many changes, we know that art is about creating change and consciousness so that's what I realized. With Eleo Pomare and many of the great choreographers I began to bring. Story_ID: 671746 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you choreo- choreographed yourself, was life experience a part of how you developed you know the dance (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Life experience absolutely, and what we're exposed to you know. So I think that was always why I always broadening my experiences because that's--you put on stage what your experience is or what others are. But I think it was--one of my first pieces was, (claps) "Come and go with me to my father's house, to my father's--," we'd just be praying and, because I grew up in Dallas [Texas] and so the church was very important, and one of those first pieces 'Spiritual Suite' [Cleo Parker Robinson] so I created the suites. 'Spiritual Suite' was the first one, I was always inspired by Revelations as everybody has been and--but I didn't want to feel as though I was you know just imitating it, I was inspired by it. And so I created 'Sometimes I feel like A Motherless Child' [Cleo Parker Robinson], 'Mary Don't You Weep' [Cleo Parker Robinson]. And I opened Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] first birthday holiday in Atlanta [Georgia] on stage with Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and the King family, and they asked for my 'Mary Don't You Weep,' and that might have been one of my greatest honors in choreographing that I could bring--because I made a tribute to Dr. King with 'Mary Don't You Weep.' Speaker 1: And 'Dry Each Other's Tears in the Still of the Night' [sic.]? Speaker 2: That one--'Dry Each Other's Tears In the Stillness of the Night' was choreographed by a young man out of Houston [Texas], David Rousseve, and it was about my mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker] and father [Jonathon Parker] and all of their journey bringing us up. And you know our parents protect us and they protected us, they didn't want us to know about all of the challenges that they had and the hardships and how they had to work so many jobs and how they got fired from their jobs because they were a mixed couple and how my father would be enraged cause he wanted this country to change and how my mother tried to understand the journey and carry on that journey, and the piece is magnificent. So it's 'Dry Each Other's Tears in the Stillness of the Night' [Cleo Parker Robinson], it was that--there was a code in there, "We could dry each other's tears in the stillness of the night, but we could not sit next to each other on the white man's train." So it was pretty powerful. And we took that piece and created a work in South Africa, that work. We opened the first Black History Month in South Africa, in Pretoria, with that ballet and we created it on them and I got to come and bring my family's photographs and talk about Five Points [Denver, Colorado] and talk about my life and let them bring that life on stage in South Africa. Story_ID: 671747 Speaker 1: The dances that are choreographed have a lot to do with the social climate-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of what's going on you know in that time period or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --whatever time period it is and it helps to bring people together as you say you want the dance to do. So tell me do you have a--what is your signature piece, or if it-- is it called a signature piece (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, we have a signature piece that I didn't choreograph, that was done over twenty-five years, called 'Rain Dance' and that 'Rain Dance' is magnificent by Milton Myers who was in Alvin Ailey's company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. I had seen Milton when he was really young dancing in the company, and he blew my mind. The energy and the love that he had and the passion, and I went to Paris [France] with him as he was, much later, he became the artistic director of the Joyce Trisler Company and he wanted to let me see the kind of work he was doing on his company in Paris. So we were there in Paris and I loved it, and every night I would look at this fantastic company at the opera house [Palais Garnier, Paris, France] and I'd say, "Not that piece, not that piece, not that piece, none of those pieces who we are." I said, "Come to Denver [Colorado], we live in the mile high--we live higher up in the mountains and we are pioneers, come up in here." And he came to Denver after we were in Paris and he felt this synergy, this energy of--and the beauty of hope, we've got a lot of, you know, we think we can do anything. And he saw my dancers and he created this circle that I talk about, this circle, and he talked about circles and circles that support each other and everybody's in this wonderful rain dance, red skirts, even the men. I think it's the first time anybody had ever seen the men dance in skirts also. And there we go into the schools and all the kids say, the boys say, "I want a red skirt, I want a red skirt," but that--it's almost like dancing dervishes and bringing people together he would see Marcy Freeman [Marceline Freeman], who he loved, who has now become blind, she started with me when she was fifteen. But he created it around her passion and she was in the middle and she was like the goddess that created all of this extraordinary lightening. But many times when we do 'Rain Dance,' I've done it in Atlanta [Georgia] and all over the world, but the Maasai in Kenya, it begins to rain and then we know, we're not on this planet alone, we are absolutely connected. Story_ID: 671748 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What I want to go back to is just a little clarification. For Model Cities [Model Cities Cultural Center, Denver, Colorado], you had your company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance] at the Women's College [Colorado Women's College; University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: --but did you and your husband [Tom Robinson] actually rent a warehouse space--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Oh yes. Speaker 1: --first before this space? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Our wonderful loft. That's when I knew I had a New York [New York] space because it was so New York, I mean it had that--you had to climb up the stairs and here was this wonderful vacant space that was a book storage, it was a warehouse and--prior. But it had poles, I remember that. I never had an ideal space, we always had to make it work. That's why I think we've never been too spoiled because that space was always cold, we were always freezing, Denver [Colorado] was always like the worst winters that we were so cold. And it was in a part of downtown that nobody would go into. So being on 20th [Street] and Lawrence Street, we had to create a real sense of artistry. And we weren't then with other artists, we were then isolated. We had left that Model City space 'cause that had closed, it boarded up. So we didn't have the musicians and the painters and the--all of these wonderful artists around us, now we were on our own. And I did miss all of that, I did, but we then focused a lot on the dance then. But, I mean I'd come sometimes the cars would be broken into and folks would be laying in your car that were homeless cause they had no place to go and people wouldn't come to the studio because they were too afraid to come into the area. And I just kept saying, "You know this is where we all live, we all live here." And we would invite, even people who had no money, to come in and dance, to be warm to--especially in the summers, it was really a marvelous thing. But I think that idea of humanity, the dance belonged to everybody and that even if you couldn't pay, you should be able to dance. And so you know we had people paying a quarter a class because it was just important that they partook, that they felt that this was part of everyone's privilege, they had the right to come and dance. I don't know how we kept the studio going though. I still don't how we keep it going because it has never been about making money, it's always been about making community. And even when we moved later on, we were there for maybe ten years and then we when we finally got this beautiful space, it was shut down for eight years and it was dilapidated and it was--no one had been in it and they were going to tear it down. And-- Speaker 1: This was actually a church? Speaker 2: This was a church, the Shorter A.M.E. Church. Shorter African Methodist Episcopal Church [Shorter Community A.M.E. Church, Denver, Colorado], first one ever built in the 1800s and then burnt down by the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] allegedly in about the '20s [1920s], 1920s and--or even later than that. But--it has a history. But when we came into it, no one had been here and it had only mice and pigeons and it was, again, you had to have a dream and a vision, I think that was it. And my husband says, "This would be wonderful." I said, "What's so wonderful about it? This would take more work than we ever--and we have no money how we going to do this?" So it was the same way of coming into the loft. We came into the loft without any money and we had to pay every month. We didn't know how we were ever going to pay those rent--the rent to be downtown. But eventually we had students who came and we had a wall that we painted down on 20th [Street] and Lawrence. It was called our wall of fame. And I remember [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt putting her signature right on that wall, as all these artists came from everywhere, from circuses to Twyla Tharp, to whoever came to town. Actors, Judy Pace [HistoryMaker Judy Pace-Flood], everybody, they all came, that was the place to come. And they loved it because it was a little bit you know off the beaten path and they felt the New York spirit there. Story_ID: 671749 Speaker 1: Well you were a dy- dynamo at fundraising, that's basically how you got things (laughter) rolling. But talk a little bit about the connection to the neighborhood and the gang members--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, gosh. Speaker 1: --and how did that play out in your, the scheme of things? Speaker 2: Well you know in the early days, we weren't so aware of gangs, I mean, people--there were districts, there were areas, I mean, we knew we were in east Denver [Colorado], if you went over to west Denver, it was Latino, if you went over to south Denver, it was white, if you were--so it was always--had that sense of areas that belonged to folks, you know. But I don't know that I felt so gang oriented, although I remember when I was head girl, I went to a game between Manual [Manual High School, Denver, Colorado] and East High School [Denver, Colorado], and I was at George Washington [George Washington High School, Denver, Colorado] so it was about colors, Manuel was blue and red and East was red and white and I didn't have any colors on, but I remember that night I was beat up pretty bad. And I was with my girlfriend who was a little short white girl and I was left in the gutter and right across the street was a police building and nobody ever came to help us. And I almost lost my hearing. But I remember there was a sense of gangs at that time, but I never really was aware of it before then until much later when we moved into this building. And I think it was a Juneteenth celebration that there was an infusion of gangs that came out of other areas, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and all kinds of--they just came on in, just like the west, you know, we gon' come on in and take over and they did, we had Bloods and the Crips then we had other kind of Chicano gangs and Latino, I mean, Asian gangs and girl gangs. Girls were growing up in gangs talking about being badder than the boys, I was like, what? So we created a program with a wonderful psychologist [Harvey Milkman] at Metro [Metropolitan State University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], because I had come to his class and I had dance, he loved dance and I loved psychology so we sort of exchanged. So I came to his class and I told them all about gangs and he said, "Well why don't we create a project together, Projects Self Discovery." And we started that program with gang members, and we brought gangs in here from all different kinds of gangs and we said that this is neutral territory and the things we learned about that was really powerful. We ran that program for about ten years and we were awarded a major award at the White House [Washington, D.C.] called the Coming Up Taller Award [National Arts and Humanities Youth Program Awards]. And seeing these young kids want to get out of gangs, I remember we brought in the D.A. [district attorney] to sit and talk to the kids. We would get them graduations and rights of passages and teach them about their culture. And they liked to dance, they loved to dance, but we wouldn't let them wear colors, we wouldn't let them wear the colors. But we learned a lot of lessons. So here we have the ballet dancers putting their tutus and things up in the locker room down there and I said Lord, and the gang members are putting their guns up. I said, what kind of place is this? I didn't know quite how we were gonna do it, but I think I knew we had to do it, we had to mix cultures. They had--the gang members had to walk through the dance studio [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance, Denver, Colorado] and see us studying dance in our leotards and tights almost naked, being vulnerable and making no money, making very little money and going, "Why do they do that every day? Do they make any money? Well why they do it?" And then knowing that we were creating a home for them. Story_ID: 671750 Speaker 1: And I had learned a lot from [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, that she had done something similar to this in East St. Louis [Illinois] where I'll go tomorrow, I'll go to East St. Louis, I'll go to St. Louis [Missouri]. I learned a lot about what she did as a great artist to have an impact on the kinds of young people and their challenges. She used the drums and so I learned a lot. I spoke to her all the time, I was always going to meet with her in St. Louis, and saying, "Miss Dunham, we have gang activity," I said, "I got back from Germany, I looked on television," and I said, "my son was sitting there with me and he said he saw this drive-by shooting." I said, "Malik [Thomas Malik Robinson], how do you know?" "'Cause I'm watching it on television." As soon as I got back from Germany, on a wonderful world tour, I'm sitting in my home in Park Hill [Denver, Colorado] and my son says, "Mama I know the car." I said, "Well how do you know?" He said, "I was standing on the corner, I happened to have been there." I said, "You saw the car that did this drive by shooting," I said, "oh Lord, don't even say you saw anything." And he said, "Mama you have to--," I said, "Maybe we gon' have to move out of the area." He says, ""Are you kidding, where you gon' to move? You can't run. You have to face the fact that these kids don't want you to run, you have to bring 'em on in," that was it. And then I knew that the drive by shooting that had happened when we found out later who was shot, it was a little boy that was four. I said, "Oh my god," the picture of the woman on television was my secretary. And I said, "Oh my god, look at that. It's so close," I said--she was my former secretary, she wasn't that at that moment, and we went right to the hospital and that little boy had a bullet lodged in his head and we prayed on it. And I tell you the day that he walked back into this studio after recovery and the bullet never left his brain. I knew we had a commitment to make a change so you cannot run, 'cause it affects all of our society and later on we knew the great tragedy at Columbine [Columbine High School, Littleton, Colorado] took place, so we knew we had to embrace communities here and everywhere. Story_ID: 671751 Speaker 1: Speak more about [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunan- Dunham and what your company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance] is about to embark on as far as her tribute (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Oh, I feel so blessed to have met Miss Dunham very young in my spirit, through my family mostly, as they would talk about [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and Sidney Poitier and [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt and Katherine Dunham then to really know her, first by studying her, reading about her and then secondly watching her company on television on 'The Ed Sullivan Show' or something like that you know and then actually meeting her dancers as I would perform in Chicago [Illinois], Tommy Gomez and Lucille Ellis would come and learn about us as they knew we were trying to learn about the Durham Company [Katherine Dunham Company]. So I learned about the Dunham Company, not only through Miss Dunham, but through their dancers. And they would meet with me and say, "Now Miss Dunham had a three hour concert and one would be Americana and one would be ethnic and one would be--and then she'd take this to Broadway," I was always inspired by the way she choreographed and the way she created her programs and I would then--I'd always take notice, but I would then study with her later in her life, and I'd take Dunham classes at The Ailey School [New York, New York] and I'd come back and teach Dunham. I became a Dunham teacher, but I never called myself a Dunham teacher, I never would, that was just too great to say I was a Dunham teacher. But every time I taught and I looked at the Dunham class, I'd say, "Well that's what I do," and then I'd see another Dunham class and say, "Oh, that's what I do." So I knew that I was already in the Dunham spirit, but then when I would train with her in East St. Louis [Illinois], I would--I knew there were others that trained with her much longer, and her dancers, but I would eventually want to know more about her work and how to preserve it, her legacy. And I knew here legacy was great in terms of not just the ballet and the works that she had, but her legacy of dance as a way of life, the philosophy itself, so I embraced both. So I always continued her legacy with our summer program, teaching children from the age of five about the Dunham experience. But then we would train the dancers in the work itself and when I met with Miss Dunham I said, "I would love to know what you would like preserved, what pieces," and she said, "Well, 'Choros' [Katherine Dunham] is one of my favorites." So 'Choros' is one that she taught the company and we now do. And then she said that I dance 'Barrelhouse Blues' [Katherine Dunham] and of course she came and taught 'Barrelhouse Blues,' which is the one that she danced with, her legs were insured for a million dollars. She was just--she had some legs that were something else like Eartha Kitt, you know. Eartha Kitt was in her company. But anyway I dance now 'Barrelhouse Blues' and I'll dance it next week to open the St. Louis museum [Missouri History Museum, St. Louis, Missouri], a wonderful exhibit of Katherine Dunham. And so I've been dancing her role for about ten years now and taking that legacy around the country and I just returned from France, teaching an international company from the Congo, Martinique and St. Martin and all over France, 'Choros' and 'Barrelhouse Blues.' I was given that opportunity from the national Dance Notation Bureau because her works are now notated so that others can learn it and I think that's magnificent. Speaker 1: Well explain, so any--can any dance company perform those works? Speaker 2: They can. They must get the rights from the national Dance Notation--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Notation, so they have to get the rights (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --and they have to get the approval of her daughter, who is alive, Marie-Christine Dunham Pratt, who lives in Rome [Italy] and then of course from the estate. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: So it is a process (simultaneous). Speaker 1: So it is a--right, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It is a--but they can. Story_ID: 671752 Speaker 1: I guess, what I'm trying to ask is, when you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But they can, they can do the work. Speaker 1: --but when you have a choreographer come in, and I--Talley Beatty? Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Talley Beatty. Yeah, Talley Beatty (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Beatty, okay. He--he choreographs his last work for your company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask you about that, but what my question is, when a choreographer comes in and you say they set a piece on your company-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that means that just your company can perform that piece, is that right? Speaker 2: Well you know when a choreographer comes and creates a work, it can be two or three things, it can be an original work, which is set originally on the company, or it can a reconstruction. Now [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's works are reconstruction, because these are works she created in 1934 and 1944. And for us to keep them alive is a real honor. But we have to train in her technique, and most dancers don't train in the Dunham technique anymore. It's way too difficult, it's very demanding. First of all you have to have this strong ballet base then you have to have a strong ethnic base, you have to know rhythms like mad. She brought drummers from all over the world, from Senegal because she was there in 1966 with the president [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] as a cultural ambassador. So as she was there she began to be very embraced in the Senegalese culture and then of course Haiti, the Haitian rhythms and the Yanvalou and all of the religious experiences that go on with voodoo, so she became a voodoo priestess and so we do all of that. We do the range of what that experience is. But dancers--young dancers don't train in it enough and so what we do is create that training right here for all--everyone, anyone, and bring in master teachers. But we'll be doing reconstructions but oftentimes we do world premieres of a work that has never been created and I'll do both of those in St. Louis [Missouri]. I have a new work by Katherine Dunham called 'Ragtime' and I love it, it's such a cute little--it's a wonderful ditty, I call it a ditty, it's to Scott Joplin. And she did this later in her life with Scott Joplin, and she did this as a part of 'Treemonisha,' the opera. She loved opera, and as a result, I loved opera. I mean I--my life somehow just parallels hers in many ways, some of it I think is divine and some of it is that I think people projected and I receive it and move in the--I listen and follow directions in the universe because she choreographed 'Aida' [Katherine Dunham] and I then choreographed 'Aida' thirty years later with the same artistic director that she worked with, he came to me. He was an impresario for the Met [Metropolitan Opera] and that was when they would not let dancers that were dark skinned dance at the Met and she made that change. She said, "I will not work at the Met unless you have my dancers of all shades dance." So she broke the color line, and I think that that's what that whole social activist part of her, this anthropological aspect of her, this flirtatious, she was quite the actress and dancer. So she inspired me on many levels. Story_ID: 671753 Speaker 1: So going back to Talley Beatty and his work, you want to talk about that? Speaker 2: Well, Talley Beatty--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Beatty. Speaker 2: --Talley, I tell you, Talley again I heard about through another great choreographer, [HistoryMaker] Eleo Pomare. And I would ask Eleo, "Who do you think should set work on our company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance]?" I let him guide us, and he said, "You know one of the greatest artists alive is Talley Beatty." I did now know that he was one of [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's dancers at the time, of course in research, you know he would always say, "Yes Miss Dunham was an influence," he said, "but there're many other influences." He didn't really want to give all that credit to Miss Dunham. And so it became my great journey to bring them together because they were sort of a little bit not speaking to each other, you know, as we know family life in the dance and in the world. But when Talley came to choreograph for my company it was in the '80s [1980s], I think it was '89 [1989], and he did the first piece was Earth, Wind and Fire and I said, "Talley, do you know that Earth, Wind and Fire grew out of Denver [Colorado], not only out of Denver but out of my basement?" I said, "Philip Bailey and all of them played music with my brothers and sisters." And he said, "Really?" And don't you know Philip Bailey walked through the door while he was choreographing and he said, "Isn't that something," you know, he loved it you know. But Talley always loved the edge, he loved the edge, and he put you on the edge. It was--he might have been one of our greatest challenges as a choreographer, because he demanded everything from you. And he was hard to understand, he was very emotional and very intense. And I think the things that he had gone through as a dancer were still very much a part of him. 'Mourner's Bench' [Talley Beatty] was a masterpiece that he did and he inspired the world as a dancer and choreographer. But what was interesting is that we later, ten years later, received his last work that he would do. And he came to Denver and said, "I want to set a work on you about Duke Ellington." He said, "Ellington was my greatest inspiration for dance," because he said he knew how to create music for dance, and he said, "I learned more from him as a choreographer than anybody." So it blew my mind. So he created 'Ellingtonia' [Talley Beatty] on the company; and then shortly after, he made his transition. Story_ID: 671754 Speaker 1: Speaking about finding different dance that could be a part of your company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance], do you go out or do you ask that your dancers go to see other works-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --so that they can bring back some things that have seen? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, sure. Speaker 1: I mean, are they willing to do that? I know we talked to Ann Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Marie Williams] and she said it was very hard for her to get dancers to go and watch other dance companies and that was something that she thought was important. So do you think that's important that they see other works? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I thought it was so important for dancers to see other works that I would put them all in my car and take them to a concert and pay for their tickets, you know pay the gas, tickets and everything. Because I pay them to see because if they don't see, they don't know what their world is about, the world of dance is huge and yet it's very small, you know, it's a very small world. But it's--but we always want people to come to the theater and support us, that's the other. And if we don't go out and support, I think that's why in sports it's a--it might be more lucrative than the dance because it's always--has a way of supporting itself, and the dance, you don't do it as much, and I think it's very important economically and also ethically--but also to broaden our horizons. I think dancers--that's why I think hosting the international black dance Conference [International Association of Blacks in Dance] here for the third time in January, it's the twenty-first year that we were hosted and now hosted here in Denver [Colorado] and I'm excited about it because our young people who have come up from all these high schools, from Duke Ellington [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.], and Baltimore [Baltimore School for the Arts, Baltimore, Maryland], and even our own school for the arts [Denver School of the Arts, Denver, Colorado], will see what I saw when I was young. And who knows what they're going to do after they see what they see. Who know--they're going to create something even beyond what we can imagine. But they'll see ballet, they'll see African, they'll see Haitian, they'll see spiritual dancing, they will see dancers that are so abstract, they'll see all kinds of mixtures of dancers and sizes of dancers and I think it broadens their concept of what is dance. Story_ID: 671755 Speaker 1: And it should be very exciting for just the Denver [Colorado] community as a whole-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --to be able to you know partake in something as grand and, I mean, just part of the Denver history now as well, you know. Let's see, there was another founding member of your troupe [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance], was Curtis Fraser a part of your founding-- Speaker 2: Well Curtis Fraser, I have an image of him downstairs at our altar. We have a couple of altars in this school. Speaker 1: What do you mean, altar? Speaker 2: Just spaces that are sacred, sacred spaces. And his image is--a huge one of Curtis Fraser. He wasn't one of my founders, but he was one of my first dancers and my sister [Leslie Parker-Wallace] danced with me and of course Marceline Freeman came out of East High School and is still with me after thirty-eight years you know, after becoming blind. We've had many dancers had many challenges, Curtis passed maybe eleven years ago, and we do a Curtis Fraser scholarship [Curtis Fraser Scholarship Fund], we give a scholarship in his name. But he was one of--he was an engineer student when I taught at the University of Colorado [Boulder, Colorado], I taught black dance there while I was in the journey of creating my company, and he became one of our great spirits for the dance. I mean he was a preacher like you'd never imagine. Anytime he did the preach, people thought he had his own church. And he was full of humor and he was a rascal. That's what I say, he was a rascal. And he also taught aerobics. They would call it the Curtis special, because the people came in and they wanted to get in a bikini by summer, they knew to take his class 'cause he'd be doing crunches and sit-ups and every kind of thing. He'd try to hurt you so you could look good. So, shoot. Speaker 1: So, as we were talking about earlier that the pieces that are choreographed have a lot to do with social awareness as well, so you have pieces that deal with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and--'Blood River' [Cleo Parker Robinson], we talked about that in--didn't we talk about that? That's the South African piece, is that right? Speaker 2: Yes, oh yeah, about apartheid. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: You know I wanted to talk about my co-founder who also helped shape where I would go. Schyleen Qualls came out of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And I think that also helped shape our political and social consciousness. And maybe it's not political, but social. Story_ID: 671756 Speaker 1: So you were going to talk about your co-founder? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And we're just beginning so you can go into that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes. Well you know I was very fortunate when I started my company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance] in the '70s [1970s], I met Schyleen Qualls and Schyleen was interested in the words. She loved movement, but she loved the way words moved, and I wasn't so interested in words even though my brother [Randall Parker] would read poetry as I would dance, he would do Langston Hughes. My whole family was involved. My father [Jonathon Parker] was an actor, so I was always around words and how he would remember scripts that would blow my mind. It was like Lord how do you remember all that? But a dancer does the same thing, you remember movement, but Schyleen loved words she loved poetry. And so she would introduce me to like [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni. And so right away we began to understand who [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis was, and I became Angela Davis, so for ten years I danced Angela Davis around the country and in prisons. I put on my wig, I put on my glasses and I was serious, I was serious about changing the prison system, the system for women, I was serious. Schyleen and I we were deep you know. We would--we had vision together, so I shared the vision with my father and my family, my brothers and sisters [Leslie Parker-Wallace] but with Schyleen Qualls. She introduced me to the poetry of [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and Maya became a great friend of the company and a great supporter. And I love her she's my sister for real, I always go that's deep, we (unclear). But if Schyleen hadn't become my other half, artistically, I don't think I would have taken the journey of being so socially active in terms of what I felt I needed to say because we would talk all the time about, so what is it that we need to talk about, what is it that we--what do we want to know about our own selves, so that's why we created work that was later, 'Spiritual Suite' [Cleo Parker Robinson] and 'African Suite' [Cleo Parker Robinson], we wanted folks to know we knew we were African you know I might be in Denver [Colorado], I might not look African, but I know I'm African, you know, was that, and I'm all of the above, I'm Jewish, I'm all of the above, but I know I have African roots. So that was kind of bold. And to wear a fro at that time when people were straightening their hair, and there were--you know we knew we were out there. Story_ID: 671757 Speaker 1: And it was really amazing that we connected with a marvelous artist, [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks. Gordon Parks wrote the music for my 'Run Sister Run' and that became a film. And people like at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], students would see me in California, I'd be somewhere in New York [New York], at New York University and they'd say, "I just saw you in a movie." I'd say, "What?" You know, as I wasn't making movies, I wasn't in Hollywood, but they would see documentaries like that. They go, ""Oh you are deep you know," and I'd say, "Why?" They say, "Oh, I saw you do [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis," I said, "Oh, yes, you talking about Angela Davis then." So in doing the work, we began to share messages and to deal with oppression and to deal with injustices and to create a consciousness and awareness all over. And so I think it was really--it fed us spiritually. We had no money again. It's interesting that we were able to be in places. We had a lot of dignity, we had a lot of pride, but we didn't have any money, so (laughter). So I think that sense of valuing what it was that we had in our culture and being able to share it was very important. So one of the pieces that I did was 'Run Sister Run,' we did that a long time. I created it as a solo and then as an ensemble work and we finally performed it at San Diego State [San Diego State University, San Diego, California] for Angela Davis. And that was the last performance that I did of 'Run Sister Run.' And I couldn't do it anymore because it was too painful, physically to do and spiritually to do. I felt as though the country didn't care about people who were incarcerated, and that it was--it was on deaf ears that I was performing that piece and that I needed to find another way. So that was Angela Davis' work. And I don't believe that now, but I did then. But then I did a piece called 'Blood River' [Cleo Parker Robinson] and it was about apartheid in South Africa. And I'd been working in Hawaii for a long time. My grandparents came from Hawaii, very much like Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] family, he has roots there, and I also. So I'd go to Hawaii and every time I go there I would feel so privileged, I'd say, "Oh my god, I'm in paradise," and then I'd look at the paper and see the bloodshed in South Africa, and I'd say, "This isn't fair that I'm sitting on a beach and I'm you know having a chi chi or whatever, a rum and coke or whatever and there are people who are being murdered senselessly in another part of this world. And let me understand this, what is my role, what is my role, can I make any change," and this is when Nelson Mandela was still in prison. And I began to go to Hawaii and create a work and I created it there and then I put it on my company, and we began to tour and bring a consciousness of apartheid and to fight against it. And I figured I'd been to many places in the U.S. that were quite frightening and I'd experienced many things in the U.S. that were parallel experiences from the Jim Crow laws to the apartheid laws. And I met with many white South Africans and--who helped me put the pieces together. But I remember the way I started it and I opened it in San Francisco [California]. I started it with a prayer for, a prayer for peace and that was maybe fifteen years ago. Story_ID: 671758 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, because this is a modern dance company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the ballet companies have always a piece that they do during the holidays and I know that dancers usually they might be away from home or away from their own culture, and I understand that you have put together a piece for the holidays, you want to tell me about that? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. We do a piece called 'Granny Dances to a Holiday Drum' [Cleo Parker Robinson]. I love it. And it's a cold creation that I created with another poet, Opalanga [HistoryMaker Opalanga D. Pugh], and she loves storytelling. She's a story teller. And I realized that I had two dancers that had gotten married in the company and they moved to Washington, D.C. Most of the time dancers don't have time to get married and have families, but this one, Alfred Dove, it was Ulysses Dove's brother who married one of my dancers and they were in the company and moved to D.C. and I visited them during the holiday time and there they were having their third birth and the third birth was twins and they had no jobs. And I went into the nursery and began to cry. I was crying for them because I was thinking these young people have these babies and they are not going to be able to feed them, how they gon' survive. And I felt like these were my children and now my grandchildren. And I didn't want them seeing me cry and I was sitting in that room and just--I went through the toy box and found a book called 'The Dancing Granny' [Ashley Bryan]. And when I saw this book, 'The Dancing Granny' it reminded me that I was the grandmother now. As young as I felt like I was that I now was a grandmother and that I had to tell them that their mother and father were very wealthy, that they were rich because of all the experiences that we had had and that they had danced around the world with me and had danced and met all kinds of folks and that this richness they would pass onto them. And don't you know, the baby, the little one named Jazzy [ph.], she came back to Denver [Colorado] and danced in 'Granny' and announced to everybody, she says, "'Granny' is about me, it's about--she created 'Granny' for me," and just danced her little self to death in here. So we start with children. In my school we have children who are at the age of three that come into the production and we have our teenagers and we have our adults and we have our actors and we have our musicians. So we have professional artists along with novices so that we can understand that kind of diversity. But I also knew that I didn't want to do 'The Nutcracker' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] anymore. I had done the 'Nutcracker.' Where we had performed for President Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] in Vail [Vail Dance Festival, Vail, Colorado] with a ballet company and it was almost like 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner,' it was like--so I said, "Wait, we could do better than this. We can tell our own story." So the story I realize wasn't just our own but a universal story, that we could celebrate cultures around the world and educate people as we were entertaining, and I then went into the show as an angel. And I became Shakti, Granny's guardian angel. And Marcy [ph.] became Granny. Marcy didn't want to act, she didn't want to say anything, but she became Granny. So when we were out in the community and the grocery store, children would walk up to her and say, "Granny." They would think she was Granny, they loved her so much. So we created this character that honors grandmothers that really--I always feel as though art reflects life and life reflects art and that the dance is a powerful way to get to the heart, not just through the body but through, as Miss Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] says, the heart chakra. And once you get there you can change the mind. But many times you can't change our mind until we get through the heart, and it takes a lot of discipline. The children are so disciplined. We were here last night and there was about 100 people in the show. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Musicians who have been with The Temptations and everybody else and who commit year after year so we're going into almost twenty years of 'Granny' and there are some kids who have grown up in 'Granny' who have been in it fifteen years and so it's almost like they can't even wait 'til we get to 'Granny' you know. So sometimes when I think, oh my god, this financial situation the country is so fragile, I don't know how I can do 'Granny' and I say how can I tell this community we don't--we can't do 'Granny' this year? I said, ""You cannot, that is not an option, you must find a way." I think that's one of the things I've learned from my father [Jonathon Parker], mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker] and great teachers like Miss Dunham and even Talley [Talley Beatty] is that there's no option, you must find a way. You will find a way. And you're not finding it alone. And I think the dance teaches us that we do it, we do it collectively, we do it together. Story_ID: 671759 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Oh my. You know--you know I almost died last year. It was a terrible infection that came through my tooth into my bloodstream and paralyzed me, and I didn't know if I could dance in 'Granny' ['Granny Dances to a Holiday Drum,' Cleo Parker Robinson], I didn't know if I could even breathe. To breathe was excruciating. And I have to say I had a conversation with the creator and I dare say if dance is my life and I can no longer move, is my life over, you know this is it. And I had to be grateful, number one I had to say, "I've had so many unbelievable teachers and students and friends and family and love ones and I've shared so much love. So if this is it, this is it, this is it." But I think at that moment I said, "Well this isn't all about you, what is this about?" Then I knew it was greater than my physical life that it was what we've been doing and not to take myself so seriously but to understand that this almost forty years is about a lot of folks and a lot of communities, a lot of communities around the world, not only Denver [Colorado], but internationally, cause I think about the Maasai, we brought them here, and they came to our country and now continue to come because of their experience here in this space, that's one of the catalysts. And that we've had many catalysts like that. So I think to continue the legacy is to who do you--whose hands do you leave it in? And one is my son, to see my son, who as a three year old would take some of the creative movement classes and go, "I'm not putting on those tights, I don't see any other boys up in this class." But to now know that he would be one that would carry this legacy. Speaker 1: What is your son's name? Speaker 2: Malik, uh-huh. Thomas Malik Robinson, but he's Malik, named with a Swahili name meaning the king and I always was challenged because I had to listen to him. I should have named him something else. But one of the things is that he understands community, he understands other young people, and even though I have been with some of the greatest artists, many of them are gone. Eleo [HistoryMaker Eleo Pomare] is gone, Talley [Talley Beatty] is gone, [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham is gone--physically. I want their spirits to continue within the young people and that they understand the value that they provided all of us that art is critical for life, it's critical. It's like I'm--it nurtures the soul. So I think if we can make art accessible, continue, that we don't go back to being elitist, that we keep it inclusive, that we have everyone who walks through the door that sees themself, anyone can see themself here. Because if it begins to be elitist as I came into the art, if it begins to be only one culture and not many, not one spirit many voices, that's very important to me. And I think that to be able to express ourselves in the most honest way that becomes a healing for us. I think many people need healing, it's a healing. Now this is the doctor, this a part that I always wanted to be and now I think it's beyond any physical space. When people come in they can feel an environment, they can feel a vibration. When they dance they can feel that same vibration that elevates their spirit. So that they are feeling strong enough to do whatever their journey is. Story_ID: 671760 Speaker 1: You speak about your legacy, but I want you to now tell me how do you want people to remember you? Speaker 2: Hm. I don't know. You know people thinking about me I always call myself the crazy wild woman. You know, I just because I--I know I challenge people, I know I do because I don't fit in a box and that's challenging for people. They go well is she a dancer, no she's an administrator, no is she an executive director, no she's choreographer, is she a mother, oh no is she a wife, is she a--and I challenge all those boxes because I am a mother, I am a wife, but I'm a mother to a large group of people, not just to my one son [Thomas Malik Robinson]. And I am--I love many people, many. And I think I'd like for them to remember me as one who exudes love and tries to teach love through movement, through dance, 'cause I think love is critical. I think in having a heart attack very young in my life, my life has been about the heart. I think every time I danced, I thought I might have a heart attack and die right on stage. And yet it was okay because I was following my heart, I was following my passion. So I think it's about love, passion and compassion. I think compassion is very, very important. That we--that I hope I've been compassionate, because I know people have been compassionate to me and I think that's--that's important. My father [Jonathon Parker] and mother [Martha Mae Roberts Parker] provided the most loving family, even in the midst of tremendous challenges and pain and suffering. And anger. And I watched them transform many situations in people and become transformed themselves. So I think that that's--I hope people have seen me continue--continually transform as I hopefully can help others transform. I want--I believe in transformation. Story_ID: 671761 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you want to talk about that we have not? Speaker 2: I think this dream that artists and people of color and indigenous people who have contributed so much to sort of the basics of life, the root, the root of life can constantly find their dignity. I think dignity is very, very important. I see homeless people, men on the street at night when I leave my building, and as a woman sometimes alone, very late, I could be frightened, but I am not, even when my name is called out in the middle of the night by a stranger. I've heard men say, "I love you, keep on doing what you're doing, sister, keep on doing it." And I don't know who it is, I don't know, but I know that probably that person does not have a job, does not have money, does not necessarily have a home, but is not there to harm me, and therefore it is my job to make sure we provide a place for them as well. And so that sense of how do we make sure others can thrive that it's not just our own survival, but it's you know it brings joy to my heart to see that, even if it's a hug, even if it's a moment, it's a stopping in time to acknowledge another human being, whether I know them or not, whether it advances my day or not, but that we stop and see each other and care about each other. And I think I've learned that that's really critical because we have no idea that sometimes that's all another human being needs. Story_ID: 671762 Speaker 1: Because this is going to be an interview that future generations, many, many years from now will be able to hear your voice and see your face, what message would send to the future generations. Speaker 2: You know I think our future is pretty exciting. I look at young people all the time, they're very bright, very bright and they have more opportunities, more choices that we had--than we had. I think to try to carry some of the wisdom of the elders, try to carry that with them. I think it's very important that they don't forget. It shouldn't just be a youth culture even though youth are powerful, they're going to move, they're going to move any situation and country and community. But I want them to stay rooted to their authenticity, who they are, because oftentimes they kind of move as one mind. I want them to do what I learned and that was hard and that was, try to be yourself, who is that? And that might not be easy because it might not even feel popular, but to try to find your inner voice and that's how you find it, in the dance, you find it in the music, you find it in the writing, you find it sometimes in silence in meditation. And that's why I think the healing center I want to build that's taking forever to build becomes a place where elders and teenagers and children come together in very creative ways and they exchange laughter and they exchange information so that there is not that gap, that we can continue, as Miss Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] says, to spiral in our knowledge and in our evolution as a society, that we evolve, that we really evolve, that we don't become computerized and materialized and so focused on some of the things that we might not even have as this shift is going on economically, but to stay rooted in spirit and rooted in their own spiritual roots. Speaker 1: Well I want thank you for taking the time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, this has been a treat (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --to share your story. It's truly going to be inspiring--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You have been doing the work, I must say, you had all the questions. I said, "I don't even remember that. Let me see if I could connect that" (laughter). Speaker 1: Well thank you very much for your time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Thank you. Oh, thank you for your time. Story_ID: 671763 Speaker 1: This is at Colorado Women's College [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. My first year as a freshman. I am over on the left. We're doing our Russian dances. We learned dances from all over the world with Rita Berger, 1967. Speaker 2: This is my teacher Rita Berger, who was dancing with the Met [Metropolitan Opera Ballet] with George Balanchine and this is one of the photographs that I got after her ceremony when she passed last year, which was about '07 [2007], 2007. Speaker 1: And 'Dance With Me' [ph.] and our signature piece 'Rain Dance' [Cleo Parker Robinson] with the men in the red skirts, became very famous. We took it around world, choreographed by Milton Myers. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: So that's Curtis Fraser? Speaker 1: Right in the middle, uh-huh. Speaker 2: --I was raising money for Miss Dunham at that time in the early days before I learned that she would be choreographing on my company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance] 'Barrelhouse Blues' [Katherine Dunham] and 'Choros' [Katherine Dunham]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my father and mother, my sister Susie, my brother Randy and my brother Preston, no Phillip. I have another brother. I have two brothers missing in that. Actually, father, Jonathon Parker, Martha Parker [Martha Mae Roberts Parker], Leslie Sue Parker-Wallace [Leslie Parker-Wallace], Randy Parker [Randall Parker] and Phillip Alloe [ph.]. Speaker 1: Whalon who was missing in that picture, uh-huh, John Whalon Parker, Jr. [Jonathon Parker, Jr.] and that's me in the middle, Cleo and Susie and Randy on the left and everybody were--everybody danced at my company. My sister danced with me. Speaker 2: --husband, Tom Robinson, and that was I think a year or so ago, so that was in 2006, I received an award. Speaker 1: --elementary school at Bromwell Elementary [Bromwell Elementary School, Denver, Colorado] in 1960 and where am I, I'm right there. Speaker 2: In New York [New York], after [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's ceremony, she had just passed, and I'm with her partner, Vanoye Aikens who was her partner in 'Barrelhouse Blues,' and he came to teach us 'Barrelhouse.' Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Cleo Parker Robinson at the age of about, I don't know, I think about 1965. Speaker 2: --ther, Jonathan Parker and my grandmother, Cleo Parker, Sr. [Cleo Parker] and I'm named after her. That's Mama Cleo and we were at a tribute for his retirement party where he put thirty-nine years at the University of Denver [Boulder, Colorado]. Speaker 1: That's my sister Susie who danced in my company and we're at one of my gala celebrations to raise money for the scholarships-- Speaker 2: --Thomas Malik Robinson. We call him Malik and he's our manager of our school and that was last year, I think. Speaker 1: This is my father he has a young--a little one, he has two children by my lighting designer, Raina Sylva [ph.], and that is my little sister and my father, Samantha [ph.], and we have a little brother name Nicky [ph.]. Speaker 2: There's me (laughter), that's me in Denver and I think one of the things we did is we went to the park all the time at City Park in Denver, Colorado. Speaker 1: And this is me at Katherine Dunham's final tribute in now, not New York, but East St. Louis [Illinois], where she was from and we're in her final ceremony and that was 2006. Speaker 2: --Emerson [ph.] with me, and Theo [Theo Ubique] taught the company 'Ragtime' [Katherine Dunham] and he and I demonstrated for Miss Dunham whenever we had Dunham classes and he'll continue the legacy with us. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977] coming back from Lagos, Nigeria, we were invited to perform in the world festival called FESTAC [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria] and that's my father Jonathon Parker, speaking to all the reporters. Speaker 2: --studio and that's Baba Chuck Davis looking very fine over there before he was an African dancer and teacher, he was a modern teacher with [HistoryMaker] Eleo Pomare's company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company]. Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know that. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and there we are in my studio. Marceline Freeman who had been with me from the age of fifteen, now thirty-eight years in the company. Speaker 1: --or something like that. Yes, that's Schyleen Qualls and myself. The photograph was taken by Rod Rodgers who was one of the early choreographers that I had choreographed on the company in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Our--Katherine Dunham with her goddaughter Kati [Kati Stovall] and one of the massage therapists, Louis [ph.], who I brought--brought Miss Dunham to the big island, to Hawaii where I was working and that was about oh, eight years ago. That might be-- Speaker 1: --Honolulu [Hawaii], as I had her lecture about anthropology and of course the Dunham way of life. Speaker 2: --now in ceremony which she absolutely loved and this is her executive director, this is Jeanelle Stovall with her daughter. Kati is Janell's daughter and both Kotti is living in East St. Louis but Jannell has made her transition-- Speaker 1: --me with [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte in a ceremony, he got the lifetime achievement award in Los Angeles [California] and invited me to be his guest. He and Julie, his wife, Julie Belafonte [Julie Robinson Belafonte]. Julie Robinson--..