 Story_ID: 616332 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers; our videographer, is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Rey Ramsey, R-E-Y, R-A-M-S-E-Y. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 10, 1960, Lower Merion Township, basically, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Lower Merion, of course, is now known as where Kobe Bryant, was born, it's right outside of Philly. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: But we lived in Philly. Speaker 1: --Lower Merion-- Speaker 2: Township in Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: --Township in Pennsylvania, okay, 'cause we had like some place, in New Jersey-- Speaker 2: Well then we--Atco, New Jersey 'cause then we moved, my first four years were in Philly, West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and then we moved to South Jersey, like a lot of people, you know, migrate over to South Jersey. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind your name? It's spelled R-- Speaker 2: R-E-Y, well, the full name is actually Reynard. R-E-Y-N-A-R-D and my late mother [Janice Hayes Ramsey], came up with that name because, it's a funny story, because it always drove my father [Felix Ramsey] crazy hearing it, because he had another name picked out, and my mother, is one of these, she believed in dreams, so you know how that whole thing goes, so she had a dream, they didn't know if I was a boy or a girl, and she was on a bus, this guy comes up to her on the bus, looks at her being pregnant, and says, "It's gonna be a boy, and you're gonna name him Reynard," and spelled it. That's how I got the spelling, woke up in the morning and told my father, it's a boy, and here's the name. He's like, Reynard? It wasn't a name to him, so that's, that's, how we got it, that's why--and she hated me you know, shrinking it, the kids in school just sort of made it Rey, and so if I was gonna shrink it, I was gonna go R-E-Y, not R-A-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Did you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No, she was like a middle name would ruin it, say no middle name, (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I'm CEO, One Economy Corporation. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, I have to check, I don't know what it is. What is it? April 29th, and this would be off, I have it as-- Speaker 1: Two thousand eight [2008]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that I know. Speaker 1: All right. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: All right, in the offices of One Economy? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Our headquarters. Story_ID: 616333 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask, of every-- Speaker 2: Oh, my god, favorite music or something, I hope not. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, my god (laughter). Speaker 1: This is not of my doing, these are not my doing. Speaker 2: I hear you. Speaker 1: This is what--- do you have a favorite food first of all? Speaker 2: Not really, I love yogurt. I love yogurt, I eat yogurt every morning. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably blue. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I love Thanksgiving, and I love the fall. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Love going to Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: People of, (laughter), I'm often told that I call things a disaster, very often, whether they are a disaster, or not, and I think the other thing, I'm always saying is if, if you're around me and I use a management tool, it's the inverted pyramid, 'cause I'm always talking about it, as a journalist, I'm always talking about the inverted pyramid, the inverted pyramid, so I like to make sure papers are written with the inverted pyramid, the inverted pyramid. I even have, they gave me stationery with it already pre-designed on the inverted pyramid. Story_ID: 616334 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Felix Ramsey] side. Speaker 2: Sure, sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's first name and spell it for us, first. Speaker 2: Yes, Janice, J-A-N-I-C-E, Hayes [Janice Hayes Ramsey], and that was her maiden name-- Speaker 1: H-A-Y-E-S? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, her place of birth was Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I'd have to backdate that she was born Jan- August 30th, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and she passed away, eighteen months ago, and she was seventy-one, so I'd have to do the math on that. She passed away October 2nd, of '06 [2006], and she was seventy-one at the time, so whatever that math is. Speaker 1: Okay, it's hard for me to do the math in my head and I'm doing this at the same time. Speaker 2: I think that it was, it would probably be '35 [1935]? I think it was '35 [1935], she passed away in '06 [2006]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And she was seventy-one. Speaker 1: What do you know, now she was born, was she raised in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Born and raised in Philadelphia, our people are from a combination of Florida, on her side, and New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, we know on my mother's side, again, in Florida that they were sort of a classic mix at that time, between Native Americans and African Americans. They owned property of their own, which was unusual, and they basically, for a number of reasons, and you have different accounts within the family, fled from Florida, and came to Philadelphia, felt the need to do that, her grandfather, fled and came up north-- Speaker 1: You say fled, that means something after them. There was some trouble (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was some trouble, yeah, there was some trouble, and again, I talked to our great aunt who's ninety-four, and she gives a different version than my grandmother gave, and so you have differing versions within the family. Speaker 1: Two different versions, now thi- this is something that your offspring gave us, see, and we still know other versions-- Speaker 2: No, part of the version was that, that he was accused of, as many African American men were, of sort of making an advance, on a woman, white woman, and they chased after him, tried to kill him, and so they had to flee for that purpose. Another account was, was, that he got into a fight with someone, and either injured him badly, but in any event, you know, had to leave, and left the land. Speaker 1: Was this, a white person as well? Speaker 2: Yes, and so just differing versions on the--exactly what happened, but it just caused this migration from Florida up, on, on my mother's side, and that's-- Speaker 1: It could be both. You know, one could lead to the other (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Could be, could be both, it's just hard to-- Speaker 1: According to these two-- Speaker 2: Of course, I have no way of knowing, and these stories have just been passed down, and-- Speaker 1: Thing about oral history, you don't have to know exactly, just that we-- Speaker 2: Very tight knit, you know, so, myself and my cousins, my great aunt, lives in Philadelphia to this day, she's ninety-four years old, so she's the matriarch, in the family, she had eleven girls and one boy, and so that's my great aunt, who was the sister of my grandmother, who had six children and my mother being one of them. Speaker 1: What did the family do in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: They just were hardworking, you know, worked for the city, worked for--my mother eventually became a nurse, so they were just hard working class people, not really college, you know, folks, it's just this generation now, we're the first generation, you know, of college folks. One of my great aunts, she was a medical nurse as well, so she was really the first one to crack through, Aunt Gladys [ph.], great aunt as well, and again, one of the sisters, so when they fled, there were three sisters, my, my, grandmother, whose nickname, her name was Marion Hayes [Marion Hayes], Bea [Bea Okitas (ph.)], who is the matriarch, and Gladys, so there were those three sisters, and so they're sort of this matriarchal, and we kind of all grew up around them, so their children and us, we were all kind of in Philadelphia. West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and different parts like that, they were in public housing, projects, things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, which in those days, were not quite (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and they used to say wow, we had a marble step and you know, we--they keep it very clean, and the windows were being washed and people had that sense of pride, in their properties, and somewhere along the line, it got lost. Speaker 1: Yeah, very different now, people talk about the pride-- Speaker 2: Public, actually in the projects-- Speaker 1: Another thing, people waited to get a place in public housing, and it was better than the general housing. Speaker 2: Exactly right and they filled out, I think the name was the Allen Projects, the name, or something like that and 'cause our mom used to point it out, they've been knocked down and rebuilt, fairly recently in Philadelphia, but she would point to the project, "That's where I grew up." Speaker 1: I guess they were named after Richard Allen, you think.? Speaker 2: I think so, yes, Richard Allen projects [Richard Allen Homes, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Story_ID: 616335 Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories that are passed down from your family about life in the South, during slavery or Civil War or the Indian [Native American] ancestors-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, all sorts of things about you know, like how my, my, great-grandfather, could, you couldn't throw him. They used to talk about how he knew how to plant his body, and men would come from all over, to try to see if they could throw him, in some way, and nobody could throw him, so you know, you would hear it always, (laughter), and of course, I never met him, and so I would often wonder, wow, this must have been amazing, you know, man. So, so, they were all storytellers, because again, particularly on that side, with all the matriarchs, the women, they would tell more of the stories, my father's [Felix Ramsey] side of the family, they're a little more stoic, a lot more quiet, and it's interesting, a lot more men on that side. So there were girls over on my mother's [Janice Hayes Ramsey] side of the family, and lots of men on, on my father's side of the family, 'cause his people are South Carolina, Aiken, South Carolina, and there were like eight-- Speaker 1: Why don't you wait on him? Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: I'll get to that in a second, but so, these are the stories from your-- Speaker 2: From my mother's side, yeah. Speaker 1: There are some stories from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and they would talk about how, you know, they all lived closer together, and so, like on my mother's side, you know, they had hard times, because her, her father [James Hayes], was in the [U.S. military] service, he was known for, you know, gambling and running around, a little bit, so the kids were often, you know, in difficult circumstances, so my grandmother was always doing the best that she could. Some of the stories handed down that my grandmother [Marion Hayes], in order to make it, had a speakeasy, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I, you know, I never visited it, but my mother said that you could see cash that she would be putting--you know, and she would make platters and cook chicken, and fish, and sweet potatoes, and other sort of things, sort of have an after hour and serve drinks and apparently, people knew about it, you know, and that kept her, you know, stable, to be able to support the kids, and that she had without her fa- without her husband being around as much as she would have liked. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, there were all kinds of stories about the characters who would show up, you know, at the speakeasy, and it had to--she eventually, had to close it because too many people wanted money off the top, so that they could keep quiet about her having it. So she had this red house, and she was obsessed with red, so that was--we never understood why Granny, as we called her, liked everything painted red. She wanted to drink her water out of red glasses, she--the house was painted red, the carpeting on the interior was red, so everything would be red or black, I don't know why. And then, there were also a lot of stories about--particularly from the Indian side and other things about seances, that they would have, so there were interesting things, so on my mother's side, we were Catholics, and they were--felt very good about being Catholics, and in fact, one of my aunts is a nun, in New Orleans [Louisiana], they-- Speaker 1: That's where your grandmother was-- Speaker 2: That's right, and that whole, ri- right. So, then it came from either-- Speaker 1: Was she Creole, or-- Speaker 2: Little bit of Creole mix and Seminole Indian mix, the Creole part would be my grandfather, mixing in with my grandmother, who was from the Florida area, and moving up, and so that's how that comes together on that, on that side, and so you know, there were all these stories about particularly again, about my colorful grandmother who was with the speakeasy, but she would also have these you know, seances, (laughter), at her house, and of course, I never, attended any of those sorts of things. So I would hear amazing stories about the table moving, (laughter), all these sorts of things, and she would be of course, talking about, you know, "Be careful, don't, don't use any roots, and don't you know--," so there were all these kinds of-- Speaker 1: The Indian and the African culture make a real-- Speaker 2: An interesting mix. They would always talk about roots, and you know, what would be put in food and be careful about what you eat, and where you eat, who made it and what did it make you feel like, (laughter), so all those sorts of things, those are some of the things that have been passed down. Okay, so I just smile over that, but unfortunately, on the health side, so many of them eventually, on my mother's side, had health problems, particularly related to kidney disease, and I believe four of her siblings were on dialysis, including herself, so, and my grandmother was also on dialysis, her mom. Speaker 1: Is there a cause, I mean a specific thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there was a lot of you know, you look at diet, you look at there was clearly, issues around obesity, and then of course, you have heredity issues, so, I tend to be very health conscious, you know, just thinking about what happened. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry-- Speaker 2: 'Cause she passed like I said around eighteen months ago, and-- Speaker 1: At a relatively young age-- Speaker 2: At a relatively young age, she battles the classic, you know, issues she had. She had a heart attack, two strokes, they amputated part of her foot, they did bypass surgery, and then eventually, it was a colon infection, along with having pneumonia, heart disease, and the kidney disease, all at once. And so, the hardest thing was I delivered the eulogy at her, at her funeral. Story_ID: 616336 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your mother's [Janice Hayes Ramsey] growing up, wha- what was growing up like for her and as far as you know. Speaker 2: It was tough, I mean, so I always looked at her as one tough, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] lady. You know, who would have to battle her way, she wanted to go to Catholic school, her parents [Marion Hayes and James Hayes] didn't have the money, and she started working at Horn and Hardart, a restaurant in Philadelphia, at a young age, and she was actually too young to carry the trays, and so the guys would try to help her out, carrying the trays, so she was really always one of the hardest workers, and she made it difficult for you not to do well in school, when you would see her, pushing herself, and then years later, after she had already had the four, there were five kids, in, in, the family, so I had four siblings, and after having already had four of us, she decided to go into the workforce, she had always worked, while she had us all, but she decided to go back, to go to nursing school. And so she went to Albert Einstein Medical Center [Albert Einstein Medical Center School of Nursing, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to get a nursing degree, and would--sometimes, I would be sitting by her and she would say, "Keep me awake," because her head would be in the book, and then she would fall asleep, you know, if her face was in the book and I would wake her up to try because she would have exams, and she still managed to do well. So she was in her forties when she got her degree, and I was said, that perseverance, was amazing to me. And I would hear, stories about how she had to walk to school, work, you know, put herself through it, and then watch her become a nurse, have that uniform clean, I would always shine her shoes, so in the morning, she would come down and she'd see, and those white nursing shoes and they would all be shined, and she wanted them shined. Just like us, she wanted all of us to have a really good education, and we went to private, Catholic school, and so just watching that perseverance all the way, throughout. She was a babbler, and I wanted her to retire, she would never retire. I had offered her, I wanted to do this big party, retirement thing, and she had worked all the way up until she had the heart attack, so she had never had a retirement. Speaker 1: Where did she go to school in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: She went to--I think it was--oh god, what was the name of the school? It was Catholic school, and I'm not sure what the name of it was. It might have been Hahnemann, is one I'm thinking of, but I'm not sure it, it was a Catholic girls school, that she went to, and I just don't remember the name. Story_ID: 616337 Speaker 1: Well, let's go to your father's side (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name? Speaker 2: Felix, no middle name, F-E-L-I-X. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ramsey [Felix Ramsey]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And then he's born in December, that would be December 10, and right now, he's seventy-five, so whatever that date works out to be. Speaker 1: Okay, that would be 1930 or so. Speaker 2: Whatever that number is, do the math (laughter). Speaker 1: Three years or so--and where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in--he grew up in Aiken, South Carolina, I believe he was born in Aiken, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Aiken, South Carolina (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But then moved to--then they moved to, of course, to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], as well, and there were seven kids, all boys, except for one girl, who died early, so it was a family of boys. And he'd--had gotten close to the family of girls on the other side. Speaker 1: Any stories about Aiken? That's an interesting town; I've heard about it a lot (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he's the youngest, so he--and unfortunately, every one of his brothers are gone. So you know, trying--should we go by memories? So he was the baby and you have all these boys there, and they know, they used to tell some stories, but again, I didn't know a lot about it, you know, about they could trace to slavery, on that side of the family come, coming, from South Carolina. They would just talk about some of the stuff they would eat, you know, and basically they would eat anything, any and every thing, you know, from squirrels, to possums, so you know, he and our uncles talking about that, of course, talking to us who grew up, you know, in South Jersey [New Jersey], and we would hear this. And sometimes, my uncle would say, "Do you guys have a trap in your backyard?" And we're like, "For what?" You know, because we could trap that, cook, and make a great gravy, and just the idea of eating some of these things, but people enjoy them, so I don't wanna you know, put that down. They survived, they did well. They owned a store, in South Carolina, and then eventually owned a store in Philadelphia. The issues in that family were a lot of the older brothers were drinkers, including my grandfather [Abraham Ramsey] on that side, and so they actually drank themselves out of having that business. So it was unusual for African Americans, to have, you know, their own store, and they had a store, but eventually, some of the problems around drinking and issues like that. Now, my father never did any--he won't touch, sniff, or get anywhere near a drink. He never has, never seen him touch a drink, my entire life, and that just something he obviously witnessed, a number of things and so things were kind of quiet, and I would see these older guys, around, who weren't as old as they looked, and they were uncles of mine, but not all of them, one of them, Charles Ramsey, was a chief master sergeant, in the [U.S.] Air Force, and he passed away about six years ago. He was also a hero, because he did extremely well--that's the highest enlisted, you know, rank, that you could get to, in the Air Force. And he was not a drinker, he was the classic officer and a gentleman, and carried himself that way. Another one, who passed away, in South Carolina, who was the colorful one, sort of the playboy, Eugene [Eugene Ramsey], and he was, you know, colorful and he had interesting stories, which we, we, witnessed as well. Speaker 1: Aiken, South Carolina, is the home of Channing Tobias [Channing Heggie Tobias], who was one of the associates of Ralph Bunche, used to head the Y, Harlem Y [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York], John G. Jackson, historian is from Aiken, you know, any stories about Aiken? Speaker 2: You know, I could never really--it was just really their sort of eating, and that my grandmother, whose name was Queen Esther [Queen Esther Anderson Ramsey], she-- Speaker 1: That was her actual-- Speaker 2: That was her name, Queen Esther, yeah, and she, which is very, very, you know, tall, and had this long ponytail, I don't remember--she had Indian [Native American] in her as well, and you could just--she would stand so straight, and she would plait her hair, and have this one long, plait, that would go down, you know, her back, and she just raised them. She was tough, she raised all those boys, and they would just tell about, she had these babies and would be back out in the fields, they say, would work in the fields picking, and she would be back up and she would tell you about, "Yeah, I was up the next day, the next morning, you know, picking after I had another baby." And they would have babies by midwives, I'd hear the stories about how midwives would come over and assist her in having a baby, and then, she'd be right back out, so, again, very strong, work ethic. My grandfather, I never really got to know because he had a stroke, and I just remember as a kid, seeing him sitting in a wheelchair, and he just had big hands, and it would scare you, you know, he had a deep voice and big hands. And all I knew, he was just called Pop, and you know, you would just kind of come around him and his big hand would go around your waist, kind of, and it was just a little scary, you know, as a kid. But he liked to watch baseball, and they were big on, of course, the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] because of Jackie Robinson, so I would hear-- Speaker 1: The whole generation (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The whole genera- absolutely, so they would have that TV on trying to watch, even when they were playing the Phillies [Philadelphia Phillies], there was always this affinity about, about that and now really growing up and understanding what that meant. I understand it a lot more--as a kid, I'm like why the Dodgers? They're out in Los Angeles [California] now, I didn't quite understand it as a kid, I grew up more with the whole Muhammad Ali, you know, kind of thing, he was a huge hero of mine. Story_ID: 616338 Speaker 1: How old was your father [Felix Ramsey], when they moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: I believe he was a boy, I don't know the exact age, but I know he was a boy, and again, they had the shop there. And then my grandfather [Abraham Ramsey] I know, not only when the shop didn't go well, he would go out junking, as they called it, you know, and he had a truck, and he would go out, and do things, scrap metal, picking up different things, refurbishing furniture, pic- you know, (laughter), doing a whole mix of things, to make it work, and she [Ramsey's paternal grandmother, Queen Esther Anderson Ramsey] would do some work, as well. So, the two of them they made enough to, you know, to get by, and have a house over, you know, that they owned, everything else like that, which was nice. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause they had their own shop, and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, and they, they sold meat, and other kind of groceries, and those sorts of things, and again, they ran into cash problems, and I was never in that store, but I would just hear the stories, and you know, about some of the drinking issues, and the carousing, and you know, and things like that. You know, and most--some of those uncles, I never got to know, I would just see them from a distance, and then, you know, sometimes, I would ask my mom, who is that? Because they would look older, I guess, because of the drinking, and hard life, and they would say, well, that's your Uncle So and So, but the three closest, you know, uncles, now, there's one, there's one surviving uncle, Uncle Buddy, he is in his eighties right now, we joke because, no one knows exactly what his age is. The joke was, he's moved it around enough, that we don't know, but he was at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii], and he does tell the story--I'm fascinated by the story, in fact, I've said that I wanted to write a book about his life, and it's something that I would like to get to more, but whenever, I'm around Uncle Buddy, I sit down to learn stories, and he was there, when in Pearl Harbor, on a ship, they got shot, and he describes it as that, of course, it catches everybody off guard, and he said he was knocked unconscious, and what I'll never forget was he said he woke up in the water, and of course, there were sharks all around, and he said what people don't remember was that it was the sharks that were killing a lot of people, because there was all this blood, and he said part of what saved him was he wasn't moving, because he had been knocked out, and when he woke up his eye was basically knocked out and he said it was turned in another direction, and then he went back out again, so you can imagine, like your eye pulled out of its socket. I think they kind of corrected it. He has a couple of issues with it, and I think he has a plate, somewhere in his head, but his eye was literally like hanging out, and looking in an odd direction, and he went back out again, so he would tell stories about that and he's a remarkable story, because, he would talk about his drinking, and how it's been, probably fifty years, since he's had a drink and he went cold turkey, so he's an amazing person, just watching him and he, so he's the oldest, you know, on that side, and so Uncle Buddy-- Speaker 1: He's probably got a good story, we should get his number. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's got great stories, I mean Uncle Buddy-- Speaker 1: I don't think we've ever interviewed a Pearl Harbor survivor for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he has amazing stories, I could definitely get you, you know, his number, and he still walks, he's a very spiritual person, you know, now, and I just love being around him, just hearing him talk and his Pearl Harbor stories are amazing, and it took years before he would say anything about it. Then he used to tell me things, which I don't know whether he'll tell you about them, things that used to happen on the ship around race issues, which were just amazing, you know-- Speaker 1: We heard a lot of those stories, and they're not--the good thing about this project, is that when we confirm a lot of reality for people (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it took him a lot of years, he would not talk, and I think I was in--probably not until I graduated from law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], and I kind of sat him down, I was like, "Buddy I want to know more about this," and I told him. And I haven't gotten to this project, but I really would like to, you know, get more of his history, you know, recorded, cause he's got some amazing stories. Speaker 1: What is his given name? Speaker 2: I, I, I just know him as Buddy, I know it's another--Bettis. I think his name is Bettis, in fact it is, it's Bettis. Speaker 1: B-E-T-T-- Speaker 2: I-S, and-- Speaker 1: Bettis Reynolds Speaker 2: Ramsey. Speaker 1: Bettis Ramsey, Ramsey. Sorry for that. Speaker 2: And he is in his eighties, don't know the exact, and it's kind of funny, because I believe he was the second oldest of all those boys, and with my father being the youngest, they could only be so close in age. (Laughter) Because my father is right around seventy-four, or seventy-five, and so, there's a compression here of age, and I'm thinking now how long has he been eighty? So I'm not quite sure exactly how old he is, but very lucid, very strong, you know, moves around, is in very good health, so it's great to see. Speaker 1: Okay, so your father was the youngest of-- Speaker 2: Youngest, of all those boys. Speaker 1: --seven sons? Speaker 2: Yeah, all those boys. Speaker 1: So your father's the seventh son-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and they had one girl, who, she passed away, early, and again, Bettis--Buddy, he remembers sort of what happened, I just heard, you know, little things like that. So, they were--when my mother [Janice Hayes Ramsey] got brought into the family, she was like the sister, and they would call her Sis, she was the sister that they never had, so they were all over them, and the Ramsey family, you know, got close, you know, with my mother's family, because, again, there were all those girls. And so, there were multiple people who had dated other people in the Ramsey family, who were connected, you know, with, with, that side of the family, so it's sort of interesting. (Laughter) 'Cause they were called the Okitases, so Aunt Bea, her last name was Okitas [Bea Okitas (ph.)], and so there were all those girls, you have all these boys, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 616339 Speaker 1: Did your father [Felix Ramsey] talk about growing up? What, what, was it like for him? Speaker 2: He was always--my father is quiet. He is very, very, quiet, and so it's really hard to get him--you can see him--his brothers would get him to come out a little bit more. Eugene [Eugene Ramsey], Charles [Charles Ramsey], and Bettis [Bettis Ramsey], those were the uncles, we were around a lot, and they would talk much more, you know, about old stories, and sometimes tell stories with him, but he's very quiet, you know, even to this day, trying to pull stuff outta him, comes from being the youngest, and you kind of let the elders, you know, talk for you, but I don't have a lot of real stories, other than, of course, his older brothers accusing him of being spoiled, and you know, having everything, and how much easier it was, and he got to eat different food in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and not you know, in South Carolina, how they had to scrounge, and those sorts of things, so it's more, it's more stories like that. Now, my father they would say-- because he's not very tall or big, he's slight of build, about 5'11" and was a fighter. So, my father would talk about getting jumped on occasion, in, in Philadelphia, and he was known for, he'd grab anything he could, a brick, a piece of whatever he could, you know, to defend himself. So he's a fighter and he is always known as a hard worker, and I watched him work hard as well at the Budd Company [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], B-U-D-D, and they would do parts for trains and you know, and other sorts of things, trains and trucks, and chassis and those sorts of things. So welding was part of his craft, you know, and he would, you know, in at different times, he would get laid off, in those days televisions needed to be repaired a lot, so he'd have the television repair kit, he'd repair appliances, you know, do whatever it took, get a second job, and then they'd put him in some trainee, you know, management trainee, type things and he eventually, worked his way up to be a supervisor, at a supervisor level and made more money, so for us, we moved from Philly, when I was five, and we moved into South Jersey [New Jersey], and it was because they were both trying to work hard and earn more money and they wanted us to have a house. Speaker 1: Now, your father, where, where, did he go to high school? Speaker 2: God, I should remember that, but you know, off the top of my head, I cannot remember. He did not go to college, so he went high school and-- Speaker 1: Did he go to the [U.S.] Army or the service? Speaker 2: He did go in the [U.S.] Air Force, yeah, he went in the Air Force, as most of my, I think all of my uncles did. Speaker 1: I guess we're here in the '50s [1950s], mid-'50s, [1950s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he didn't, he didn't, he didn't do-- Speaker 1: --none of that Cold War stuff, just strategic. Speaker 2: --yeah, and again, he didn't, he only talked very sketchily about his time, you know, in the [U.S.] military. And I remember seeing, him in a military uniform, in the picture with him and my mom [Janice Hayes Ramsey], having gotten married, and at first, they did a civil ceremony and then they did a, you know, full religious, ceremony, and he converted, you know, at least the name converted, from being a Baptist, to a Catholic, because that's what my grandmother [Marion Hayes] wanted, and it was all Catholics on my mother's side. Story_ID: 616340 Speaker 1: So when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Everybody would tell you my mother [Janice Hayes Ramsey], because she's very outspoken. I'm known to be outspoken, but there are traits from both. He, he, has a--my father [Felix Ramsey] has a work ethic, sort of a quiet resolve, and I've been told that I have that, you know, sort of work ethic, quiet resolve, but she was clearly the firebrand, speak her mind on any issue, and was always the one sort of pushing, you know, in all ways, you gotta be twice as good, you gotta be twice as good, and so I have that kind of push, but when you peel beneath that, you can see some of the other, you know, some of the other traits as well (simultaneous). Story_ID: 616341 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: The earliest would be, we used to call it the old house, on Delancey Street in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. I remember having a tricycle, and riding it around the dining room, in the dining room, around the table, probably much to the chagrin of my parents [Janice Hayes Ramsey and Felix Ramsey], but they owned that house on Delancey Street, and those were my memories of that, of that place, you know, there, and having--it was a blue bike, a blue tricycle and I remember riding it around, right? And I thought that it was the most beautiful bike, you know, in the world, so, that what I remember most about it and occasionally, when I would be over at my grandmother's house, being allowed to, with somebody holding my hand, to go to the little stores, and you know, and you'd have a few pennies, and you know, you could get some good candy, so with a nickel and a few other things, we could come back with some good candy, that's what I remember. Story_ID: 616342 Speaker 1: Okay, now how old were you when your family moved to-- Speaker 2: Five. Speaker 1: Five, okay. Speaker 2: That was a big adjustment moving from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was an all-black environment, living on Delancey Street in West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and so, not even really knowing, we didn't have a television at that time, so, race was not something I, I, even knew, cause you didn't see anybody who looked--and then all of a sudden, we moved to South Jersey, and we integrated the neighborhood, and so it was in Atco, New Jersey, in this housing development, so, you know, they were building all of this developments with split level houses, and I remember my parents [Janice Hayes Ramsey and Felix Ramsey] went, look at all the property, and then, you know, at that age, it seemed like it was acres, and acres, and acres, it was a half acre, but it seemed like it was enormous, you know, in terms of having property, and the house at that age, just seemed enormous, you know. It was a four bedroom house, and the classic split level, and that's when I understood there were racial differences. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: And that brought it right out of the gate. Speaker 1: --by this time, did you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: By that time, that's how and when we moved, in '65 [1965], were three of us with one on the way, 'cause I'm the next youngest. I was born in 1960, and the next youngest was born in '65 [1965] and we moved in '65 [1965], so he was just being born, so there were the three and then the baby, and eventually there was another one who came along, for a total of five. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so my brother [Felix Ramsey] is three years older than me, then my sister [Melanie Ramsey], one year older than me, and then me. Speaker 1: Okay, and one sister and four brothers. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Your family produces a lot of males. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, (laughter), and--but when we moved in, one of the memories that I have, one of the first memories, was there was a sign on the, on the, entry way to the neighborhood, you know, they would name developments, you know, and it was called Ivystone [Atco, New Jersey], you know, as in ivy growing, on the back side of it, I remember turning in the car, asking my mother, "What does K, K, and K, mean?" 'Cause, they had spray painted it, after we moved in, and at the time, she just said, "It's something very bad." And didn't wanna go into details about it, and so that was the beginning of learning how to--and this was in 1965, so you know what was going on at that time, and we integrated this neighborhood, and so suddenly, in this neighborhood, where they had just, built all these homes, the people, who had the house before us, only lived in it a short period of time, so I think that they had to get out of it, that we were able to get it for a nice deal, and we were able to move in, and then suddenly, all these issues started happening. Speaker 1: Now, especially after doing a lot of these interviews, I understand that New Jersey, can, can be a lot like Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Totally. Speaker 1: --some people wouldn't think--wow, you're in New Jersey, KKK [Ku Klux Klan]? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was spray painted right there, and then having to have the police outside the front of our house, going to bed, looking out my window and seeing a police car, because that was to protect us. Speaker 1: It got that serious? Speaker 2: It got that serious, because we had a birdbath out front, my mother wanted to fix the house up, so we put this beautiful birdbath out front, the very next morning, someone had taken a sledge hammer and smashed it. And then we put another one up and they smashed that, and they literally, would dig up our plants in front, and overturn them, and there would be messages left. My father was working evenings, so it got a little scary, so what my mother would do at night, we would do this, she would say, "We're gonna lock up," so when it got dark, you would have to go around and lock the front door, the back door, make sure the windows were locked because, what people started doing, were knocking on the front, on the back of the house, and then they would leave notes. And she would grab the notes, so we couldn't see the words of what we were being called, and what was being said, so she would get it, rip it up, so, I only saw a couple, and then that's when I learned what some of these words were, that I never had heard before, so we had never seen that sort of thing. Speaker 1: So it was 1965 and you would have been in what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was five years old. Speaker 1: --second-- Speaker 2: So, I was just getting ready to enter school. I entered school [Assumption School, Atco, New Jersey], when I was five, and I (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 616343 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were born in-- Speaker 2: I was born in '60 [1960], and so but because it was September, you know, I joined and then I turned six, once I started school, and we went to a Catholic school, called Assumption [Assumption School], in South Jersey [Atco, New Jersey], and it--we integra- at one point in time, there were three African Americans in grades one through eight, my brother, my sister [Melanie Ramsey], and me. And so you can just imagine, you know, what that was like, so dealing with the isolation of that being, you know, the camera on you the whole time, you know, and again, having parents who, you know, my father [Felix Ramsey] saying, you know, you gotta fight for yourself, and my mother [Janice Hayes Ramsey], you know, making it very clear, you know, you have to fight. And I remember one story that I can look back on fondly, because my older brother, was more peaceful, and he's smaller than I am, Felix [Felix Ramsey], the oldest, he's about only 5'9", so and he always had a more peaceful disposition, so he came home from school, a number of times, and we would wear these little uniforms, you know, with the blue blazer and the white shirt, and he'd have footprint marks, on his pants, on his trousers, 'cause people were taking their feet and rubbing it on him, to be cruel, and all I remember is one time my mother saying, "Come up here," and so she called him upstairs, and of course, as a kid, you wanted to listen in, and so what is she saying, I never forget her saying, "If you come home, disgraced like that, with footprints all over you, I'm going to give it to you worse than the kids give it to you", (laughter). And I remember literally, the next day, hearing the announcer at school, 'cause, you know, the PA [public address] systems, weren't that good, so once they would go on the PA system, you would hear it across the whole thing, and him being called to the principal's office, I thought, what did he do? And then, my mother being called up to the school, as well, and she made it clear to the nuns, that "I've told my children never to start a fight, but if they get abused, to end the fight." (Laughter) And that was a very clear, that was a very clear message. I was a little more, at that age rebellious, you didn't have to tell me, you know, to get started, because I would fight. Speaker 1: Did you ever have an incident where they tried to put their feet on you? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and let's just say, it ended very quickly, 'cause, I had no qualms about fighting, and I would fight, and part of that was, it was one thing that I had to hold onto, my own sense of pride was don't touch me, but it was weird, being in school the first time and standing in line and having people touch your hair, and sort of do weird things, as though you were an alien, and going, "Get off me, get off me," and then turning around and punching somebody when you had to. So that was very, very, tough, you know, this was a Catholic school, very good school, but the isolation-- Speaker 1: You were the first blacks in the school? Speaker 2: We integrated that school and so it made us very close, you know, as a family, because it was sort of us versus everybody else, and I always said to people who said, we're kind of clannish as a family, it's sort of like us versus, 'cause we were drop landed into that neighborhood, and a lot of kids didn't want to play with us, and so, you learned about racial issues, from day one. I had a fight, my first day of school. In six--you know, as a six year old, which I'll never forget, I know the person, the whole thing. Speaker 1: What happened? Tell the story. Speaker 2: Well, he, he, shoved me from behind. We were waiting in line, and he called me a name, and I had heard stories about what my brother was going through, so I guess, I was all ready for this, you know, for this, and I turned around and I hit him, and he hit me back, and then it was on, and everybody kind of broke it up, and at that age, as kids, you know, you're flailing around, and so I didn't get hurt, he didn't get hurt, but it was first day of school. But I was proud of myself, you know, for standing up, you know, and I didn't know any other response, you know, what do you--what do--you don't reason a way through that, and I was just told never initiate a fight, never start anything, you know, and so, my mother always said, "They can call you names, you can take it, but if they lay their hands on you, go from there." Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the age of you know, nonviolent, direct action and you know-- Speaker 2: As a little-- Speaker 1: --the integration model you see on television was of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] marching, people being attacked at lunch counters, and not fighting back, and it was a strategy and all that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now that wouldn't have worked in-- Speaker 2: Well, we, we, just--all I know is, we had t- we had to fight and, and, the neighborhood kids, would try to do different things, but it was interesting but we kept our house immaculate, we--the neighbors I remember getting angry, when my parents decided they'd save their money, that we were gonna get a pool, so imagine this, and we got an in ground pool, and I'll never forget angry people standing there, with their arms folded, looking like they couldn't believe we were gonna get a pool, and then, of course, we invariably, invited our family in from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and elsewhere, we had great pool parties, with a lot of noise, and barbecue and a lot of fun (laughter). So it was quite an interesting education, I learned a lot of things, a lot of things. Speaker 1: What was the ethnic mix of the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Very much Italian, and Irish, and some Polish, so I got to see some of the long names and some of the ethnic, you know, names and we went to the church, so we would go to Assumption Church [Atco, New Jersey], even though it was not really an integrated church, and for a while I was an altar boy, and so we integrated that institution, so it was always inte- you know, the Cub Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], my brother and I in there, you know, integrating that institution, and so there were all of the--and we were just told, we were never allowed to have that be an excuse, for not doing well, it was just not, it was just not permitted. Story_ID: 616344 Speaker 1: Did you do good in--did you make good grades(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Started out, I was doing terrible, I was not a good student for the longest time and I think, I only derived pride from being able to be a good fighter, and so, which obviously means you're lacking in other, in other sorts of things, and the kids were cruel. They pulled a prank, on me in school, which I'll never forget it, which was--several pranks--but one I'll never forget was--and the teacher was in on it, woman by the name of Mrs. Washhard [ph.], in--I think I was in second grade [at Assumption School, Atco, New Jersey]. And I raised my hand to spell, in spelling, and I obviously misspelled something, so everybody kind of went along with this, and she said, "I want you to go next door and tell Sister So and So," I can't remember her name, "how to spell this word," and so I was like, "Okay," and I dutifully get up out of my seat, and go to--I knock on the door, and there's sister and I try to spell the word, and she says, "Why are you here," and I said, "Well, Mrs. Washhard, asked me to spell this word for you," and she says, "Okay," and I spelled it, and she says, "No, no, no, here's how you spell it," so she corrected me, very appropriately, and she says, "Go back into your classroom," so I walk back to the classroom, and everybody, including the teacher, were laughing. So it was just--it was very abusive, and then she said, "What's your nickname?" The teacher had given me a nickname, and I'll never forget the nickname, and she said, "What's your nickname?" And it was Oblivious, and she said, "And what does that mean?" And I said, "Not mindful of," which is a definition of the word, and she had made me memorize that definition, and that was the nickname I was given. So I literally went, several years, without ever raising my hand again. I didn't want to raise my hand, and when we used to do these standardized tests, I remember I used to make a game of it, and just would mark out B, C, A, or whatever, read half the question and just sort of go through it, so my standardized, scores were, you know, 30 and 40 percentile, you know, on the bottom. They put me in a remedial reading, you know, for a period of time, and I was also very withdrawn, so I wouldn't raise my hand, wouldn't talk to you, all I could do was, I could do well in gym, you know, I could run like anybody, you know, I could be on the track team and I could, I could fight you, and that was it. And the turning point was a woman who I'll never forget, her name was Mrs. Elizabeth Piefer, Peiffer [Elizabeth A. Peiffer], and I dedicated the book that I co-wrote ['ManagingNonprofits.org: Dynamic Management for the Digital Age,' Ben Hecht and Rey Ramsey] to her. Her name is in the forward of that, and she, early on, apparently, I had her, she was a lay teacher, and so she wasn't a nun, and there was something different about this woman. I couldn't place it, and so here was this white woman and there was something different about her. And so she said to me to stay after class one day, and I thought, oh, what did I do now, because, I was beginning to get in trouble in school, I would, you know, let's just say, I would occasionally take things that weren't mine and so I would get in trouble, and after class, she said to me that I was the smartest boy in the class. I have no idea what would make her say that, because I would sit there, my grades, when she looked at them, you know, they were Cs, Ds, you know, I would usually get just enough, whether it was a gift just not to give me an F, you know, I could just muster enough, to get into the D range, or an occasional C, which I thought was a good grade. And I was very isolated. I would cry about the isolation, or I used to have this little rosary in my room, and I would pray to the rosary, so that was sort of my connection to Christ, which is very important to me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have-- Story_ID: 616345 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have any friends in school at that point? Speaker 2: Very few, I could talk to a few kids in the classroom [at Assumption School, Atco, New Jersey], but none of them would play with us, when we would go back to the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Did you suspect that they weren't allowed to play? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, and there's a story of my sister [Melanie Ramsey] along those lines. So, Mrs. Peiffer [Elizabeth A. Peiffer] said this to me and the amazing thing was my parents [Janie Hayes Ramsey and Felix Ramsey] decided to buy the Encyclopedia Britannica, and you know, in those days, there were those big, leather bound, volumes, that you paid on forever. You would, you know, and you would get the new edition, every few months. Every few months, there would be a new edition, a new sort of supplemental, you know, to the encyclopedia, because she said this to me and the encyclopedias were pretty new, I just, on my own, decided to start reading from the encyclopedia, right? And this continued, you know, for a while, and the turning point came when we were studying current events, I'll never forget this, and the question came: what is an ICBM? And I'll never forget, I looked around and no one had their hand up. Now I had not raised my hand in several years because of that, that, abusive incident, and I thought, I'm gonna raise my hand, so I raised my hand, and a few--I heard a few people snicker, they snickered, they were like, "Rey [HistoryMaker Rey Ramsey], what's he got," you know, laughter, here we go. And I said "It's an intercontinental ballistic missile," and people, I heard something like--I heard somebody go like, "Damn." You know, they just couldn't believe it, and suddenly, I sat up a little straighter, and I tasted what it felt like to use my brain. And you could see her smile, and suddenly I was like, I can do this. I never forget getting my first B, in a long time, in a real course, and then, all of a sudden A's were popping up, in reading and other stuff, and I continued to read the encyclopedia, and so, I was becoming ahead of the other students. Speaker 1: Now how old were you? Speaker 2: It was--this all happened in sixth grade. This--the turnaround, all happened in sixth grade, and so that--six, seven, eight, nine, ten--I was eleven, yeah, I was eleven. Speaker 1: So this was around '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: Yeah, sixth grade, so I started school in '65 [1965], so whatever that would be in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966 ], or '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: No, remember I start--I was born in '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Oh, oh yeah, '60 [1960], yeah, high school [Paul VI High School, Haddonfield, New Jersey], '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: All of a sudden the grades started to flip, and then people started to accept me as literally being one of the smartest kids in the classroom, and then we had elections, and Mrs. Peiffer, again, wanted as a civics lesson, wanted us to understand voting, and so she had real voting machines brought into the school, so we could have--install a student government, and I was nominated, after all this years of unpopular, I was nominated to be the vice president of the school, and I won. I gave the speech, and that for me was big, she told my mother, she says, "I brought in voting machines, because I thought that they would cheat your son out of winning this election." And so the voting machine, there it was, 'cause I was running against the class jock, and sort of the class angel, whose mother was a school teacher, as well. And it shocked everybody, and that just, for me, was just like full circle, you can make things happen, you know, and Mrs. Peiffer got me to believe in myself, and I never looked back, you know, in terms of academics. Story_ID: 616346 Speaker 1: In terms of kids playing with each other, I'll never my sister [Melanie Ramsey] had a friend, Maria [ph.], and they were like two peas in a pod, they would play and do everything, so finally my sister was invited for a sleep over, you know, she could stay over at Maria's and we were all excited, so we dropped her off, you know, at Maria's house, and then, we went back home and we were sitting there, on a Friday night having dinner, and about twenty minutes later, you could hear this pitter, patter, of my sister--of somebody, running up the--up the walkway, and she came bursting in, and she was crying, and she said that Maria told her that she couldn't stay over because she was a nigger, and my sister was just--that really had a big impact on her, that was her best friend, they actually never spoke again. So those were some of the things that used to happen in the neighborhood. Speaker 2: Did your parents [Janice Hayes Ramsey and Felix Ramsey] ever express any regret for-- Speaker 1: Bringing us to that neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah, putting you in that situation. Speaker 1: I, I, at the time, I remember being, you know, and my older brother [Felix Ramsey], who had it difficult, he had the anger, you know, over that, so being--'cause he was in school, in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and then was moved into the school here, and had to deal with all of that adjustment. They just felt that education was that important, they wanted us in a quality school, and in those days, you know, a lot of parents had to make decisions, do I move from a familiar, comfortable, neighborhood, because the quality of the school being so tied, you know, to the neighborhood in which you lived and so, they just felt that what's we needed was to have a quality education, so I tend not to look back on that and question it, because I think it was a quality education, a series of, you know, life experiences, and you make the best of those, of those life experiences. Was it tough? Absolutely, but I also am a believer that everybody has in this journey, something tough, you know, that they're dealing with and so, mine may be different than somebody else, you know, it might be the overweight kid or the you know, the only red headed kid, who's getting teased, or you know, the rural kid, who moves into the city, or the, you know, so there were so many different things, I learned not to feel like a victim. And so I just look back on it and say, I learned how to fight, you know, in different ways, first I learned to fight with my fists, and then I learned how to fight with my mind, and I said that's so much stronger, and that'll will make a big enough difference, so I look at it like, boy, did I learn a lot of good things. Story_ID: 616347 Speaker 1: What was the name of your school? All this and I didn't get it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Assumption [Assumption School, Atco, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Assumption? Speaker 2: Yep, Assumption, and then went on to Paul VI High School [Haddonfield, New Jersey]. It was all Catholic. Speaker 1: Okay, and Paul VI. Speaker 2: High school. Speaker 1: Named after Pope Paul VI, right? Speaker 2: Paul VI, we had a graduating class of almost four hundred, no black males in my class, there were some black females, so I did not have, I did not know what it was like to have another African American male in a classroom with me, until college. So in terms of feeling isolated and not, you know, I went through that until college, and when I really went to Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and was walking on campus, I was going, oh my goodness, it's just (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So, at least there were some females. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, there were, there were. Speaker 1: Did they separate the boys and girls? Speaker 2: No, no, we were all together in high school at Paul VI. Speaker 1: What, order, what order of Catholics ran Paul VI? Speaker 2: I don't remember, we didn't have that many priests, who were teachers, we only had a few. We had a lot of lay teachers, you know, so there were just a few, and we continued to stay affiliated with our Assumption Church [Atco, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this Paul VI was in Hackle-- Speaker 2: Haddonfield. Speaker 1: Haddonfield [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Yeah, H-A-D-D-O-N, Haddonfield, New Jersey. Speaker 1: That was all real close to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] it built up right across the Delaware? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause we used to play some of the Philly teams occasionally, and get killed in sports, but yeah. Story_ID: 616348 Speaker 1: Now, well tell us about your sports, what, what-- Speaker 2: I ran track. The two things that I enjoyed were--I played hockey, and I ran track, of course, hockey was very much integrating, into that, and I did a mix of ice and floor hockey, and those were all very popular because the Philadelphia Flyers had won the Stanley Cup, the hockey championship, so hockey was really a big deal. And I chose that I wanted to play that sport, of course, there aren't that many of us known to play that sport, and-- Speaker 1: Conditions create controversy. Speaker 2: Yeah, I often was the captain of my team, and it was a physical sport and so I did like the physicality, you know, so that you could hit, legally, in, in, hockey, and I enjoyed it, and in running, we all ran, my oldest brother [Felix Ramsey] was--ran, my sister [Melanie Ramsey], you know, ran and played field events, and then I ran, I was a sprinter, and got involved in that. But I also got involved in the debate team in high school [Paul VI High School, Haddonfield, New Jersey], and I was intrigued by that, in fact, the movie, you know, 'The Great Debaters,' when that came out, with Denzel Washington, I wished more people had watched it, it, didn't have a lot of viewership, but I thought it was a stunning movie, absolutely stunning, it actually made me cry, because it just brought back so many memories, you know, of being on the debate team, and you know, et cetera. And again, when I was on that debate team, there were no other blacks, on the debate team but me, and you know, the whole thing, going through that, it's just sort of reliving that, it's pretty amazing. Speaker 1: Okay, did you ch- ever, did you dare chose a topic of race relations as a topic for a debate? Speaker 2: Well, you didn't get to choose, the way a debate would work, unless you realize that you would debate one topic, the entire season, so I remember we had national health insurance was debated--and I'm sure if I jog my memory, I could remember what some of other the topics were, but never something like that. Now obviously, and personal discussions as I was learning more about my own consciousness and stuff, and so, I wanted to debate and talk about those topics, you know, and then things would play out in a different way. So it was like supporting Muhammad Ali, you know, with his brashness, you know, and sort of vicariously, you know, expressing myself, you know, through that, I mean, you know, he would fight Frazier [Joe Frazier], even though Frazier was African American, there was something very different about Muhammad Ali, and what he represented, and I just put my whole self into that, you know, into those fights, and I remember just sitting there, watching it with my father and ever--it just meant everything for him to be able to win, and him losing, was just a moment of great depression, you know, I can remember all the losses. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 616349 Speaker 1: Muhammad Ali, now this is an important figure for you. Just explain why Muhammad Ali was so important (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He represented a boldness, the willingness to step forward as a black man and say, here I am, I'm standing up for my beliefs, you know, so for him, you know, here you had in the peak of his career, him standing up against the war [Vietnam War], when a lot of people were still thinking the war was okay, and Ali said, "No, it's not okay, it's against what I believe in." And then the brashness at having grown up, you know, and having to try to fit, in a particular, societal, way, here you have a guy go, no, I'm actually switching my name, I'm brash, I'm bold, and I'm pretty, you know, here I am, and he just represented a lot, so he's one of my--one of my all time heroes and every fight, my heart and soul, was on the line for every one of his fights. I didn't want to see him hurt, I didn't want to see him touched, I wanted him to win, you know, every fight, and of course, the, the Frazier [Joe Frazier] fights, and then of course, Foreman [George Foreman] fight from Zaire, that was actually the first broadcast, for HBO [Home Box Office]--you don't realize that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You caught the tail end of his career, you caught the comeback. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: 'Cause he started fighting the year before you were born. Speaker 2: Sonny Liston, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, or, and the--not the year before you were born, it was '64 [1964], you would have been four, you wouldn't have remembered his early years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't really remember his early years, Speaker 1: He--his exile from boxing was in and around '70 [1970], that's '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Right, and I followed that. Speaker 1: Then he fought, he fought his way back to the championship fight, with the fight with Joe Frazier-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and lost that one a left, Frazier caught him with a left hook and, and-- Speaker 2: Knocked him down, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Boy that must have been--and then you saw him comeback-- Speaker 2: The comeback was just amazing, just sort of the comeback, after having lost all those years, and having all these old timers, tell me about oh, but he could really punch then, and his punches--and you would see the films of how fast, you know, he could punch, I didn't quite see that, but he became more his craft. He was more of an artist, when he came back, and his movements, I mean, who could forget the way he would dance in the ring, you know, and move, and move, and some people didn't like that he running from people, but it was so artful and speaking up, you know, just a figure, he's one of the few people, that if he were standing in front of me, I might just cry. I'm not quite sure what I would say to him. He, he, just means that much, of what he represented. He's just one of those iconic figures and there aren't that many. Speaker 1: So, for your generation he would be like Joe Louis was for the previous generation? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I mean, for a while, he was the most famous person, and remember, who could forget the Olympics in Atlanta [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia], with the torch, and with his shaking hand of Parkinson's, you know, to all of a sudden make this surprising appearance, and light the torch, it was pretty amazing, pretty amazing. Speaker 1: It would be wonderful now, if he could actually speak the way he used to (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, it's hard seeing him like that, but my memory is still affixed to where he was, you know, in his, in his, heyday, it's almost freeze frame, you know, in that, but he's clearly, clearly, one of my biggest heroes. Speaker 1: So was your favorite fight, the Foreman fight? Speaker 2: I think probably the Foreman fight, because he won. The Frazier fights were great, but they were so physical, he took a beating in every fight, even though he won, but for this, being such an underdog, to lay back on the ropes, seeming like he was getting beaten with his rope a dope strategy, to come off the ropes, and be able to just, you know, knock him down like that, you know, and have Cosell's [Howard Cosell] voice, you know, in the background, (laughter), it was an amazing thing for him to raise his arms up, and it was one of the great moments. Speaker 1: Were you able to see, see it on one of the closed circuits? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were always, we always found a way to be able to see that, and watching that fight, I watched it and re-watched it, and re-watched, and then watching the highlights again, over, and over, and over, again. And you know, in those days radio, and so you would always be on a delay, so they would tell you what was happening and how they were scoring it, so you could listen in, you know, because we didn't have all of the advantages of you know, satellite and you know, cable sorts of things, so it's pretty amazing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Thrilla in Manila, you know, all the fights. Story_ID: 616350 Speaker 1: Now, what was your favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved geography, and history. I was a real whiz in geography. I could draw the map. I always thought that was really important, and I could literally draw the map, I was also good in art, and so I graduated even from grade school [Assumption School, Atco, New Jersey], and I was voted most artistic, and I was also voted most likely to succeed. Speaker 1: Oh, all right, so did you draw a lot when you were a kid (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would draw, a lot. I used to love to draw, paint. I do a little sketching now, and, you know, a few things. I keep threatening to get back into that, but I loved--I love art, just period, of all different kinds, aboriginal art, I love South African art, I love Surrealists like Salvador Dali, and people like Miro [Joan Miro], you know, abstractionists. So I have a wide array of sort of art, so I really appreciate art. Speaker 1: Now, you grew up during the Black Arts Movement, but were you aware of it at the time? Speaker 2: Vaguely aware of it, I wasn't following that very closely because for me, at that time, I was more getting into music, and I was big Motown [Motown Records], you know, a music fan, and so for me, it would be like my crush, would be with Diana Ross, who would come on television with her glamour and vulnerability, and you know, and then Aretha Franklin, representing something very, very, different, and coming in with this soul, you know, it was, it would just speak to your heart, and I loved Marvin Gaye, you know I always said if I could have been a singer, that is who I would have wanted to be, I cannot sing, but he was an amazing, soulful, you know, singer, so all of the Motown people also became, you know, iconic heroes, you know, for me as well. Story_ID: 616351 Speaker 1: Okay, so, you must've been very popular with the black women at that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I could dance-- Speaker 1: --the only black, you were the only black man at that school [Paul VI High School, Haddonfield, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Yeah, there were like eight of them and one of me, so we'd have nice dances and I could, you know, move around and dance, and I loved to dance at that time, I haven't danced in a while, but I loved dancing then, and that music, just, you know, the Motown sound [Motown Records], it was just amazing. Speaker 1: In high school is the social life restricted to the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very restricted. Speaker 1: --school? Speaker 2: It was very, very, restrictive, I had a few friends but again, it was still a sense of that isolation, and you know, somewhat restricted, hard to see people outside of the classroom, the neighborhood that we were in was beginning to integrate more, more African Americans, started to move in, but some of the isolation was, they were going to the public schools, we were still going to the private school, so there was still that sense of isolation, so, the notion of being isolated, was always something that I felt, and that my family I think had, we kind of did some things together and you know, I could see my cousins in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know, and those sorts of things, and turn to sports, you know, and music, so that was-- Speaker 1: Now the other--we've heard like people like Bill Cosby talk about how today, you know, kids that want to study are considered acting white. Were they, were they tough on you? Speaker 2: I was beginning, we were beginning, to get those things, and I remember things we used to hate was, if we missed our bus, to go to the private school, we'd have to walk back home, and then some of the public school kids were there, and then they would start saying things, because, you know, we were in our little uniforms and those sorts of things, but again, we were taught, you blot all of that out, that's not what's important, and then at that time I learned how to fight with my brain, and so, you just slough it off, and so I would study, I had no qualms about studying. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you run for class office or anything like that? Speaker 2: In high school, I did not. In high school, I did more--I was the debate society, track and field, and just sort of again, reestablishing myself academically, and--because the first year was an adjustment, and then, after that, it became easier for me and then I just started, again, racking up good, good grades. Story_ID: 616352 Speaker 1: Ali [Muhammad Ali] was like a role model on one level. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But what did you see as a career when you were in high school, had you started (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was interesting, I started off, there was a TV program, called 'Room 226' [sic. 'Room 222'], I think it was called, and there was a history teacher on there, so at first I said, I'm gonna be a social scientist, I'm gonna be a history teacher, because there was a good role model on TV like that and watching him. Denise Nichols [sic. HistoryMaker Denise Nicholas] was in that series, and I remember his name, and a lot of people might remember that series, and I used to watch and go, wow, 'cause there was this clean cut, African American guy, you know teaching history, but I listened very closely as my mother [Janice Hayes Ramsey] would tell the story about the profession that she had always wanted to go into, but at the time people would laugh at her, and that was, she wanted to be a lawyer. And so I would just listen to her, and she would tell me, you know, God rest her soul, and I don't know if she was trying to communicate to me, that's what I should try to be, 'cause she never said, you should be a lawyer, but in hearing that and in knowing that I had good argumentative skills, I started thinking, I'm gonna be a lawyer. So, before I graduated from high school [Paul VI High School, Haddonfield, New Jersey], I had already decided, I'll be a lawyer, and you know, what you find, unfortunately, in too many schools, is guidance counselors. There are many good guidance counselors, but there are also some who aren't very good, and so they were literally trying steer me away from law school, at that age. And I remember getting into trouble for not attending guidance counseling sessions, because I no longer wanted to hear what they had to say, because I like, I had already decided. This one woman in particular, said to me, well, you know, "There's a lot of testing, you gotta do a lot of tests, you have to take tests to get in, you gotta take--," da, da, da, and she listed out all these years of school, and looked at me like, do you really want to do that? Which was really amazing to me, and I had already decided, so I tuned it out, blinders on, I will be a lawyer, so I was one of these kids, when I entered college [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] I had no curiosity about other stuff. I said, I'm gonna be a lawyer, so I wasn't like moving around, trying to figure out what I wanted to be, I had decided, with great determination. Speaker 1: You're one of many bad counselor stories we've heard. I, I, you know, I think a good counselor would maybe make up 1 percent of the total of the counselors. Speaker 2: Yeah, and trying to steer kids, and they were always like and Ms. Warren [ph.] was trying to get me, "Oh, you're good in social studies. Why don't you go into social work and that's a noble profession," but I was like, want to be a lawyer, I want to be a corporate lawyer as a matter of fact, or a constitutional lawyer, which is what I--those were the two things-- Speaker 1: Well it's interesting that you know what those two things were. Speaker 2: Oh, because I looked at, you had Thurgood Marshall, so there became another iconic figure and I was like whoa, a black man on the United States Supreme Court, you know, appointed by President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], this is pretty amazing, so I started looking at that. Speaker 1: Did you know any black lawyers? Speaker 2: Didn't--did not know any black lawyers and there weren't any on television, so again, looking at Thurgood Marshall, the power of television, hearing about that, reading about that, looking things up in the encyclopedia on my own, you know, there was no Internet, so it was all about you had to be self paced with those things, and so those became figures, and then, again, hearing my mom say, I wanted to be a lawyer, I wanted to be a lawyer, and people laughed at me, and I was like, I will be a lawyer. Story_ID: 616353 Speaker 1: Were your grades real good in high school [Paul VI High School, Haddonfield, New Jersey] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, and so I had lots of choices, I chose Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], because I wanted to get away from sort of the private, elite, Rutgers is a very good school, but it's not like, you know, because, people wanted me to go to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], and I had the grades to go to Princeton, Ivy League school, and I did not--nothing against Princeton, I just said, I want to go somewhere where there's a mix, and you can imagine all the isolation, everything else like that, I wanted to have a mix. In fact, I had said that the time that I wanted to go to H- or Howard [Howard University, Washington D.C.], you know, as well, and my parents [Janice Hayes Ramsey and Felix Ramsey] were like, "Well that's--well let's settle on Rutgers" 'cause they thought, you know, you're gonna go from this all white environment, to all of a sudden, you know, that environment, they were like, "Why don't you kind of get a better cross section," you know, of the country, so I went to Rutgers and I'm a huge Rutgers booster, so I'm very proud to go there. In fact, in literally a month, I'll be the graduation speaker, at Rutgers college, so I'm very--it's one of the best honors for me. Speaker 1: Did you know about Paul Robeson? Speaker 2: I, as soon as I went to Rutgers, I started learning about that. I was like oh my goodness, and so, again I would do a deep dive, sort of learn about who these figures were, and I'm obviously very proud to be at the school that he went to. And what an amazing talent, you almost can't chart his abilities from acting, to athletics, to social activism, to academic, just an amazing Renaissance (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And a lawyer. Speaker 2: I know, a Renaissance person, an amazing Renaissance person. So, I did use him as a little bit of a role model, in the sense of, I want to be a Renaissance person, I want to do a mix of everything. I may not be the number one student, but when it's all said and done, I'm gonna have done a whole series of things. And I started using the expression, the body of work, that, that, it's important to have a body of work, to look at and that's what drives me to this day, is to leave behind a body of work. Story_ID: 616354 Speaker 1: Okay, now you liked history and geography, and you majored in political science, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Political Science, yes. Speaker 1: Did you know Ivan Van Sertima at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: No, I did not. I, I, in political science, I actually focused a lot on, initially, a lot on political philosophers, I really started to get involved in trying to understand, you know, Locke [John Locke], and Stuart Mill [John Stuart Mill], and, you know, Aristotle, and that, that aspect of political science. Hobbes [Thomas Hobbes], and folks like that, so I really started to focus on that because I really wanted to pick up this philosophical, you know, underpinning what are some of the philosophies that drive the power of people, and the power of politics, so I focused on that. And then, I decided, that my sort of academic study in terms of the black culture, and it was a great experience for me and I say with a smile, I decided to minor in literature, and then I said, I'm gonna make it black literature, and this was for me, to have a black teacher, this was the first time, and I was like wow, and I just used to stare at this guy, I would literally sit toward the front of the room, and stare, because I just, I couldn't believe it. Professor Barnett [ph.], I remember who was there teaching and you know, just reading, you know, Ralph Ellison and you know, the 'Invisible Man,' and Richard Wright, you know, and one of the books we read for Richard Wright is the least known of some of his books, because you know, everybody looks at, you know, 'Native Son' and 'Black Boy' but 'The Outsider,' and reading that, not as well known, but it was an amazing story. Our professor was somewhat controversial, he made a few people angry, because he had us read not only African American writers, but he actually had us read several white authors, because he said they're speaking about the black American condition, so one of the things he did, it was interesting, he had us read Mary Shelley's 'Frankenstein,' and he said, the character is a black man. He said because it was a created figure, and he says that the black man was pulled from Africa, and basically created in America, 'cause our experience was so unique, so we drew this together, or he had us read Jerzy Kosinski, and 'The Painted Bird,' and it was all about the journey of this Russian Jew, through what was going on with him, and he goes, that is very much the story of the black man, because of the isolation, and the persecution. Then addition to that, we would read, you know, Zora Neale Hurston, or, you know, Ralph Ellison, you know, and then my absolute favorite, James Baldwin. I completely got turned on by Baldwin's writing, and I would go to the library, and read everything. I've gone through cycles with Baldwin, where I've gone back to re-read to get a deeper understanding in his use of flashbacks and narratives, and things like that, because I've always wanted to write, you know, more and then, I would read Baldwin and say forget it, how are you going to recreate that craft, you know, his ability, you know, from 'Manchild In The Promised Land' [Claude Brown], to just a whole series of, you know-- Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite from Baldwin novels? Speaker 2: I like--'Tell'--I like-'Go Tell it on the Mountain' [James Baldwin]. I like, 'If Beale Street Could Talk' [James Baldwin], you know, really well, but I like a bunch of them, at different times, you know, 'Fire Next Time' ['The Fire Next Time,' James Baldwin], you know, even though it's short, you know, it's just powerful as an essay, but 'Tell Me How Long the Train's Been Gone' [James Baldwin]. I just love so many of his books, and I've read almost all of them. So at different times, I get in the mood to go back and re-read, you know, some of his things, and there's always a little something, you know, else, that I glean out of it, and again, he always dealt with a level of isolation, a level of sort of inward looking at the rest of the world and trying to understand your role and place in it. And I just found that fascinating because, again, I would always, you know, having been isolated, you're observing the world, and so you're going from the inner to the outer, and so trying to figure that all out, and he captured some of that. Sometimes I would be reading a book and I had to put it down, I'd be going, oh my god, you know just sort of understanding him speaking to the condition, the human condition. And obviously, he'd throw an occasional, communist, you know, figure, or something like that, you know, so-- Speaker 1: So did you have--was there a mentor, an academic mentor at Rutgers? Speaker 2: Not in particular. I just tried to devour as much African American literature as I could, both in the classroom and not. There was a white professor, in--who's still there, Ross Baker, I would say he was my favorite you know, professor in political science, 'cause he was just free wheeling and he would talk about politics as it really was, and I took every course I could find that Ross Baker, you know, would teach. I hope to reconnect with him at the graduation from Rutgers. Story_ID: 616355 Speaker 1: What about organizations, were you involved in any ca- ca- ca- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh many, I went crazy getting involved in organizations. The radio station was really was--became one of my first loves, I had wanted to go to the newspaper [The Daily Targum], but I found them to be haughty, and they ignored me when I first went over there. When I was in high school [Paul VI High School, Haddonfield, New Jersey], I, for a while was editor-in-chief, of the high school newspaper, so I figured it would be natural to go this and they didn't treat me that well, and I said, well, and I walked down the hall, and there were these radio guys, and I said, do you think I could be on the radio one day? And they said absolutely, so I joined up with them, and for--at one period of time, I became the acting news director, for the radio station and we had a very big news department. In fact, we covered the presidential election in 1980 by sending four correspondents to Washington, D.C., and I was one of them, and even though I was only a sophomore, I was the youngest, and I covered Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] headquarters live, and we would do, we hooked up with a lot of public radio stations. We'd do topics for the hour, bottom of the hour reports, and so I remember in our signoff, we called it selection '80 [1980], and so I'd be like, "For selection '80 [1980], I'm [HistoryMaker] Rey Ramsey," and you know, and so it was WRSU FM 88.7 in New Brunswick [WRSU Radio, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and so that became a real joy of mine. And then, inexplicably, I did something, which I would have never thought that I would have done. I got involved in fraternities, and so you would have thought, given all the isolation and stuff that I had, that I would go to a black fraternity, and ironically, it wound up being not a black fraternity, but a white fraternity. It was a Jewish fraternity, ZBT, Zeta Beta Tau [Zeta Beta Tau Fraternity], and some friends of mine from the dorm, we went out, you know, doing some of the parties, and they treated me so well, it was a Jewish fraternity, and I owe a lot to them, ZBT, because they treated me really, really, well. I did not know it was a Jewish fraternity, I just thought these brothers were cool, you know, in there, and I wound up basically, and this was an amazing thing and it wasn't planned, I wound up basically leading an integration of that fraternity. And so by the time I lef- when I started there were no African Americans in the fraternity, and by the time I left, there were, there were, a decent number, it started to go in there because I had been in there. And then, I became fascinated by the whole fraternity system, and I eventually ran for office, and I made history at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], because I was the first African American to ever lead the Greek system. I was elected to be president of the fraternity-sorority council, and so became a student leader, that way. And it was a pretty big election, and our national fraternity, got very excited by it because ZBT had not held that position at the campus before. And so, it was kind of funny, to have this black guy, from a Jewish fraternity, running in the Greek system, and I won, so go figure, and I learned a lot from that, and I consider them my brothers. And that's what I mean, sort of like learning, you know, things, and seeing people for who they are, and I think, again, Mrs. Peiffer [Elizabeth A. Peiffer], I think this has taught me to understand that, 'cause here you have a white woman, who turned my life around, you know, despite all the isolation and the other things, and then I joined this Jewish fraternity, and those brothers helped me to learn how to study better, and many of them were on their way to law school and med school, and I said, I want to be a lawyer, and I want your help. And there was one in particular, he went on to go to law school in North Carolina, and he gave me some tips on how to prepare, and how to study, and how to write essays, and those sorts of things, and I picked up on all those tips and it helped. And we had a nice house, that we, that we lived in. I lived in the house for a couple of years, and I lived on the dorm, for a couple of years. So those were my big activities, and that was very time consuming, you know running the Greek system, dealing with disciplinary issues, you know, in fraternities, we got a line, I pass an academic program to help raise the academic achievement of people in, in, fraternities, and then just became the spokesperson, 'cause everybody wanted to hear from me. It was like I wasn't the normal figure of what thought would be heading the Greek system. Speaker 1: Okay now, did you--being in a Jewish fraternity, you went to Ca- Catholic school, Jewish fraternity (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fraternity, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, did you make any comparisons? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean, you know, we used to tease each other about, you know, the role that guilt played, you know, and Catholics always talk about guilt's a factor, say yeah, we have it up to a certain extent, but not as much as you guys, and, you know, I learned about the culture, and food and I thought it was just an amazing experience. And some of the people, that I'm still in touch with, are brothers in that fraternity of ZBT. So it's completely inexplicable, unplanned, just human relationships, and then I decided, I said once I got into the system, I'm going to open the system up, and I remember giving a couple of speeches on it. I gave a speech about race, in front of everybody, and we had never held one of the Greek meetings over on the black part of the campus, and I decided to have a meeting over there, about the importance of race, and why we had to open our system up, and not make it as inhospitable to African Americans and Latinos, and you know, and et cetera so--I was speaking about that in the '80s, [1980s]. Speaker 1: So, so, is there anything else before we graduate you and get you to law school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, those were my, yeah, those were my things, poli sci [political science], and African American literature, and I just loved Rutgers. Story_ID: 616356 Speaker 1: So did they have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then, on to law school, which was a little bit different experience. Speaker 1: Did they have a black student organization at Rutgers? Speaker 2: Yeah, they did, black student alliance, and they had an elective, you know, governmental system with that, and I'd interact with those guys, but of course, I had my own elective governmental system, as well, so you had three of the black, you know, student union, you had the overall Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], governing groups of class president, and then you had the Greek system. And we were always considered very potent, because we could organize, you know, very effectively, and that's like a voting bloc and so everybody kind of, you know, wanted to deal with us. And I wielded that pretty good, I knew how--I understood voting blocs and how to, how to make that work, and I would interact with the deans. And what was great about that job was the accessibility that they had, you know, where I could go and talk to them about issues, and things like that, and they felt comfortable because I didn't represent certain, you know, this image that everybody has, sort of, the jock in the Greek system, you know, the rich, white, guy, you know, a kid coming in with parents, and here I was. Here I am, I represent the Greek system. They were like, what? (Laughter) So I, I, used that, to great advantage. Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you chose the U of-- Speaker 2: UVA? Speaker 1: --of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]? Speaker 2: It's interesting. I had never visited the campus, it was--I had had offers from other schools, price mattered, because at the time, I was comparing it with University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I was wait-listed at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I didn't want to wait around until--to find out what the results would be, and I just sort of said, hey, I'm gonna go--I just had this feeling that I should go to Virginia, and so I-- Speaker 1: Let me just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --one second, recapitulate the dates. You came out of high school [Paul VI High School, Haddonfield, New Jersey] in what year was it? Speaker 2: In '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], and you came-- Speaker 2: Graduated from Rutgers in '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were ready to start law school. Speaker 2: Ready to start law school, and so, talk about it, so you had this cultural mix at Rutgers, you know, people of all income stratas, cultural mix, and I go and not really realizing, it's [President] Thomas Jefferson's school. Speaker 1: Yeah, he founded it. Speaker 2: He founded it, and here were are, and that was very much in the middle of the South. Inexplicable journey, because again, if I was sort of like thinking like, I don't want to go into this elite, kind of southern, genteel environment, which was what UVA was, there I was. It was like we would have parties, some of the African Americans students, and this is the experience of having the police knock on the door and we were having peaceful parties, and to sort of break up our parties, so the little, subtle, forms of harassment, that went on. And a buddy of mine, who has just a great, social conscious, from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and Morehouse graduate, he was at UVA with me and eventually rose to become the head of the Black Law Students Association [National Black Law Students Association] nationwide, and there were a group of us, that decided that we were gonna have a protest rally, at UVA. So now, my consciousness, had really been honed, and I was like, I'm no longer just be the inside player, I, I'm going to protest. So I called this sort of my rebel phase, and of course, my parents [Janice Hayes Ramsey and Felix Ramsey] were worried, was just like, "Just get the degree, you're so close, just get the degree," and we decided, because UVA at that time, had never had a black faculty in the law school, which for a top ten law school, was just disgraceful, and they had one woman. And so we decided, and Mike played this huge role in it, Mike Ross [Michael Ross], that we were gonna do this protest, of that, and we did a very thoughtful thing, we said we're gonna have teach in, and we brought in people like Alvin Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint] from Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], and, you know, other noted experts, to talk about the importance of role models and the psychological, the psychological side of all those sort of things. So we did a teach in-- Story_ID: 616357 Speaker 1: So let's pick this up, so, so you had a-- Speaker 2: UVA [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]. Speaker 1: --teach-in at UVA and Alvin Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, so we did a, we did a teach-in, and we brought in noted experts like Ogletree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree], you know came. Speaker 1: Charles Ogletree from Harvard. Poussaint, a number of just well noted experts, to talk about the importance of role models and diversity. We did a one day boycott of class, and then we did a little rally out front. UVA is a pretty conservative place, so, not a lot of people wanted to show up for the rally. My job was to be in charge of the media, and so, I remember me getting a phone call before the event started. We were notified that the dean, wanted to see us, so Dean Merrill [Richard A. Merrill], wanted to see myself, Mike Ross [Michael Ross], and another guy by the name of Butch Hollowell [Melvin "Butch" Hollowell], was the head of the of the black association, Black Law Students Association, at UVA. The three of us, were called into the office, and the dean looked us in the eye, and said, "I want you to call all this off, because we've just hired a black professor who will come in from Minnesota," and everybody was kind of quiet, and I never forget that I spoke up and I said, that "Dean, we really appreciate the fact that you've made this hire; we feel it's long overdue, but we're going to continue with the rally because UVA is a top law school, one is not enough, and we wanna draw attention to this issue, which is an issue at other schools, so it is on." Of course, I was nervous on the inside, and it was a very successful teach-in, and the other things I remember about UVA, is one, I had to work my way through s-- through. Story_ID: 616358 Speaker 1: I was working in a dining hall, and doing a whole bunch of other things, 'cause I needed the money, though I didn't get to do very many social things because I had to work, you know, while studying, and I got involved politically, and for the first time, and it was to work on Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] campaign. And we organized, amongst the first organizers he had in Virginia, and we had some fun, you know, getting involved in that, and again people were like, what are you doing, you know, this is a little bit of rabble rousing, but I needed that part of my life, to be able to express, you know being African American, and Jesse Jackson represented so much. A lot of people forget-- Speaker 2: This was 1984. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-four [1984]. A lot of people forget when they look at Barack's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] campaign, and they say--and I've reminded some younger people, like this is amazing, I would have never thought--people forget how many primaries he won, and what that was like in the '80s [1980s], and what that was like, and the speech that he gave, and that was huge. Speaker 2: He was right--he sort of caught the wind of the Harold Washington campaign in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, and it was huge. Speaker 2: --and decided to run for president. Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: 'Cause he, you know-- Speaker 1: --and talk about audacity, the audacity of hope that Jesse Jackson, you know, had to run in '84 [1984], and I, it was just a moral calling, it was a moral call, you know. Speaker 2: It was a big deal then-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and people were excited all over the country. Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 2: --and he won primaries in Michigan and-- Speaker 1: --absolutely, he won several other places. He won in the South, he won South Carolina, I mean, he won in a number-- Speaker 2: Yeah, South Carolina-- Speaker 1: --a number of different places overall. I think he won as many as eleven or so primaries. So we, we, felt good about the campaign, and we were doing little makeshift things, and doing things. Virginia was a caucus state at that time and it was difficult, but we were doing our organizing, and I got to give one of the talks, you know, for the group, for Jesse, and you know, and et cetera. Speaker 2: Did you have a feeling that he could win? Speaker 1: Well, I never forget his campaign slogan coming out of, I think Michigan, we kept chanting, "Jesse," a repetition, "we can win, we can win." I'd walk around campus, the grounds of UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], "We can win, we can," you know, so, I got caught up in that, and it just becomes, you know, part of your emotion, you know, you don't sit there and sort of do the whole calculation. Speaker 2: Did you have a--what was the--his organization like, when you look back at it, was it-- Speaker 1: It was very, you know, church based, very activist driven, not a lot of money, I mean, he certainly wasn't raising a million dollars a day, or anything else that we see like with Barack, we people were doing bake sales and scratching our way, we paid our own way, you know, with a group of us who organized things for him, and they just said, "God bless you," you know. I continued on, I got to ride around a little bit with Jesse, when he went through a few places here in Virginia. Speaker 2: What was he like, I mean, you know, what was he like? Speaker 1: He was caught up in the moment, you know, as well, so it was a larger than life figure, caught up in the moment, you know, he would inspire you by putting his arm around you, you know, and just give you that glint in the eye, and you know, thanking you, or, you know, and so you felt this spiritual, you know, a spiritual connection, it was, it was, it was a revival, almost. It was not rooted deep in policies, it was very much in this is, this is our time, you know, sort of turn the page in this country, and do something different. So it was, it was a form of self-expression, and that is how I view that campaign. Speaker 2: When I look back on it, I think a lot of people were just moved by the fact that we had a black candidate that could actually articulate the issues, better than most of the others. Speaker 1: And it was the summer of '84 [1984], at the San Francisco convention [1984 Democratic National Convention], it was in San Francisco [California], and I was out in Oregon, at that time, as a summer clerk in the law firm [Stoel, Rives, Boley, Jones and Grey; Stoel Rives LLP, Portland, Oregon], and I was at this cocktail reception, and I remember telling somebody, "I have to leave," and they said, "Why," and I said, "Because I'm going home to watch Jesse Jackson," and he delivered that speech. And I remember closing the door to my little efficiency unit, and just, at having flipped on the television, literally, as it was coming on, and for some reason, I started crying before he even started talking, just because, you know, that moment. And I remember, I think it was Wintley Phipps, singing 'God Uses Ordinary People' ['Ordinary People'], you know, and he sang that, and everybody had their arms clasped together, and the whole place was rocking and moving. It was, it was, an amazing moment. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's was kind of a drama. Speaker 1: Amazing moment. Speaker 2: It, it's something that's now, I think, as that people consider after, you know, as the Barack Obama campaign, is kind of going on as we speak, that people had kind of forgotten about the drama of the Jesse Jackson-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I've reminded twenty somethings of that because they don't have any sense of that, and they think that this is the only thing, and it all kind of starts with this, and I go, no, no, no, Jesse was doing some amazing things, at a time--without money, you know, and really bucking an establishment that was much more you know, entrenched against--the obstacles were amazing, but he got there and debated, you know, in a dramatic way against Mondale [Walter Mondale]. And you know, then you had, you know, Ferraro selected as the, as the running mate, and I remember again, seeing Gerry Ferraro [Geraldine Ferraro], that was even exciting as well, watching that barrier being broken, and going to a rally and hearing everybody chanting, "Gerry, Gerry," you know, it was pretty exciting, I was at that rally, you know, as well. Speaker 2: Yeah, that may have been--'84 [1984], just may have been Jesse Jackson's finest hour as a public figure-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it was. Speaker 2: --'cause of the speech. Speaker 1: 'Cause the '88 [1988], campaign, you know, I, I, it wasn't the same, it wasn't quite the same. Speaker 2: No, I didn't hear--it had at a residual kind of thing. But it wasn't-- Speaker 1: Wasn't quite the same. Speaker 2: So, since he wasn't gonna, I mean, you know, I think it was pretty much (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you didn't think he gonna beat Dukakis [Michael Dukakis], and-- Speaker 2: --it was symbolic. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 616359 Speaker 1: So you end up on the West Coast, in the Northwest? Speaker 2: Yep, as a lark. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I decided to take up a challenge to go somewhere outside of--a few friends of mine said, no you just wanna see, 'cause I was only looking at law firms, in the New York, New Jersey, I had an offer to be a summer clerk, with Morgenthau [Robert M. Morgenthau], who was the district attorney in Manhattan [New York], which was a coveted position, and out of the blue, this firm from Oregon, met me at the campus, Stoel Rives and Boley [Stoel, Rives, Boley, Jones and Grey; Stoel Rives LLP, Portland, Oregon], and they said ordinarily, they would fly you back, to meet more lawyers, before they would make an offer, and they made an offer in the room, based on that interview, and I said okay, I'll come out for summer, but I was like, but there's no way I'm gonna stay out there, 'cause again, I thought improbably, why would I move to this unbelievably white state and I moved out there, and absolutely fell in love with it. I remember though, I was running into difficulties, because I said that my hair was beginning to grow too long and I said I don't know where to get a barber, and I just grabbed this black guy on the street, and I said, "Can you help me out? Where do, where do I get hair like mine cut?" And he said, "Oh, have you gone across the river?" It's the northeast side, it wasn't over, and the firm was in downtown, which was southwest, I said, "No" 'cause I didn't even have a car, and he goes, "Oh, you gotta go over to northeast. That's where the barbers and the churches and the--." I went over there, and found a barber, and found a church, and they were so welcoming to want me to come back, they were like, "We always lose people like you. So come back to Oregon," and they threw a surprise barbecue for me when I was leaving town as a summer clerk. They wrote me letters during my final year, you know, at UVA [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] and I had to come back, and then law firm had made an offer, I decided to come back. Speaker 1: Okay, so you made a connection in the black community there? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, and it was my church, Maranatha Church [Portland, Oregon], which was also part of it as well. Speaker 1: Okay, now, Maranatha that's a--is that--what denomination is that? Speaker 2: It's, it's kind of, I mean it didn't matter, it was like, nondenominational, I just viewed it as a Christian, you know, church, having been raised in the structured Catholic--you know, all of a sudden, to walk in there, and you'd see some people who were somewhat charismatic, you know, occasionally, you know, speaking in tongues, and doing things, you know, that as a Catholic, I had never seen. I kept thinking, I don't know how to do that, you know, how do I do that, you know, (laughter), and it was--and the choir and the you know, just the whole movement and rhythm of the church was pretty amazing. Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's a nondenominational-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, it may have the--I didn't get caught up in what--I don't, you know, I don't go to churches now. I don't get caught up about what order it is and all that sort of thing, it's a Christian, you know gathering, and it doesn't, doesn't matter to me, so you have, I know there were Baptists in there, and Pentecostal in there, a mix of different people so, it probably had some affiliation, but I never tried to, it never interested me in knowing what that was. Speaker 1: Maranatha, I would say that was a Maranatha power sales in Iowa, there's a Maranatha print shop in Chicago [Illinois], and it's associated with the church-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, don't know, you know, I never bother to get involved all in any of that, for me, it's a place of worship, and a good place of worship. Story_ID: 616360 Speaker 1: You're in Portland [Oregon], and you're--what kind of--you're with Stoel and [Stoel, Rives, Boley, Jones and Grey; Stoel Rives LLP] (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stoel Rives. Speaker 1: Stoel Rives, and what kind of law-- Speaker 2: Corporate. Speaker 1: Corporate, okay. Speaker 2: It was corporate very much from property law, to intellectual property, to securities. I wanted straight corporate. I wanted to understand more about how Corporate America works, and that was very intentional, and I told some of my friends there, that I'd met at the firm, very privately, I said, my goal is to be here for a couple of years, and then use this experience to learn how to do other things, and it was the biggest firm in the state, and so that carried obviously, influence, being the big firm, and that's what I wanted. And then I left after two years, and I remember saying now, every job from this point forward, is all gonna be about what I want it to be. Part of that job for me, was one, not only learning but, it was important to my mom [Janice Hayes Ramsey]. I knew she wanted me to be in a big firm, and she never tried to steer me, you know, into one, but it was kind of like--and I told a friend of mine, I told her, I said, now all the rest of the jobs are going to be mine, you know, from that point forward, and that's when I made the transition to go into government. Story_ID: 616361 Speaker 1: I was showing your outline to someone who said, when they looked at it, they said, "Oh, he's a do gooder." (Laughter) So when did you-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I always, again, going back to, you know, this sort of sense I'm giving back, I still feel very lucky, so a lot of people look at that and go, oh yeah, look at this tough journey, but I just say boy, am I lucky, and so, that's where this whole giving back--so whether it was like, Mrs. Peiffer [Elizabeth A. Peiffer], for what she did for me, and all these different people, I was like, I just have that in me. I enjoy, and I think there's a social obligation, and to do things, and so I'm like obsessed with doing a lot of different, you know, things, some people call it do gooder, or whatever, I get something from that, I think it's important to do that, and I always think about. There may be somebody in that classroom, who like--who was like me. And they just need somebody, to just give them that little, that little nudge, that little extra, you know, thing, like Mrs. Peiffer did for me, so Habitat for Humanity became my first big charity that I got involved with. I was doing stuff, I was on the Urban League [Urban League of Portland]-- Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--okay, in, in, Portland [Oregon]? Speaker 2: In Portland, so I was-- Speaker 1: Was Useni Perkins [HistoryMaker Useni Eugene Perkins] there? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, he was-- Speaker 1: He was Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] finest (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, in fact, he--I was--let's see, was he--Herb Cawthorne, was there, when I was first there, and then Useni came in, and then I was on the board, and I had to leave the board, because I quickly, took a different job, to move out to Central Oregon, but I met Habitat people, at a funeral, and this was a turning point for me, because I remember--never forget being at this funeral, and I said, I don't just want to just make money. I want to do something else. I was at the big law firm [Stoel, Rives, Boley, Jones and Grey; Stoel Rives LLP, Portland, Oregon] and I was at this funeral, because a friend of mine had lost her mother and her father, in a span of thirteen months, and I was very depressed and the mother had just died, and I remember talking to this woman, opening up to her, about this void that I felt. There's this white woman who was at the funeral, and she said, "Well there's an organization that I know of that you really might get something out of it," and she started describing what they do for housing. I said, that's not possible, no interest mortgages and so, what I said is, this doesn't work, you know, and of course, being a lawyer, and thinking about how real estate works, I said, "It won't work." And she said, "Well, I want you to go visit them," and they met in a church basement, at my first meeting with some of them, of course, they were all over me, they said, "Ooh, we can get a lawyer to be a volunteer," and you know, I was a little naive, and they passed around a hat literally because the basement was chilly, and I wrote a check, and I didn't think anything of it, said oh, a $100 check, wow, you know, and then I just started volunteering, volunteering, volunteering, and I met the founder, you know, of it, Millard Fuller, and who was also a lawyer, who had gave up his lucrative practice of law, to start Habitat for Humanity, and Millard became a hero of mine. Speaker 1: This would have been 1980 something-- Speaker 2: This would have been 1986. Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986]. Speaker 2: While I was practicing. Speaker 1: Millard-- Speaker 2: Millard Fuller. Speaker 1: Millard Fuller, almost like Miller the killer. Speaker 2: Yeah, he founded Habitat for Humanity and you know how famous Habitat is. Speaker 1: Right, now this is--it was, I think catapulted in the national scene, with the association with Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that just took off, I mean, it's brand name, is widely known and you know, a few years ago, I was the chairman of Habitat International [Habitat for Humanity International], so my whole career should have moved forward and the story with that is, you know I had to fire Millard. Speaker 1: No, I don't know-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --tell us about that now, this is not--head of the organization-- Speaker 2: And so you can imagine, you go full forward through a career, and when I became chairman a few years ago, it would have been--let's see, I've been out of being chairman for one, two, three, years, I've been out of being chairman, so five years ago, I became the chairman because it's a two year term and I had worked my way up to the board. I was on the international board for eight years, and had been vice chairman, secretary of the board, et cetera, and there was an allegation, and if you Google Millard's name, you'll see, Millard Fuller, you'll see more about the story, there are obviously things I can't say. But there was an allegation of misconduct and so it was one of those moments, I call 'em defining moments, and I literally cried that night when I got--when I heard the allegation, cause I just thought oh, Lord please, don't let something like that happen while I'm chairman, and don't let it be true. And so, I hired a law firm, and they did an investigation and President Carter got involved, actually did a mediation, at his home, the mediation worked only temporarily, but it ultimately culminated with me having to literally pick up the phone and fire this man, as the leader of this movement, you know, Habitat for Humanity, and you can imagine how tough that was. And here he is, a southern, you know, man, in his seventies, you know, and me being, you know, younger, African American firing him. Speaker 1: So, he was literally from--was he from Georgia? Speaker 2: He, I believe he's from Alabama originally, I don't remember, but that you could easily, you know, fact check that, but he I had, I had, to let him go. I had to call President Carter and inform him that I was, with the support of the board, letting him go. Story_ID: 616362 Speaker 1: What, now this Habitat [Habitat for Humanity] signaled the re-emergence into public life of Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] because Jimmy Carter had sort of been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --trashed by that campaign and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, it helped to rehabilitate his image 'til Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], he got killed. Speaker 1: --yeah, and they accused him of being too soft on, you know, it Iran then, and the ayatollah [Ruhollah Khomeini], and they were just wrong and there were a lot of funny deals made between the public and the Iranians really made Carter look bad and you know, what was your impression of Jimmy Carter, in those days, before you met him and-- Speaker 2: Oh, I probably shared some of the same thoughts, you know he always, President Carter, you know, you could tell he had a level of integrity, obviously, I got to know him better, in the role, and involvement with Habitat, and I had numerous conversations, you know, none of which, I, I, can really share, but he was involved and notified of every move that I was taking, although, he never overstepped boundaries, in terms of, you know, respected the fact that I was the chairman of this board, of international directors, and I had decisions that I had to make. They weren't always popular, but that article, there was a New York Post article, if you Google, Millard Fuller's name it kind of lays out the story, and you'll--if you read that article, you'll understand why I'm, I'm, not saying as much, as I could otherwise state. So Millard's created a new organization, obviously not anywhere near what Habitat was, but it made it really tough to fire somebody, who was a hero, and a former lawyer like I was, endeavoring to do, to do, good. So, I grew a lot through that, I learned a lot, I considered it a great learning experience. Speaker 1: Okay, of course, Jimmy Carter remained involved with Habitat. Speaker 2: And he still is involved, and part of my goal was to keep him involved while making the other moves. And in the aftermath, people said, "Well how did things go," and I said that our fundraising continued to move up. We didn't lose corporate sponsors. We didn't lose any of our affiliates, and I kept the board together. And I feel that all the parties were treated fairly, so I think that was a good measure, of how it went. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were with Habitat since-- Speaker 2: I've been involved with Habitat, from one way or another from 1986 to 2003, 2004. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: In one way or another, from being a volunteer, to being on the advisory board, to being on the board of directors for eight years, where I worked my way up from secretary, to vice chairman, to chairman. Story_ID: 616363 Speaker 1: Okay, now in '96 [1996], you became president of the Enterprise Foundation [Enterprise Community Partners, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Right, and before that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or, or am I going too fast for you? Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no, the one thing, the turning point, I guess the career, one of the career defining moments for me, was when the governor of Oregon, Governor Goldschmidt [Neil Goldschmidt], appointed me to run housing for Oregon, and there were no African Americans in the cabinet, and people were trying to sort of look up historically, there may not have been--and some people said there had not been a black person to run a free standing agency before, in Oregon. Speaker 1: So thi- this is what year you had-- Speaker 2: This would have been 1989. I was twenty-nine, so that caused a lot of great curiosity, again, being that young, running an agency, overseeing millions of dollars, I mean, in charge of housing policy, and housing for the state, and that was just a, an amazing moment. I'll never forget it. And when he asked me to do it, I had a private moment in my office. I came back to my office and I actually knelt down, because I believe in prayer, and I prayed and I said housing would never be the same. That was my prayer, and I said, no matter what I have to do, housing will never be the same. We got a housing trust fund and I had fourteen pieces of legislation that I proposed, all fourteen passed, it was just an amazing time, legislature took another agency and merged it in with mine, I was put in charge of both. So, things were going, you know, really well, and I was in that job for four years, and then, in 1993, I got a phone call from the Enterprise Foundation and Jim Rouse [James Rouse], who is, of course, a legend. Speaker 1: Well, let me go back a little bit-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to housing, what were some of the housing issues in Oregon? Speaker 2: We had a mix from homelessness, to a lot of low income people just like now, looking for affordable housing, we had an outmoded financing system in Oregon, we didn't use any general fund money, we weren't utilizing tax credits, there were just a series of things that I had analyzed, even being that young, and I just attacked it, and, and having been, again, used to having a spotlight, 'cause it was a spotlight, where they're going, let's see what the twenty-nine year old black kid, can do. I just traveled the state, and I gave speeches and testified in front of the legislature, and hired and fired, and you know, did everything I could, with more energy and passion, you know, in just about anything I've ever, you know, I spent time on. It was a very successful period and you know, there's been a lot written about it, you know, about that time, and people still look back at it as a golden period, for housing. So I was--I had a very talented team of people with me, and my job was really to be a leader, and I loved that job, I absolutely loved that job, but it was getting the phone call from Jim Rouse, was just amazing, 'cause having studied, you know, in political science, urban affairs, and that sort of thing, and you see that he built Faneuil Hall [Boston, Massachusetts], and Baltimore Inner Harbor [Maryland], and the City of Columbia; he's urban legend. And so, he wanted to meet me and I flew back, I here and met him in Columbia, Maryland, and he made a job offer that day, and I didn't accept, and he pushed, and pushed, and he closed the deal by saying, "We'd be honored to have you." So I was just, I said, "I'm gonna do it," and I gave up all of that which I loved in Oregon, and I decided to move back here, and his dream was to lift up community development agencies, all over the United States, and I always said, that you could give them financial assistance, human assistance, by way of technical help, and hope. And those were the three things you try to do to lift those organizations up, and that was my job, you know, coming in. Story_ID: 616364 Speaker 1: I came in as senior vice president first, to do that, and I'd given a commitment to Jim Rouse [James Rouse] of three years, that I would stay with him for three years, and I'd had--it was an amazing week, on a Monday, I had a lucrative offer made to me, by a private firm, who I won't say, and I'd said yes, 'cause, my three years was up, I was ready for something else, and this was gonna be a move back into the private sector and the money was a lot. And I can remember, I kept my hands under the table because I didn't want them to see me digging my hands together, for how much money it was, 'cause I was trying to act cool, and when they said the salary, I said, "Aw, that's about right, you know," that's about what it would take, of course, I'm digging my hands together thinking, that much? And so that was a Monday, on Wednesday, they asked me to be president, and on Thursday, Jim died, and it was just one of these amazing things, 'cause he was again, one of my heroes, and he was dead, and again, similar to Millard Fuller, Jim Rouse, had, had a successful career, started an organization from scratch. Jim Rouse, successful career, started Enterprise [Enterprise Foundation; Enterprise Community Partners, Inc.] from scratch, and I studied under him, and watched his, his, skill and ability, starting something from scratch, and so I decided to stay and make a commitment and to stay and be president for a number of years, and we continue to do well, raising money, helping community organizations, and so I still had that ongoing bug to start something from scratch, like these other people had done, and I had been thinking about technology, then the Internet came around in the '90s [1990s], I was tinkering around with it, I started something called Enterprise Online, which was a way to provide technical assistance to people using technology, then I started an online magazine, called Horizon. And I was inspired to start Horizon, I was on an airplane and I, I was always--John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and the Kennedy family, was always, you know, so John John's [John F. Kennedy, Jr.] magazine, George, I was one of the people who, I subscribed to it, and he had died, and I remember having his--one of his final versions of George, and I was reading it on the airplane, and I'll never forget saying George, meet slate, so in other words, take this magazine, that's about topical issues, and put it online. And so I said, I'm gonna go online, with a magazine that deals with community development, and community involvement, but I'm gonna talk about young people, and I'm gonna talk about celebrities, and so, I think we had Lauryn Hill, was on our first edition, and we did all kinds of pop related, you know, things and we would talk about how they were involved in making a difference in their communities, and we used the medium, you know, the online medium, so it was www.horizonmag.com. And it was a online magazine, that we launched, and it was hot, and I got the young kids involved, in the office, and for a while, we called it project X, and nobody knew what was, what was being writ- and so I was getting my hands, little did I know, I was getting my hands into the online world by launching this magazine, and finally, I realized, it was time to go, and to start this [One Economy Corporation, Washington, D.C.], and it was a scary thing, four of us, leaving Enterprise to work from a basement in here in Washington D.C., and I joke-- Speaker 2: Why the basement now? Speaker 1: Because we had no money, we had no money and my friend and one of the people that, that helped start this, Ben Hecht, knew-- Speaker 2: Now, is he related to--now I heard the name Ben Hecht. Speaker 1: No relation, no relation-- Speaker 2: Is no relation to the fighter Ben Hecht, or the stage, and all that-- Speaker 1: --no relation, no relation, and he had a friend, who was an accountant, who had an office in that building and there was storage space in the basement, he didn't tell me it was storage space, so Ben says, oh, we're gonna be on 18th [Street] and L [Street], in Washington, D.C., which is a great address, and so Ben and I are standing on the ground floor and I should have realized there was a problem, when he pressed the down button and we were already down, on, on, the bottom floor. Pressed the button and we're walking through the storage area, and I'm like, "Where's my office" 'cause I always had nice offices, you know I was in government, I had the flag behind me, you know, I always had, you know, nice offices, and he goes, "We're in it." It's just a storage area, old, broken computers, no real ventilation, it was just a few ventilation things, and you know, and there we were. I used to grouse at the time, I can't do this much real work, you know, so after a while, you know, as you move up higher and higher, I could fly into a city and say, oh, we need to make it better, and after a while, you know, you just get to a certain level, you know, I was like, and I could meet with mayors, and other stuff. I thought that was hard work, but to go into a basement, to have to write your own proposals, have to do all these things, at a folding table, borrowed computers, you know, all those sorts of things, so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 616365 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So doing real work from the basement. Speaker 2: So you're in the basement doing real work. Speaker 1: Well, one of the funny stories was my wastepaper basket was getting filled and I never forget, you know, when I had a little folding area, there were two rooms in this storage spa- so I, put off three of them in one space, and I wanted to have at least the pretense of being CEO, and having a room. And the wastepaper basket was getting filled and I said, my wastepaper basket is filled, and Alec [Alec Ross], who I worked with said, that's because you haven't emptied it, and then I just said--I remember yelling, "My career is in the tank," you know, and having to, you know, to build from there, so it's very humbling, you know, moving around, and then in the year 2000 when we-- Speaker 2: Did you really feel emotional angst at that? Speaker 1: Of course, 'cause I said, my career, I hadn't had to do that sort of thing, for a while. I'd been very fortunate, you know, and so, you just learn how to do a little bit of everything, and we all pitched in, relearned skills that I had forgotten I had, you know, getting involved, in writing and proposal writing, we were taking pitches, we had lots of doors closed on us, people rooting against us, you know, on occasion, and in the year 2000, the technology bubble had burst, so here you had, for profit companies, going under, and here I am I'm walking and seeking funding, and they're saying, "Let me get this right, you're a non-profit, who wants to use the Internet, to help the poor, when for profit companies have been trying to use the Internet, to help richer people, and they've gone under." And I would look at them and say, "Absolutely. This is the perfect time to get started with that" with a straight face, with an absolute straight face, and, and, remembering from some of the people that I learned from, like Jim Rouse [James Rouse], that conviction from the inside, and I used to tell the story, like I spoke earlier, about the Encyclopedia Britannica, and I said, years ago, those moms would buy the Encyclopedia Britannica, for their children, because they wanted them to have a better future, and I remember how I used that encyclopedia, as a point of discovery, to further my knowledge. I said, in, in, this century, it's all about using the Internet, and technology. And I spoke that with conviction, and you remember, earlier we were speaking about the encyclopedia, and that sort of thing, and that story stayed in my heart, and that's what I would convey to people. And so, it was about this instrument of hope, and using that as an instrument of hope, and so it was less about the gadgetry, and more about that it could open up opportunities-- Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: --and that's really the story of One Economy [One Economy Corporation, Washington, D.C.]. Our name is sort of all about one economy. That there is one economy, and we need to build a pathway to that one economy, for everybody who chooses to try to advance their lives, or the lives of their children. Speaker 2: This is 2001? Speaker 1: This is 2000, in the year 2000, in July of 2000. Speaker 2: Did you--what was your first big--I guess (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Our first grant was the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], $250,000, and we got a seventy-five thousand dollar discretionary grant from the Annie E. Casey Foundation [Baltimore, Maryland], that was all the commitments we had. People thought we had a lot more money committed. That was an illusion. We did not have other monies committed, that was not really--so, we had four people, that we had to pay for, and pay for all of our stationery, travel, and everything else like that, and that was all we had committed. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we decided that we were gonna launch this Beehive website, and we were gonna get a couple of demonstration projects to get computers in people's hands and show how they would use the technology, and show how, they would use the Beehive website, we just started building one program, after another. I was really heartened by the number of volunteers that we had, friends of mine, you know, that decided to just volunteer for us, and help. We had the donated space, I had a friend who was running a foundation, Washington Mutual Foundation [Washington Mutual Savings Bank Foundation], out of the blue, just send me a check, and it was discretionary money, you know, at the end of the year. And that really made me very emotional, because it was like I believe in you, didn't really know what our idea was, and whether we were gonna make it, but there was a ten thousand dollar check in the mail, and so it was things like that, that you don't forget. And you know, just counting the cash, running out of money, getting close to running out of money, I took out paperwork, to get a lien against my house, if we were gonna need it, because I just didn't want this dream to die, and here we are. Speaker 2: Okay, well, were you married at the time? Speaker 1: No, divorced still, so that gave me the ability to take out a, a, loan against the house if I needed to, and to work like a wild man, you know, on it-- Speaker 2: Okay, but there's no one at home saying why are you doing it. Speaker 1: Obviously, I would see someone from time to time, but you know, anybody with me would have to deal with my craziness, of trying to get this dream done, and so we would work, all of us, would work crazy hours, 'cause you would see emails flying back and forth, sometimes. I could just be at my desk at home, thinking oh, let me send, you know, Alec, or Ben [Ben Hecht], an email, and, you know they would ping me back, and I'd be like what are they doing, at this time of night or this time of morning, you know, we'd be communicating with each other, because just different ideas. It's an exhilarating moment, you know, being in a startup, you know, like that, so we felt everything in any for profit startup would feel, you know, the first time we could get our own stationery, and you know, and have our name on it, and all those moments, the first grants, the first computers given out, the first, you know, all those milestones. Story_ID: 616366 Speaker 1: What community did you target first, was it here in Washington [D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did, we went into Columbia Heights [Washington, D.C.], and a community there, and we reached out to a community in Portland [Oregon] as well 'cause I used some of my Portland roots, as well, and we just got--just started very small scale, just a few computers, that we had gotten from Hewlett-Packard [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California]; we were slowly getting some of the tech companies to start to look at this, even as a grand experiment. One thing we were trying to do is just proof of point, if you could help low income people get technology, they would do smart things with it, it's just that simple. And, and, our real focus was not about buying computers for people, or those sort of things, those were a means to an end, our real mission, is to use technology, the Internet in particular, as a medium for change, as a medium for self improvement, and self enhancement. Speaker 1: How did it work? So, for instance, so how did it work for Columbia Heights, what-- Speaker 2: We just teamed up with a few community agencies, asked them to select some families, who could go into this computer purchase program, basically a microloan, and that's how we got started, and again, it was kind of experimental, it's not who we are today. Because we don't focus so much on--we have a few computer programs, but our real focus is connectivity, which is making sure broadband is affordable, in affordable housing projects, low income housing projects, and our biggest issue is what we call public purpose media, which is getting the Internet in our various websites, so we view those other things, we tend to get asked a lot of questions about that, but that's not our, our, root mission [at One Economy Corporation, Washington, D.C.]. There are a lot of other people, who are helping people get hardware, people are getting to hardware on their own, our obsession, is to say, this medium of the Internet, can be used purposefully, to help people, help themselves, and we've gotta spend more money, more time, more creativity, making that happen. Speaker 1: Okay, so for instance, I have a problem, an educational problem-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or a crime problem-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a job employment problem, I can, I can-- Speaker 2: We want people to be able to turn to that for solutions. We want people that when government--having been in government, and having been in the non-profit sector, the age old problem is reaching people. So you'll often have agencies coming up with some shiny, new program, or government come up with some shiny, new program, only to learn later, that there's a significant portion of the population, who doesn't know how to use it, and doesn't even know that it exists. Children's health insurance, earned income tax credit, all those sorts of things, so our goal, is to make sure people access what's available to them, and then have that as Malcolm Gladwell saw it, the tipping point, that aha moment that a person has. I call it the personal tipping point, when they go, "Oh, I get it." And it's like I look at my own, personal, tipping point, in sixth grade [at Assumption School, Atco, New Jersey], when I answered that question, and I was like, ah, I get it. I can sit up straighter in the chair, I get it, that's what I'm looking for, for people, because we try to do too much sometimes, in social services, we try to social engineer everybody's life, you know, they should have five of these, two of these, three of this, like, let's pick the computer model, let's tell them how many hours of training, let's tell them what their kids need to be doing, no, no one wants to function like that. You know, I don't think anybody grows up--the great American dream, is not to one day live in public housing, the great American dream, is not to be the recipient of social services, and so why can't we, we think about ways to help accentuate their strengths, help them facilitate their success, which is what I, which is what I'm wor- how, how, do I help you facilitate your success, versus helping you through your failures? And there's that subtle, but very powerful difference, and that is what we try to focus on. Speaker 1: Okay, and can you expand on that a little bit? Speaker 2: Well, again, it's, that we don't try to do everything, we don't try to solve every single problem. It's, there has to be a point of self-discovery. There has to be that aha moment, and a lot of people have it through the discovery of having that knowledge, and information at their fingertips, so what I'm trying to do is just make it easy, make it easy to find, make it an experience that you'll actually enjoy, make it comfortable, make it convenient, and build that bridge between all these programs, all of these resources, that are supposed to be available, make it easy for you to get. Story_ID: 616367 Speaker 1: Okay, as I sit here, and as I hear you talking, I was thinking about the Chinese proverb, it's better to teach people how to fish-- Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) than to bring 'em fish. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and that's what we're about, and we would argue sometimes, with people in social services, social sciences, who say, "Well, you should do this, require this, require that," and I said, "Nobody required me to do all things before I could get my computer, nobody required all these things from me before I could read the newspaper. Why are we placing requirement after requirement on--," you know, I, I'm amazed by single moms, and how they're able to take the tiny budget, feed their kids, get them to school on time, have a little family vacation, and make it all work. And yet, we treat them, the moment they step out of their--the doors of their house, as though they were stupid, you know, and versus, with the respect to say, somehow, you're making that work, I ask for the rec- could you make it on that budget, if you were only making twenty-six thousand dollars a year? How far could you stretch it? You know, and so, it's, we tend to look at a deficit model, you know, we gotta help all these people do X, Y and Z, and I'm like, no, a few little things here and there, but for, let's help them continue on that path, let's facilitate her success. You know, lets expose her to a program that she might not have known about. Let, let's show her that it's easier, that she could get that degree from community college, it may not be as tough as she thinks it is. Let's remove barriers, you know, and so that's, that's our philosophy. It, it's not rooted in prescriptions, you know, all the way down, you know, of planning out every pathway, so that's why our website, you know, has a colors, nice colors on it, and it's called the Beehive, we didn't wanna call it--we used to joke, I am poor dot com, you know, click here, if you're poor. You know, 'cause no one considers themselves poor, you know, they're just sort of, they're making it work, everybody says they're middle class, in fact, heck, even rich people say they're middle class, and so why not have a place where they can go online and feel like I'm just like everybody else. And so, it's just appealing to human aspiration, you know, more than any, anything else, you know, I remember the only time that I got motivated in school, even before Mrs. Peiffer [Elizabeth A. Peiffer], was when I was in remedial reading, which I didn't feel like I belonged there, I didn't like that stigma, and then they used to give little stars, little, gold, stars, they would put on this little chart for all of us, who were in the remedial reading, every time we got a hundred. And I just went bing, bing, bing, bing, bing, all the way across with all of these hundreds, and then I remember hearing the teacher whisper, "He doesn't belong in here." It was in that little point of motivation, you know, it's about, it's about getting that going, those are homilies--that's what we're trying to do. That's what One Economy [One Economy Corporation, Washington, D.C.] is trying to do. We can't do everything, and we're not attempting to try to social engineer our way through everything, but this is a transformative device, the internet is transformative, it's transformed the way we do business, the way we shop, the way we do so many parts of our lives, why aren't we using it more to assist the poor and use it as an instrument, all over the world? Our goals in Africa, are to use cell phones and that technology to provide information to people, vital information, 'cause many people are getting cell phones, so we're working on a cell phone initiative, for, for Africa. We're doing work in Africa already, but it's about--information is a great democratizer, and so, we wanna make it so that one day, that that playing field is completely level. Everybody has access to the same information. It makes it easier to run a race, if we're all starting from the same point. Speaker 1: Okay, what we just discussed is your philosophy of social service in this regard. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So anybody evaluating this in the future knows that we discussed the philosophy (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Story_ID: 616368 Speaker 1: Let's discuss, discuss, on the individual aspects of One Economy [One Economy Corporation, Washington, D.C.], Beehive, PIC.tv, 247 Town Hall (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll touch on a few of these briefly. Speaker 1: Yeah, just touch on some of these. Speaker 2: The, the, ultimate aim is what we call public purpose media, media with a purpose so, we started with the Beehive, which is our quintessential, I call it, America's toolbox, you know, there are tools there for how do I get the earned income tax credit, how do I get social self-insurance, how do I access, you know, healthcare, a series of things like that. Town Hall is, is, a fairly new website, which is all about civic engagement, putting issues out there, how do I learn more about, so there are many places, to get civic engagement, but we felt we needed to have something in that space-- Speaker 1: Is this like a blog? Speaker 2: It's, there's, a mix of things, there will be town halls on there, there will be--we have flip cameras, for kids who are out there, interviewing people about their thoughts and impressions, so, I encourage you to, you know, take a look at it, because I could go a deep dive into every one of these. The one I think which has the greatest potential, will be launched later this year, in '08 [2008], which is PIC.tv , the Pubic Internet Channel, and it's a mix of things, that we produce, but it's a mix of content and programming that other people produce, all coming together, in a public purpose space, as we call it. Really looking at the Internet and saying, there can be a public purpose space, that really has programming, a lot of it video based, that assists people in a variety of important, public purpose areas. So we have Robert Townsend, the actor, has just agreed to run a new aspect for, and produce programming for the Public Internet Channel. It's something that we call the V Studio, a virtual studio, where he recruiting talent to come in an help us produce, and he will be directing a series of webisodes, and the first series will be called 'The Single Mom' ['Diary of a Single Mom'], and 'The Single Mom' will be a series with actors. It'll be a well written out series which, as Robert calls it, a dramedy, which is designed to inspire and inform, but ultimately get people feeling like they can and they ought to take action, to improve their lives. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, a different genre, and we're very excited, you know, about it, and you'll hear more about it, there'll be a hopefully, a Hollywood premiere at some point, when this is ready to be rolled out. Speaker 1: Okay, what is Zip Road? Speaker 2: Zip Road, is a, is another website, where you can put your zip code in and get educational information, and so we're growing and expanding that, that was launched not that long ago, and we're just quietly building that, building work content, and making it so when you put your zip code in, press a button, six pre-programmed areas of information will be in front of you. After school care, supplemental education services, college prep, how to pay for, for school, those sorts of things, school choice issues, et cetera. So we call it contextualized search, but it's placed in the context of these six areas, so it was meant to make you think of the zip code and we call it Zip Road, because it's a road to education, and so again, all designed to make things easier, and put that information there and make it easy. I view the Public Internet Channel, as I told Robert, I said, you know, we're suppling a lot of spinach, in this entree of information, but I want to make sure that dessert and the appetizer is there, and that's what you can help us with, with the Public Internet Channel, and the VStudio. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your ultimate goal for, for One Economy? What's the big picture? Speaker 2: The big picture for us is global, and that when you look back on this body of work, you know, I talk about the body of work, that we all leave behind, that one day, we'll look back and we'll say, of course we're using information to assist the journey for low income people, you know, all over the world, and how much they'll remember about the role of One Economy. I mean that, that's left up to history, but ultimately it's to continue to do things that show people this is the way we ought to be doing it. This is how we ought to be thinking about it. I don't think we're, we're, not going to be the only one doing this kind of work, but we're on the cutting edge, and we're, we're, very much first out there, showing people, we can use it this way. And I think when you add it all up with what we're capable of doing in Africa, and in the Middle East, and other places, I think it's pretty amazing, and that's, that's how I want us to be viewed. Story_ID: 616369 Speaker 1: This may sound redundant but, we always ask this question, and I have to ask you, what, what, are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I, I, think the, the, biggest concern I have is that we try to love ourselves better, and it starts with self, I think, self-love. We have, we have, a lot of manifestations of self-hatred, in different ways, and I think that we all know what that means, and we have to keep--so, I think a lot of it, deals with we'll work on self, and then, if you're a complete person, you can have a complete relationship, and complete relationships in the community. And sometimes we just say let's focus on community, focus on community, but a lot of that is about self-discovery, self-awareness, self-improvement, you know, sorts of things, and my greatest hope is, is that we're an extraordinary people, and we all these vignettes of all of our different stories, we still overcome amazing hurdles and amazing boundaries because there are still hurdles, there are still boundaries, and regardless of who's president, in this country, many of those boundaries are still gonna be there, and it comes back to what are we gonna do about it, and I'm very hopeful about that. Story_ID: 616370 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now? Speaker 2: You know, it's funny. I never look back and try to reconstruct anything, and I continue to pinch myself and feel lucky about each one of the experiences, and as I say the body of work. You know, and I feel that I can look back at each step, and say there's a body of work that's left behind, there's a body of work that's left behind. I believe that in our lives we get a canvas to paint and I, I, wrote a poem about Jim Rouse [James Rouse] when he died, and I was on the airplane, I was crying, and I described him as an artist, and I believe we're all artists, and I said that he painted a new portrait of America and he used broad strokes, strokes with bright colors, and I thing we get one canvas and when it's all said and done, you look at what we get to paint on that canvas, and that's that body of work that I talked about. That's what important. Story_ID: 616371 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done again, what today, would you consider to be your legacy at this point? Speaker 2: I'm just, I'm always pushing the envelope, is what it is. Whatever sector I'm in, so every spot from when I was in Oregon, pushing the envelope with One Economy [One Economy Corporation, Washington, D.C.], in Africa, in the Middle East, and we've launched a program in Jordan, we're going to be doing some work in Israel, it's pushing the envelope, wherever that is. The restlessness, and I think that's, that's the common thread that through the body of work, no one particular, you know, thing. It's sort of that sense of being restless. Speaker 1: I'm also reading some literature that two honorary chairs are Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and-- Speaker 2: John McCain. Speaker 1: --John McCain, and they're probably going to be running against one another for president this year. Speaker 2: I asked them both to do that. That's right, I asked them to do that, and we've had lots of--and you can see some of the pictures around the office. You'll see a lot of other people. We have had help from amazing people, Republicans like Jack Kemp, and you know, Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], John McCain, you know, not afraid to ask for help, I don't put partisan politics before the mission. Story_ID: 616372 Speaker 1: Tell us a little about your family here before I ask my last question. Speaker 2: Yeah, for me, well, as I told you, divorced and so I'm pretty much, you know, on my own. I have a nice circle of, of support friends, spiritual advisor. Speaker 1: When did you get married? Speaker 2: In Oregon to an Ethiopian, and she's a wonderful, wonderful, woman, back there. I should plug her store, but I won't. She owns a cosmetic store and a great person. Speaker 1: Did you have any children? Speaker 2: We never unfortunately, we never, we never had any kids, so we'll see what happens in my own personal legacy in that regard. Speaker 1: Okay, father's [Felix Ramsey] still alive and-- Speaker 2: Father's still alive. One of my brothers is in naval intelligence, probably shouldn't say his name 'cause he goes off in missions, and then a family of a lot of school teachers. Sister's [Melanie Ramsey] a school teacher, another brother, the youngest, is a teacher, and even the one who's in the [U.S.] military, is a teacher, so there are a lot, a lot of sort of giving back, kind of ethos, you know, teachers, nobody decided to fly off and just go into the corporate, you know, world. Story_ID: 616373 Speaker 1: We'll probably come back in forty years and interview you again, but is there anything that I haven't asked you that we need to cover now? Speaker 2: No, I think you, you were very thorough. I'm not used to being opened up like that so it was very thorough. I appreciate that. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you as well, and the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That is a great question. A teacher, a teacher...