 Story_ID: 117407 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My full name is Sonya Lisa Ross, and Sonya is spelled S-O-N-Y-A, Lisa the usual way, Ross, like Diana. Speaker 1: Okay, R-O-S-S? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, and Ma'am, what is your date of birth and place? Speaker 2: I was born July 11, 1962, in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well, my occupation is journalist. My title is Race and Ethnicity Editor, kind of a little bit of a clunker, you know, but it's about coverage of racial stuff, I guess that's a way to put it. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date--what is today's date? (Laughter) December 4th, ninet- oh, not 19--2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present-- Speaker 2: I'm still in the twentieth century, as you can tell. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At the present time, we are in the Associated Press's Washington [D.C.] bureau, in a conference room. Speaker 1: In the Ikea Room. Speaker 2: The Ikea Room, right (laughter). Doesn't look so Ikea anymore, but yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 117408 Speaker 1: So before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that are kind of a warm-up that we always ask. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only re--these questions only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Food is my favorite food. I love food. I can't narrow it down to one food. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's, that's, that's just too confining, so no (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Green, even though I don't wear it much. I really don't wear it much. I haven't--I have yet to have somebody say to me, "You look great in green." But green is my favorite color. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like winter, yeah. I would have to--I would have to say I'm, I'm a winter person. I like winter. I was born in the summer, I can tolerate the heat, but winter has--winter is just so much more interesting. Winter makes you adjust, you know. Winter, winter says today you can wear wool, but you can't wear suede. Okay, now the sun's out, you can wear suede; you can pile on as many layers as you'd like. Wintertime is fireplaces, and snow, and warmth, and snuggling, and I ski. And you know, I--so yes, I like winter. Most people take their vacations in the summer, so when you take your vacation in the winter, you're really on vacation. You can always take yourself somewhere in the world where it's summer, if you just gotta have that heat. But--yeah, I like winter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Drew's right; you're good. See you're on the lightweight stuff and got me--got me elaboratin'. Speaker 1: And just, you know, luckily enough you mentioned vacation, and the la--the next question is, what, what is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh, [Lake] Tahoe [Nevada], Tahoe. Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) According to my friends I do. I can't say that I do. I, I have philosophies that I live by. I live by, "Let go, let God." God's got it, you know. My--one of my friends from college used to say that I was always saying, it--"Oh, it's all racially motivated" (laughter). "It's all racially motivated." And I do remember saying that a lot then. I don't use it so much now. I don't know why, 'cause it's still all racially motivated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 117409 Speaker 1: All right, now, let me ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but, but separately, then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Mattie Antoinette Mariano, and Mattie is spelled M-A-T-T-I-E, Antoinette A-N-T-O-I-N-E-T-T-E-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and Mariano M-A-R-I-A-N-O. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is September 7, 1925, Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, and what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother's side of the family we've managed to trace back to at least 1790, in the Azores, off the coast of Portugal. Speaker 1: Okay, so is your mother a Portuguese or of Portuguese descent? Speaker 2: She's of Portuguese descent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. She was, I should say, of Portuguese descent. Speaker 1: Okay, so what were they doing in 1790 in the Azores? Speaker 2: Well, according to the oral history in the family, there were the three Mariano brothers who left from Barcelona [Spain] and sailed to the United States. And once they arrived in the United States, according to the family lore, two of them went and became white. This is what we were told. Two went their--they went separate ways, and two of them became white. They never exactly said the third one became black, so we just assumed--at least I did--I just assumed that. Speaker 1: Well, yeah, it, it, it--yeah, the assumption is that they were--all three of them were--other than one-- Speaker 2: Were the same thing and then they came here and turned into something else-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --right, yeah. Speaker 1: --which is other than white. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And--okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: But close enough where they could-- Speaker 2: Right, according to what I've been able to locate on Ancestry.com, at least two of these brothers lived to--in the same place, settled in Georgetown, South Carolina--in coastal Carolina, in the--probably the early part of the 1800s. We don't have an exact date of when they arrived there, but we found the earliest census that we could find. And I wanna say it was either the 1810 or 1820 census listed A. L. Mariano. Speaker 1: So what did they do? Do, do you know what they did? Speaker 2: A. L. was--he listed his occupation as merchant. And he is--at the earliest census he's listed as one of four free white people on his land, and the others are a wife and daughter whose name--wife and two daughters, rather, whose names weren't given. And also listed on that census form were that there were three hundred slaves on that property. Speaker 1: Now that's a-- Speaker 2: And by the next-- Speaker 1: --that' a lot. Speaker 2: That's a lot isn't it? Speaker 1: That's a lot. Even for the Deep South, that's a lot of slaves, three hundred. Speaker 2: That's a whole lot. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And ten years later, very same property, there were only ten slaves listed there. So either there was some pox on that land that killed lots of people or he was a merchant who was selling slaves. I haven't really been able to ascertain exactly what he was selling, but he gave his occupation as merchant. And his brother, whose initials were given as M. N. Mariano, was--gave his occupation as silversmith. Speaker 1: Okay, now off--often, you know, when, when people were in debt, you know their slaves, being property, were seized by, by the court, you know. Speaker 2: Entirely possible. Speaker 1: Yeah, so if he was a merchant and, and had--was in some sort of trouble, like a ship sunk with all his goods--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: All his cargo. Speaker 1: Yeah, they would seize the--seize the slaves. Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, well, you know it could be. I, I figured he sold 'em or somebody got 'em. Speaker 1: It could have been. Now this is all 'cause the Azores are--you know, I know the Canary Islands and Cape Verde are places where Africans are [were] brought to do work by the Portuguese, and that sort of thing. And so you know, there's a--yeah, I, I, I was--thought that much--that could have been the case when I--when I heard you. So, you know, but it's something that somebody has to investigate to really get to the bottom of. Story_ID: 117410 Speaker 1: Yes, I'd love to know more. I wanna research it more. It's been kind of delicate, you know. Because my grandfather [Antonio Mariano] who--my mother's [Mattie Antoinette Mariano] father, was never very forthcoming about family history, didn't really share. My aunt, my mother's sister, my mother's oldest sister, kept a lot of this history, and we would bond over the history, you know, sharing the information. And she passed away two years ago, and I assured her that I would keep my thumb on the family history. So I'm still trying to put a lot of it together. Speaker 2: Okay, now in terms of the contemporary history of the family--I mean, well, after the Civil War, there's no slavery or anything like that, so did the Marianos move to Atlanta [Georgia] at some point or? Speaker 1: They went from Ge- they migrated from Georgetown, South Carolina, over to Eastman, Georgia. And that's where my great-grandfather had a farm. And his name was, was Lewis--L-E-W-I-S, Antonio, Mariano. Speaker 2: Okay. And he had a farm where he was--what was he growing, do you know? Speaker 1: I don't know. My grandfather went there to live with him in later in life. And they grew soybean I think, and he had some sugarcane plants there because I remember him chopping some of it to give it to me, but I don't know everything that they grew--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Was it a cash farm or some--you know, a, a food farm--you know, a farm where you--you're growing like-- Speaker 1: Crops. He had crops. Speaker 2: Crops to eat or to sell? Speaker 1: I think it was crops to sell, but I don't know the extent of it. My grandfather died when I was eight, almost nine. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so I didn't have him very long. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so was your mother--so did your mother grow up on a farm? Speaker 1: No, no, my grandfather, whose name was Antonio Edward Lewis--Lewis--Lewis Antonio's, son. And I'm, I'm telling you now, I can lose you in Lewises and Antonios because that was a family name that got passed down from all those generations, starting with that original A. L., whose name was Antonio Louis, L-O-U-I-S. So--but he was a construction worker, and at one point he worked for the Armour Meat Company in Chicago [Illinois]. He sort of--he sort of gravitated around, you know. And eventually, when after--well, he went to New York [New York] and that's where he met my grandmother. Her name was Mary Bell Jones, and she was a nurse. And she was working at a hospital on Lenox Avenue and met my grandfather on the street, at least that's what she told me, that they-- Speaker 2: So this sounds like Harlem Hospital on Lenox Avenue, yeah. Speaker 1: She kept telling me what the hospital was. It was--it--what street it was on. It could have been Harlem Hospital or it could have been Lenox Hill Hospital. I just don't-- Speaker 2: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --know which hospital. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was working at a nearby construction site, and they met there in New York. And so they, they married and he wanted to go back to Georgia. So she had to give up her career to marry, which was what was expected of women at the time. And they moved to Atlanta at after that. Speaker 2: Okay. And what, what did your grandfather do in Atlanta when he-- Speaker 1: He had a construction company, and he--and he was in brick masonry and he had contracts. And the time they were building lots of home--housing in the colored community, you know. And he mainly had a business laying foundations, so he, he earned a good living, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 117411 Speaker 1: Now what, what did your mother [Mattie Antoinette Mariano] say about growing up in, in Atlanta [Georgia]? Did-- Speaker 2: Among the things I remember her saying, well, she enjoyed it. They were deeply embedded in the black community. And they had a normal upbringing. I do remember, though, that she told me once she was in a fight ev--pretty much every day at school from second grade all the way up through school, and that other kids would chase them home from school and chunk rocks at them, yelling "Spinnochio [ph.]," you know, because they could see they were different; they were a little different, but they're culturally--they were culturally very black--black family. My grandmother [Mary Bell Jones Mariano] was--my, my mother's mother was part Native American, part white, so they were I guess what you would call ethnically exotic in the black community at the time. To me they came out looking just like regular light-skinned black people, and that was my reality. And they, they were very much about black life and black culture. My mother went to beauty school. She went to Apex Beauty College in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Now did she finish high, high school there? Speaker 2: Yes, she went to Booker T. Washington High. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and, and then she went to beauty school? Speaker 2: And then she went to beauty school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she became a beautician. That's what they called it then. Speaker 1: Yeah, did, did she have her own shop or did she work in someone else's? Speaker 2: No, she, she just sort of worked whenever. But she got married pretty young, so she never spent a long career doing hair, but she had the skills. I think mostly she practiced it on us (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now does that--is that--does the Apex Museum like stand in the--of the place where the Apex Beauty School was? You know-- Speaker 2: It was on Auburn Avenue. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where, where the Apex Black History Museum is. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't know if it did or not. What I recall her saying about the Apex of Beauty was that one of the students there at the time she was there was Nathaniel Bronner, who founded Bronner Bros. [Enterprise]. And she said he was the only man in the class at the time. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, they-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: They're one of the Jheri curl-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they came up with hair-- Speaker 1: Entrepreneurs-- Speaker 2: --products. Speaker 1: --in the '80s [1980s] that made a lot of--the Bronner brothers were--yeah. Speaker 2: And they do-- Speaker 1: Like [HM] George Johnson and-- Speaker 2: --hair show, yeah. Speaker 1: --hol--Comer Cottrell and other people. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember talking about that, so. Speaker 1: Okay, so you [sic, her mother] went to school with the Bronner brothers--with Nathan Bronner. Speaker 2: Nathaniel-- Speaker 1: Nathaniel Bronner. Speaker 2: --I think his name was. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 117412 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, let me go to your father's side. We'll put 'em together. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His full name was Harold Ross. He didn't have a middle name. Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 14, 1919, in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And what, what can you tell us about his side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: We can trace them pretty far back also. My grandfather was a minister. His name was Osborn Frank Ross, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And what denomination was he? Do you know? Speaker 2: Baptist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was an associate pastor or assistant pastor or something like that at Greater Springfield Baptist Church in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he worked as a sexton. There's, there's an antiquated term for you. He, he worked as a sexton for All Saints Church in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay, so he, he was an assistant pastor at one church and worked as a sexton-- Speaker 2: At a black church. Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh, so All Saints is a white church? Speaker 2: White church, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's interesting, 'cause it seems like the times would conflict. Speaker 2: Well, I mean, one of my aunts told me this title sexton was essentially--he was a night watchman (laughter) or I don't know. Maybe it was a janitor--what they had for the janitor for the church or what, but he worked at that church. But he-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think they, they do--(unclear) they clean up and they keep the doors locked-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and all the keys and-- Speaker 2: That's what he did at, at All Saints. And actually, years later he--when he was ready to retire, he talked to the people at All Saints and wanted to pass his job on to his son, my father [Harold Ross]. And my father was in school at the time. He was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time, and he had just gotten married--not to my mother, but to his previous wife, and worked--so he worked at All Saints also for a little while, but then he went to World War II. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So--yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so your father finished high school in Atlanta. Speaker 2: Yes, Booker T. Washington High [School]; same high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what, what kind of--what did your father say about growing up in Atlanta? Now, they grew up--your father grew up--(unclear) just, just to say this 'cause we know that this is sort of a Golden Age for Atlanta--Au--Auburn Avenue. They lived around that, that area--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They were on the west side-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a little further removed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were in Dixie Hills--what's called Dixie Hills-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Community. And so they were part of these black families who were migrating to the west, because the west wasn't always black, and it wasn't always developed, you know. So they had migrated over from the city core and were headed to the west. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the west side of Atlanta where they lived. Speaker 2: Yes, they lived on Tiger Flowers Drive, which was named after the boxer, not that far from where the Atlanta University Center is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's sort of west of the Atlanta University Center--yeah, slightly west and north, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 117413 Speaker 1: Okay, so your father [Harold Ross], did, did he have any stories about what life was like when he was coming up? Speaker 2: Not a lot that I can recall. He died when I was fourteen, so what I can recall is him sharing stories about what it was like growing up in the [Great] Depression, because it was--you know, times were tight, and how neighbors would share like a ham bone to make soup and beans and things like that. They were a little--I guess a little more privileged than some other people because they had a car. Most of it I've had to put back together from recollections--recollections from my aunts and uncles who survived him. But that--that's the gist of what I know. He had--gosh, one, two, three--he had seven siblings, so I had to kind of cull stories from others. He wasn't the first to pass on, but. And I remember him telling me a few things about when he served in World War II. And I really do want to get to the bottom of his military record, because the stories he told involved being in Italy. My father went to Italy and saw action in Italy because he was wounded. He had told me he had shrapnel in his--in his knee. And he also at one point had to jump into either a canal or a river to swim away from enemy soldiers. I'm not sure whether they were German soldiers or-- Speaker 1: Italian-- Speaker 2: --what enemy. Speaker 1: It could--it could have been Italian even. Speaker 2: It could have been Italians. And he had to swim a long distance. And actually, I got a few detail about that out of my aunt ov--over the summer, this past summer, that he, he swam at least a mile on the water. And I remember him being very insistent that we all learn how to swim because he said, "You never know when it will save your life one day." I also remember him sharing stories about how a little Italian boy followed his unit. And at one point, they tried to turn him back on the road, and he kept following them anyway. I think they were headed into action, and he tried to follow them and they kept turning him back and, and he wouldn't go back; like, they would still look back and he was following them. And I remember asking him, "Whatever happened to the little boy?" He said, "Oh, he just followed us." So he didn't--I think he just didn't wanna tell me maybe the boy got killed, or he just didn't know what happened to him. But I, I do remember that story. Speaker 1: Now just for the record, now he went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] first? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Then worked in the church [All Saints Church] for a brief period of time; then was drafted into the war? Speaker 2: Yes, he was drafted into the war. Speaker 1: Okay, now the whole idea of going to Morehouse, was he the first person in his family to go to school or was-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --were there--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah--no. Speaker 1: There's a tra--tradition to go to college then? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so, well, tell something about-- Speaker 2: I don't know which one of them went (laughter)--I don't know which one of them went first. Speaker 1: Were they the first-- Speaker 2: I have to ask my aunt. Speaker 1: --generation to go? Speaker 2: Were they what? Speaker 1: The first generation to go to college? Speaker 2: On my father's side? Speaker 1: Yeah, his brothers and sisters. Were they the first generation--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I believe they were, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe they were. On my mother's side they were not. My mother's [Mattie Antoinette Mariano] generation was not. My grandmother [Mary Bell Jones Mariano] went to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She went to Bennett College in Greensboro [North Carolina], and she graduated some--somewhere in the window between 1917 and 1920, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I do have a photo of her graduating class. Speaker 1: So--and what is--did, did she become a teacher or nur--or-- Speaker 2: My grandmother? Speaker 1: --that, that was a nurse? Is that the nurse? Speaker 2: Yes, that's the nurse. Speaker 1: That's the nurse, okay. Speaker 2: That's my maternal grandmother. Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right. Speaker 2: My paternal grandmother, her name was Lula Clifford Howard Ross, and she was a homemaker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, now your father, when he was--when he graduated from high school, he goes to Morehouse. What did he want to, to do or what, what he--what, what occupation did he want? Speaker 2: He was a math major. I found that out. I don't think he had really formed what he wanted to do, and then he got sucked off into the war. In the ar--he was in the [U.S.] Army, and he had reached the rank of Tech[nical] Sergeant III. After--and he, he worked with airplanes in some capacity, and after the war, he was hired by Lockheed. And he worked on C-130s [Lockheed C-130 Hercules]. He was part of a flight testing crew on the C-130s. Speaker 1: You know the C-130 is a big cargo plane, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The Hercules project-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --is what they called it. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: He was on that team. Speaker 1: So he worked for Lockheed in Atlanta? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, in Marietta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now (unclear)--let me--so he, he was married right out of high school or, or af- or-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure exactly when they got married, but I know he was married at the time he went to work for All Saints. Yeah, and they got divorced after the war. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When he came back from the war, they were divorced. Story_ID: 117414 Speaker 1: All right, so is there a story about how your parents met and fell in love and got together? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, there's a story behind that (laughter). Because Lockheed [Corporation, now Lockheed Martin] was in Marietta [Georgia], it was [Klu Klux] Klan country, and they had hired many black workers. So they would mar--they would carpool together to work I guess off the belief that there is strength in numbers, you know. And so he [Harold Ross] would meet the carpool a short distance from this elementary school where my mother [Mattie Antoinette Mariano] was working as a school crossing guard. And there was a little corner store near that, so he would get picked up at the corner store. And my ma--according to my mother, he told the owner of the corner store, Mr. Robinson, "That's my wife standing out there in the street." This was in 1956. "There's my wife standing in the middle of the street." My mother at the time was divorced and had a young daughter, so that's why she was working, to support her daughter. So every day she's out there in the school--in the--in the street (laughter), and he saw her every day. So one day the store owner told her, "Well, Ross says you're his wife." And she said, "Well, he'll need to talk to me about that first." And oh--and so he--I guess that opened the door for him to approach her and ask her out. So he asked her out to a dance at the Royal Peacock [Dance Club, Atlanta, Georgia]. And they went--she said they had a great time. He took her dancing. He used to love to dance. He was--he liked to jitterbug. And, and they began dating then, and he took a shine to my sister, had her in his company almost immediately. And so they dated for a couple of years and got married on Valentine's Day 1958. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Valentine's Day. Okay, that's a good story. So, now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their talents, their looks, how they walk, talk, what they're interested in, who, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I can see a lot of both of them. I have traits of a lot of both of them. From my father I got a really wicked sense of humor, height, and I mean, I've been told I have his eyes, like the eye color. He had very, very brown eyes. As a matter of fact, his eyes and his skin were eerily close to the same color, so if you seen people who look like that, he was one of those. So he could actually look like he was a lot meaner than he really was. So, but yeah, I've been told I have his eyes--so yeah, at, at--really razor sharp wit, kind of sarcastic on a lot of levels, lo- loved to read and put things together, and love to play games like Solitaire, and love to dance. He, he also loved to sing, but he couldn't sing a note (laughter). He was a, a deeply--a deeply spiritual man, very much about family and church, so I get a lot of that from him. From my mother--my mother was very sweet, very sensitive, very giving, very affectionate, great cook, and loved dirty jokes. Like she was a real prissy, you know, kind of--not, not like prim, but you know, she was one of that those dainty Southern women type and look--but will tell dirty jokes. And I got a lot of that from her about, you know, being warm, being approachable, friendly. So yeah, I get that from her. They say my mother was this great looker. I mean, I remember being with her when I was about seven at Greenbriar Mall in Atlanta [Georgia]. And that was the first time I had ever heard anybody wolf whistle at a woman and hoof and claw, you know. And, and I'm thinking these men are saying this about my mother. Like well, what, what do you do when you go out and your mother stops traffic, you know. So, if I've got any good looks, I got 'em from her. And she also loved to write letters. She loved to write letters, so she was a natural writer, and I think I got that from her. Story_ID: 115905 Speaker 1: All right, so, well, tell us about your, your mo--mother's [Mattie Antoinette Mariano] first husband. You were gonna tell us about him. Speaker 2: Well, okay, her first husband's name was James Lay [ph.]. He was her high school sweetheart, and they got married right after high school, and then he went into the [U.S.] Navy and shipped off to World War II [WWII]. And when he shipped off, she came home. And they, they, they just sort of--I think the war broke 'em up. There was something about letters that never got delivered and so she divorced him on abandonment, and then married a childhood sweetheart--I mean a childhood friend named Harmon Perry. And Harmon Perry-- Speaker 1: So, she, she was married twice before? Speaker 2: She was married twice before my father [Harold Ross]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Harmon Perry was a photographer. He, he had grown up kind of in the neighborhood with them, so she knew of him and he knew of her for many years. And so she married him and, and they had a daughter, my oldest sister, Philippa [ph.]. And he worked as a photographer in the city, and he also established something called the Miss Sepia Atlanta Beauty Contest--Beauty Pageant. But he was one of those multipurpose black men, you know, the--they have several different jobs doing a whole bunch of different things (laughter). But he worked for the 'Atlanta Daily World,' and he eventually worked for the 'Atlanta Journal [Constitution]' as a sportswriter. And then after that he worked as an Atlanta bureau chief with Johnson Publishing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But all that was well after my mother--he and my mother divorced. He and my mother divorced around 1955--'54 [1954], '55 [1955]. Speaker 1: Wow, okay-- Speaker 2: And they, they had married I think in 1948 or '49 [1949], somewhere in that window. Speaker 1: So the journalism genes are actually carried by somebody who's not related to you? Speaker 2: Exactly (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: When I was in school--when I was in college, I remember talking to him about this and--about this profession. And he said--I, I told him I thought maybe it would be smart--I felt black people kind of got a raw deal where media were concerned. There was not enough information about what's going on, and what you did get was kind of skewed and incomplete. And so he said--I said, "Maybe if you go into this field with the purpose of improving how black people's information needs are met from the inside, things will get better; you can make a difference." And he said, "Well, you can do that if you want. Just know black folks won't appreciate you" (laughter). Speaker 1: He's a veteran (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's why he said, "Just know black folks won't appreciate you." Story_ID: 115906 Speaker 1: Now--oh, well, tell us about your brothers and sisters--I mean, your, your siblings. Speaker 2: My siblings? Speaker 1: Yeah, your sister was born first, right? Your mother [Mattie Antoinette Mariano]-- Speaker 2: I have three sisters-- Speaker 1: Three sisters, okay. Speaker 2: --and no brothers, family of girls. Speaker 1: Can you name them and just give us an idea of what they're doing, you know, what they do-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. My oldest sister is Philippa--Philippa Perry, and her married name is Elder; and she's a homemaker now, but prior to that she worked for AT&T for many years in customer service. My second sister is Antonia Terria [ph.] Ross; her married name is Gray; and she is a minister. And my third sister is Harolka Janene Ross. Speaker 1: And how do you spell that name? That's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly--H-A-R-O-L-K-A, and Janene, J-A-N-E-N-E, Ross, and her married name is Moore, M-O-O-R-E; and she works for Allstate Insurance Company. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's all girls? Speaker 2: All girls. Speaker 1: And you--and you fit in? Speaker 2: I'm the baby. Speaker 1: In--okay, so you're, you're the youngest. Speaker 2: I'm the youngest. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And then Philippa has a sister, Phyllis Perry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were always told because Phyllis is Philippa's sister, Phyllis is your sister, so she's my sister too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she's a year older than me, and she is an author and writing coach. Speaker 1: And that's the--Mr.-- Speaker 2: Perry. Speaker 1: Per--Perry's-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Daughter. Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --by his second wife. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now when you grew up then you had, had your mother and father in the household and, and your one, two, three sisters. Speaker 2: Three sisters. Speaker 1: Three sisters, right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother [Mary Bell Jones Mariano]. Speaker 1: And your grandmother, okay, all right. Speaker 2: And my grandmother, my mother's mother. Speaker 1: Your mother's mother, okay. Your grand--now and, and you lived on the west side of town [Atlanta, Georgia] on that-- Speaker 2: Yes, we lived in a community called Collier Heights. Speaker 1: Collier Heights, right. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 115907 Speaker 1: Now can you describe the house you lived in? Speaker 2: We lived in a--well, it was one level. I guess you would call it a ranch. It was--it started out with three bedrooms, and then they expanded the house to add a den, a bathroom, and another bedroom. So it's a four-bedroom house, all on one level, yellow, wood and brick. But it was yellow wood and red brick, and we had green shutters (laughter) on the windows. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was a--there was a single pine tree in the front yard that just towered way up, and yet we never worried about a storm knocking that tree over onto the house. I mean, that tree--that--you've seen southern pines and how tall they can get? Speaker 1: Oh, a Georgia pine is a prototype for-- Speaker 2: A Georgia pine is a tall tree, and that thing was in the center of our front yard and it just towered over the house. And tornadoes came and ice storms and everything else and never knocked that tree over. It has since been cut down. I mean, we sold the house a while ago, but the tree is gone now; it's a stump. Speaker 1: So you lived there your whole--your whole-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --childhood and-- Speaker 2: Whole childhood. Speaker 1: --teenage life. Speaker 2: My parents [Mattie Antoinette Mariano and Harold Ross] bought that house in 1959, moved in just before my sister [Harolka] Janene [Moore] was born. And yeah, I--they were living there when I was born in liv--that--I lived there. That was my home until I moved out in my twenties after, you know, I started working for AP [Associated Press]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so can--do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: It's not very interesting. My earliest child--one of my--I have two. My earliest memory is running and just twirling and falling. I, I was outside on some grass, 'cause I remember seeing some sky, and then it turned into grass. So, according to my sister, "You must have fell; like, you were running and fell." I don't know when it was. I have to some--I had to be younger than two. This second memory I have is maybe I was three or four, and I remember Phyllis [Perry]'s hand coming right here to my face. And that--that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember vaguely--I, I forgot this one. I do remember two big hands coming at me like this, and they were men's hands, but that one's kind of fuzzy. Maybe I was a toddler walking, and my dad was catching me or something, but it's a very fuzzy memory. But those are the earliest I have. Story_ID: 115908 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now we always ask this question. When you consider where you grew up and where you shopped and went to school and everything, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, man--oh, sights sounds and smells. Well, Atlanta [Georgia] was an interesting place in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], you know. I had no real idea that I was growing up in some sort of a black paradise or anything, but apparently a lot of people really thought that was the case. I remember the radio. The radio was on almost all the time in our house and mainly tuned to gospel music, but lots of 'WAOK,' lots of 'WIGO.' And I remember the ads on the radio, and I remember Alley Pat. Alley Pat was an Atlanta radio personality, and he was hilarious. I mean, you could--I wish I could just think of something to give you a taste of Alley Pat, but he was something else on the radio. I mean, he was just not really a shock jock, but he said a lot of interesting things on the radio. Speaker 1: Now, now was he on in the morning or in the evening? Speaker 2: I don't remember a particular time of day and catching him--I think--I think in the afternoons. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I think he might have been on in the afternoons. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I just remember hearing him and thinking wow, that was funny. I think that was a little too old for me to hear, you know, things like that. I remember ads like, like "Take your business to pop--Papa Heinz Home of Funerals," you know. Honeysuckle was a smell I remember because there were these wild honeysuckle vines that grew along the side of this--I don't think they were on a fence. They were just growing wild on the edge of a sidewalk that we had to walk when we came from our house around the corner to go to school. And we would pluck wild honeysuckle, and pull it apart and suck the honeysuckle. I don't think you can really do that now with the proliferation of pesticides. And for all I know, you probably shouldn't have been doing it then either, but we did. I remember fireflies or lightning bugs, and we would hang outside in twilight and catch the lightning bugs. Sometimes we'd swat 'em with badminton racquets. But mostly I wanted to catch 'em in a jar and take 'em in the house so they could glow in my room. My grandmother [Mary Bell Jones Mariano] gave me an old mason jar with holes poked in the lid. And Adrienne Waller, who was my friend next door and the friend I've had longer than anybody, we would catch fireflies and put 'em in the jars. And then when they would die from either lack of oxygen or something like that, or just having a short insect lifespan, we did a, a, a bug cemetery between our two houses, and marked the graves with blades of grass that we stapled together into crosses (laughter). I remember, in terms of sights, Mr. Florence across the street. I think he worked as a landscaper, and he landscaped his own yard and would consult with everybody else. And our neighbors had beautiful--he had beautiful magnolia trees in his front yard and zinnias. And he would take time with me and Adrienne and let us plant flowers with--teach us how to grow flowers. My mother [Mattie Antoinette Mariano] loved hydrangeas, and we had--even though our house was yellow and green, we had these big--this big blue hydrangea bush in the front yard next to this giant hedge; and all that was behind that tree I told you about. But she planted hydrangea bushes, and they grew very large. My mother had a wonderful green thumb. I mean, she would go to people's houses and like, "Can I take a snippet off your plant?" you know? And she could grow--she could take one leaf and grow a beautiful plant. I can't do that to this day, but the irony is I have one plant that, that survived my wither and die habits, and that's a hydrangea bush that I planted in my backyard behind my house after my mom passed away, and it still blooms, yeah. So I remember that. I remem- I just remember lots of radio, because as we got older, my parents liked the running noise of gospel and talk radio in the house. But we would stitch it over to 'WAOK' and, and the--you know, soul music and things like that. And then one time I asked my dad to--for a radio. I saw this radio. It was supposed to be this hip thing. Did you see this ad: "It's an S; it's an O; it's a crazy radio"? I wanted that radio. He went shopping for it. I don't guess he could find it, and so he came back with this little round thing he got at Radio Shack. So I was like, "Okay I won't be ungrateful, thank you." I really wanted the one that's shaped like an S though, but I took that one; it was red. And I would just troll up and down the, the dial, listening to different radio stations and stumbled upon '96 Rock.' And I would listen to all the crazy pop and rock of the early '70s [1970s], stuff like ABBA and main- mainly a lot of ABBA and some Elton John and different things mixed in. I, I think that's really where I began to diversify past just being immersed in this chocolate world with the radio just playing around with the radio dial. Story_ID: 115909 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now when did you start school? What was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: My first school was G. A. Towns Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia], George Alexander Towns Elementary-- Speaker 1: Now who--now he probably was someone important in Atlanta [Georgia] history, right? Speaker 2: He was somebody important in Atlanta history. He was an educator, from what I understand. And his daughter was Grace Towns Hamilton, who I think was on the city council. But George Alexander Towns was I believe a notable educator in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay, now did, did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved school. I owe my sisters--I, I, I owe that to my sisters. They, they were older than me, and, and I stayed home with my grandmother [Mary Bell Jones Mariano]. Well, well, I was home with my mother [Mattie Antoinette Mariano] until she took a job sometime when I was about four. And I was home with my grandmother, and then they sent me to Head Start and I--I went to Head Start at English Avenue Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] because the principal at the time was a lady named Mrs. Margaret Dabney Jackson. And she was the president of the usher board at my mother--that my mother served on at church. And she says to my mother, "Your daughter's smart as a whip; we need to put her in school now." And I think she made a jitney hookup for me to go to head start. So I ended up being delivered over to English Avenue Elementary School when I was four; and so I enjoyed that. And then my sisters would come home from school, and they would wanna play teacher with what they learned that day. And so they--I mean, I was--I was reading and reciting things as early as three because they wanted to play teacher. So I--they would make me be the student while they played teacher. This was mainly Terria [ph.] and [Harolka] Janene, 'cause Philippa was--Philippa's sev--a few years older than me so she was too cool for school. By the time I was three or four years she didn't wanna be (laughter) bothered with me, but they were--they were playing with me that way. And so I already knew how to read in--when they sent me to Head Start, and ended up--by the time I went to first grade, I needed to be sent over to an adjacent classroom for second grade reading--reading and writing 'ca--'cause I was ahead of the others. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 115910 Speaker 1: So did you have a favorite teacher at the grade school level? Speaker 2: I had several. Again, do I have to narrow it down to one? Speaker 1: Well, no, you don't have to narrow it down to one, but who--but who were they? You can name a few. Speaker 2: Who sticks out? Speaker 1: Yeah, you can name-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --a few of 'em. Speaker 2: Mrs. Caldwell, my first grade teacher. It was her first year. She had--I think she graduated from Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], and we were her first class. And she was the one who said, "This child can already read." So she arranged with Mrs. Pat Serrett [ph.] next door for me to work with her. She had a second grade class, so she would send me to Mrs. Serrett for reading. But Mrs. Caldwell, she was one of my favorites. And then there's Mrs. Yancey, who really was--I had her for sixth grade. Yeah, I had her for sixth grade; and actually, once I got to high school, her daughter, Corliss, was in my class. And then there was Mrs. Dawkins, who I never had. She was a fifth grade teacher, but her daughter was in my class. And she lived a few streets up from us, and I always liked and admired her because she was so dignified. And then high school, Mrs. Lillie King, who was my homeroom teacher for eighth grade and I think twelfth, too. No, she was my homeroom teacher in twelfth grade. Mr. Leo Shingles taught me how to type. And Mrs. Dones [ph.]--oh, goodness. Mrs. Alice Dones, who insisted that I learn how to do math, which I sucked at terribly (laughter). I was better at trigonometry and geometry than I was at calculus or algebra, so she would work with me. She would continually work with me, stay with me after school to make sure I got it right. I mean, trigonometry, great I--because it involved shapes. But when it came to equations and things like that I couldn't really do 'em--no. My eyes are mistin' over. I was like-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: --am I crying? (Laughter) That's what it feels like. I'm--feels like I'm misting over. It's gettin' a little cloudy. Speaker 1: And just remembering the-- Speaker 2: Just remembering those teachers. Oh yeah, they were adorable. They were great--Atlanta Public Schools. I didn't go to private school, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: --it's possible to get that, you know. Story_ID: 115911 Speaker 1: You were born in '62 [1962], right? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So you're in school during the balance of the '60s [1960s] and through--in the '70s [1970s] in grade school? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So you were in school when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, right? You, you were like-- Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: --a kid--what, what six? Speaker 2: I wa--ooh, I'm (laughter)--I have--that is a tear. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: So you're about six years old when Dr. King was killed. Speaker 2: I was five. Speaker 1: Five, all right. Speaker 2: I turned six that summer, so I was five. I was in kindergarten. I remember that well, because that's the first time his--the, the night he was assassinated. I remember my parents [Mattie Antoinette Mariano and Harold Ross]--the first time I had ever noticed that they seemed tense watching TV, and we watched TV a long time that day. It was a rainy day, like stormy, and dark at night. And my father had built this--he had gone to Sears and gotten this prefabricated shed, and put it up in our backyard to house the lawnmower and different things like that. And the storm blew it over. So the next morning, as we were gettin' ready for school, I just couldn't stop crying. I was crying, you know. You know, little kids go on these crying jags. And my mother delivered me to school crying, and my kindergarten teacher asked what's wrong? Why are you crying? And I said the big--the bad wind came and took Dr. King and blew my daddy's shed over (laughter). Speaker 1: So you think the wind had something to do with both of 'em? Speaker 2: Yes, I kind of tied it all together. So she said well, don't cry. I think I probably cried to the middle of the day when we had cookies or something. I don't know. But I remember going on a crying jag, and I think it was because I could sense the tension and the worry in my parents. And I had never--had never seen them tense or worried, you know. When I talked about that later in life with my mother, you know, I remember asking her well, why didn't you all march at some of these protests? And she gave this quiet answer like well, we had children. And I thought about it later, and they were aware--that kind of thing could get you killed. And if they got killed, what would happen to us was sort of the answer there. Speaker 1: Now did your grandfather know Reverend [Martin Luther] King, Sr.--Martin Luther King--daddy King-- Speaker 2: My father's father? Speaker 1: Yeah, daddy King or-- Speaker 2: I, I don't know. I never met him because he died well before my parents even met or-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --well before I was born, so I never knew him. My grandmother also passed away before I had any memory--my father's parents [Lula Howard Ross and Osborn Ross], they had both passed. And then my mother's father [Antonio Mariano] died when I was eight, and my mother's mother [Mary Bell Jones Mariano] died when I was seventeen. So really I had her longer than anybody, and she spent more time with me than anybody. Story_ID: 115912 Speaker 1: Now did you have middle school? Speaker 2: No, the way it was structured you went to elementary school from kindergarten to seventh grade, and high school from eighth to twelfth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so, so you had good grades in, in school, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I had good grades. Speaker 1: --math was a little bit of a struggle-- Speaker 2: Math was-- Speaker 1: --some, some of it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At any rate, now-- Speaker 2: Wasn't my strong suit (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, and you went to high school at-- Speaker 2: Charles Lincoln Harper High School [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It doesn't exist anymore in the way that I knew it, but it was a great school. Because I had the grades I had, my parents [Mattie Antoinette Mariano and Harold Ross] would put me in every summer program known to mankind. And at Mrs. Jackson's urging, they got me tested--assessed at Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] I wanna say maybe 1970 or '71 [1971], somewhere in there. And so they gave my parents a report, which I have a copy of that says, among other things, that had the--at age eight or nine I had the reading comprehension of a fifteen-year-old. So they needed to do something with me to keep me reading. And, and so my parents would take me to the Collier Heights Library [Atlanta, Georgia] and drop--you know. And I, I got tossed into some kid book club. I used to have to get--I, I plowed through the books for my age group very quickly, and I was always bringing permission slips home from the library saying, does she have permission check this book out for adults? So, my dad got a little sick of this and said, "Here, read this," and began to hand me the newspaper every day. We took three newspapers in our house. We took the 'Atlanta Constitution,' the 'Atlanta Voice,' and the 'Atlanta Daily World.' So he began to ply me with newspapers to keep me reading things. And I would bring the encyclopedia to the dinner table. So he wanted to cut that out and developed a, a habit of reading, and there the newspapers were this thick and full of stuff--different stuff every day. And that's where me and newspapers came together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --but they, they kept me in somebody's--I was always going to somebody's summer program, somebody's gifted this or that. I--it--I, I think maybe because I was last one they wanted to get all of their stuff in that you do with your little girls, so I had ballet classes, I played the violin. Well, I played the violin because one of my sisters had washed out on it (laughter), and I had to choose between the instruments that they didn't wanna play anymore; and so I was in a--in an orchestra. And it was all kinds of things like that. They kept me very busy. Story_ID: 117415 Speaker 1: So your high school days corresponded exactly to the [President] Jimmy Carter Administration, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When he's elected in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw-- Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976] to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, '76 [1976] to-- Speaker 1: Through '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I started high school in the fall of 1976. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And my father [Harold Ross] died in the fall of 1976. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, wait, I started high school in 1975. Speaker 1: In eight--eighth grade. It happened in '75 [1975], yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the fall-- Speaker 1: --in eighth grade. Speaker 2: of 1975. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I started ninth grade in the fall of '76 [1976], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what happened to your father? Speaker 2: He died of lung cancer, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and you know, he didn't really make a big deal of that struggle. I, I didn't even know he was dying. I just knew he had been really sick. You know how you don't really process the toll illness takes on people? So he had gotten very thin; he had lost lots of weight; he was not comfortable in the end. But even with that, you know, they didn't exactly tell us he was dying. So, being a child, I just thought everything is--you can conquer anything. I believe in miracles, you know. But he did die, and that was like a gut punch. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause my dad and I were very close. He didn't have sons, so I was a designated son, which meant he wanted somebody to buy Tonka trucks for and take fishin'. That was me. He couldn't--sports nut. He was a sports nut. I mean in the in community (unclear)--as growing up, he was playing baseball. And they would have these little community teams, and he played for the team in Dixie Hills, and so did his nephew. And actually, the nephew ended up getting drafted by the Black Crackers later. Speaker 1: Atlanta Black Crackers. That was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --an old ne--Negro League team that stayed-- Speaker 2: Negro League team, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, his name was James North, Jr., and he played for the Black Crackers, but I think he played for the Black Crackers kind of late, like maybe in the '50s [1950s]. So it wasn't like prime-- Speaker 1: It was a the-- Speaker 2: --ne--Negro-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --time. But my dad loved baseball, so he would take us to Braves' games. And you can't really take a whole family of women to a baseball game. Everybody's not gonna pay attention. My mom had packed these lunches with purple passion soda in 'em, and you know, we were--my sisters were all over the place about everything but the game. And the only person who would pay attention was me, so my dad's sittin' there explaining baseball. And then as time went on, he said, "It doesn't make sense to take everybody; I'll just take Sonya." So we would sneak off to [Atlanta] Braves games. He would take newspapers like he was taking them in to be recycled, and we'd--I'd get in his truck with him and off we'd go to the Braves game. We'd load up--one time we loaded up the boat like we were gonna go fishing, (laughter) 'cause my sisters didn't wanna do that, and we went to the Braves game and did the same thing with the [Atlanta] Falcons and the [Atlanta] Hawks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is in that window between about 1969--'68 [1968] or '69 [1969] and '74 [1974] or so. Speaker 1: Now what--did you have a chance to see Hank Aaron play-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: --in his last years? Speaker 2: I did. As a matter of fact, the day we loaded up the boat was the day he hit 715. We were--in was in April. I was eleven going on twelve I think, and I wanna say it was a Saturday. And he had told my mother well, "We're gonna go fishing, but I wanna stop off at Springfield," which was his family church--Grave Springfield Baptist; that's where he went to church--"to see Gladys, the church secretary, to pick up the taxes." So my mother's like okay, like that's what we were doing that day. And I'm thinking, how are we gone do all this fishing and we gotta go see Gladys (laughter)? But instead of fishing, we pulled up at Atlanta Fulton County Stadium, and we had seats--they were kind of in the nosebleed section, way up there. I guess those were the cheap seats, you know. And so my dad--we're sitting in there and my dad's watching the game. And he's real intent, like yeah, yeah, I gotta watch it. I, I remember hearing the bat, but it didn't sound special to me. It just sounded like [popping sound effect], you know, like a--I said I think that might be a homerun. And the, the stadium erupted, and the only thing that helped me realize then that it was different were seeing the two guys come running around the third base--to third base with them. And said what are they doing down there? They weren't even supposed to be down there, but my father clearly wanted to see this; this was special. And, and so we were there. I went with him; we were there; I heard the bat. It sounded like the crack of any other bat to me. And I saw two regular plain clothes dressed guys running with Hank Aaron around the bases. And shortly after that we left, so we could go pick up the taxes from Gladys (laughter). So we didn't even stay for the whole game, you know. We left before the game was over, I just remember that. Speaker 1: Well, you were there for the good part--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was there for the good part. Story_ID: 117416 Speaker 1: Now you're growing up during like the golden age of Atlanta [Georgia] in a lot of ways-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: --(unclear) the-- Speaker 2: It was golden? Speaker 1: I think so-- Speaker 2: See I didn't--I-- Speaker 1: --'cause-- Speaker 2: --didn't think of it-- Speaker 1: --here you-- Speaker 2: --that way. Speaker 1: --you elect a black mayor [Maynard Jackson] right when you're-- Speaker 2: Yes, I remember-- Speaker 1: --in school. Speaker 2: --that. I remember the election of-- Speaker 1: Maynard Jackson. Speaker 2: --Maynard Jackson. I remember campaign workers driving through our neighborhoods with young people in t-shirts that said "Maynard for Mayor." It was cool if you had a "Maynard for Mayor" t-shirt. And they would load 'em onto pickup trucks and drive around the neighborhood chanting: "Maynard Jackson for mayor"; "Maynard Jackson for mayor." So it's like okay, yeah. Yeah, (unclear) like Maynard Jackson. I couldn't vote, you know. Yeah, I like Maynard Jackson. So I remember that. Speaker 1: So, first black mayor Atlanta, and the--Atlanta becomes in the eyes of the rest of the country, especially for black folks, like a place where you ought to go after you get your college degree to get a job. Atlanta represented a lot of opportunity for people. You know, there's--I think CNN [Cable News Network] starts up when you're in school-- Speaker 2: CNN-- Speaker 1: --and the whole cable TV thing-- Speaker 2: CNN-- Speaker 1: --jumps off. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think CNN came along-- Speaker 1: Hank Aaron hits-- Speaker 2: --my senior year of high school. Speaker 1: --more homeruns than anybody else. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Jimmy Carter is the president. He's from Georgia, and he brings-- Speaker 2: But he had been the governor before, so I was used to seeing him (laughter). Speaker 1: But see, in the eyes of the rest of the country, though, we, we thought of Lester Maddox as representing Georgia, you know. That-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he did though. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then here comes [President] Jimmy Carter, a whole different kind of person; friend to the Civil Rights Movement; he's tight with [HM the Honorable] Andrew Young and the [Martin Luther] King family and his--so did you have a sense of--you didn't have a sense of (unclear) was-- Speaker 2: I did; I just didn't think it was all that. I didn't it was--I thought it was ordinary. I thought that was normal. I thought that was the way it always is everywhere else too. It's just that this is our special circumstance. Like, the same details that you can put to work here were happening everywhere else too, 'cause I, I know, you know, that mayors got elected in other cities, okay. So I just didn't realize that magnitude of it I think is what it was. Speaker 1: Yeah, the whole-- Speaker 2: When it's your everyday life and you're growing up, and you don't have anything to compare it to, you just think this is the way it is everywhere else. I--that's why I was saying I didn't realize it was so--such a utopia for black people, you know, and being in a world where your mailman is black, and your teachers are black, and now the mayor is black, and Martin Luther King's kids go to that school over there. You know them. Yeah, we saw--we would see Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King in the grocery story. It didn't feel big or special, but I guess it was, yeah. We got to--after King's assassination, we would, would go on fieldtrips. They would take kids down to his grave. They had moved him from South View Cemetery to a, a crypt on Auburn Avenue near Ebenezer [Baptist Church], what eventually became the King Center [for Nonviolent Social Change]. But at the time it as just a grave surrounded by a white picket fence, and they had an eternal flame there. And so they would--they made a point of taking the school children down there to his grave. I remember being seven--six, seven, eight going on school fieldtrips to Martin Luther King's grave, and they would tell us what he was about. One time, I wanna say maybe when I was in third grade, we were taken there. Ralph Abernathy rode up on us (laughter) there on the sidewalk and would talk to us--was talking to us. I think he had a--I remember him 'cause he had a dashiki on. I thought--I was like here's somebody--you know, somebody's daddy wearing a dashiki (laughter). I remember seeing [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson around that time, that he would make stops in the school. That, that was the big-afro Jesse, the "I am somebody" Jesse. Speaker 1: Right, right, the country preacher. Speaker 2: Yes, so there was a lot of pastor in Atlanta, a whole lot of pastor. My sister got a greater glimpse of this kind of history than I did because she would go with her father. He'd take her places and sometimes she would meet celebrities through him on his assignments, you know. Story_ID: 117417 Speaker 1: Now, she wasn't a celebrity at the time, but your story was sounding familiar to me about your mother's [Mattie Antoinette Mariano] side of the family. And I thought of [HM] Jasmine Guy actually, who grew up in Atlanta [Georgia], who-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a contemporary. I didn't know her personally, but we were parallel, right around the same age, just in different schools. Speaker 1: And her mother was from Portugal, actually. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: No, I didn't know that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's news to me. Speaker 1: Yeah, the family's from Portugal, and yeah-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --it's sort, sort of a mixed marriage, her father a Port--Portuguese, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, wow. No, I didn't know that about her, but that's an interesting thing. That is pretty cool. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it's in our [The HistoryMakers] archives. Speaker 2: Oh, wow. I guess-- Speaker 1: It's not (unclear) any other place (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --I should la-- Speaker 1: --but that's-- Speaker 2: I'm gonna go look at it now. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--I, I--now you were saying Portugal. I said where have I heard that before? I'm thinking well, Jasmine Guy. Speaker 2: But you know, there was a huge population of Portuguese in coastal care--in the coastal Carolinas. They settled there right around Georgetown, South Carolina, and that's where my mother's paternal family came from; that's where they came out of. So that--I'm not surprised at the proximity of the Portuguese that way. And then there were other enclaves of Portuguese in New England. And I know there were some in Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Some different places around the country, yeah. Story_ID: 117418 Speaker 1: Right, right, right. So at any rate, so in high school [at C.L. Harper High School in Atlanta, Georgia], now what did--what were you focusing on? Did you think that you were gonna become a jour--a journalist when you were in high school? Speaker 2: No, no, I was gonna be a doctor, and I wanted to be a doctor to cure cancer because my father [Harold Ross] had died of it. Scienti--so I got routed into these science programs. I was in something called Minority Women in Science when I was in the tenth grade. And it was a summer program designed to encourage more girls to go into fields associated with math and science. And as part of that, you would get a full ride to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to major in biology or psychology. So by the time I got ready to choose a college, I didn't want to major in either of those things, and I wanted to go away. I didn't want to go to Spelman or Morris Brown. I wanted to get out of town. I wanted to get out of town so. Speaker 1: So in your senior--in your senior year of high school--now were you--were you a popular high school student? Were you involved in clubs and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in-- Speaker 1: --student government? Speaker 2: --lots of clubs. I ran for a student government position, but I lost. I was a cheerleader; I was on the debate team; I was on the newspaper staff. And actually, I recently posted a picture on Facebook of the 'Trojan Courier' staff when I was on it, and it was all girls. And I'm thinking I know we had a guy or two somewhere, but I went wow, what a statement about girl power? Look at this. And the editor was Valerie Boyd, who today is an esteemed journalist in her own right, and author, profession, and she currently is working on editing an anthology or collection of works with Alice Walker. That, that recently got announced. So we, we grew up together, and Valerie was a year behind me. And it just seemed everything I had done at [G.A.] Towns [Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], she came right behind me and did it. And then when I got to [C.L.] Harper [High School], she came right behind me at Harper. And so she just kind of leapfrogged and became the editor of the student paper in her junior that--and I went: "But wait, a senior is supposed to be the editor--like, why shouldn't I be the editor?" But I had just jumped onto the staff, and she had been on there for a while. So Valerie Boyd actually was my first editor in life (laughter). We laugh about that now, but. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so was, was there any high school teachers that were, you know, pivotal in your development? Speaker 2: As a journalist? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, gosh, yes, yes, there was Mrs. Lindsay. She was a stickler for sentence structure, and grammar, and Engli--language arts. She was all about the language arts and she made sure that you did everything properly, and don't you dare give her a messed up sentence. Yeah, she sort of turned me into a punctuation nax- Nazi. She was good about that. Mrs. Elise MacDonald was a Spanish teacher, and she was the first person I had ever heard say, "You should learn this stuff because you're gonna need it someday." And then when I actually did have to speak Spanish for my job, I thought about her forcin' us to learn how to function in Spanish. So, yeah, there were several. That--that's what I mean. There were just so many teachers who did so many things for me, taught me so many different things, you know. I'm drawing a blank on who our newspaper advisor was, and I'm (unclear)--Ms.--I think it was Mrs. Verna Smith, 'cause I'm lookin' at--I'm thinking of the picture of, of the staff there. But I think her name was Mrs. Smith. So I, at the time, was trying to put all my attention into science so that I could go and become a doctor and... Then when I got to college and had less than stellar grades in biology, I said, I don't think I'm cut out for this. Story_ID: 117419 Speaker 1: Now tell me how you chose University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. Speaker 2: I, again, back at the Collier Heights Library [Atlanta, Georgia] and having plowed through all the books that were age appropriate for me, one of the librarians taught me how to use the microfilm and microfiche. So, after having cultivated a--a love for newspapers, courtesy of my dad [Harold Ross], I went on the microfiche looking at old newspapers and old magazine articles and read about [HM] Charlayne Hunter-Gault and, and the way she integrated the University of Georgia. And, and I thought oh, wow, that's cool, and she's from Hunter Hills, which is right over there. So she was from the west side of Atlanta like myself and, and doing all these great things. And then after she graduated from Georgia, she was--they would give updates, you know, they would have updates. She was working at this paper here. Then when she went into TV--and I could track her career that way, and I thought that was fascinating. My dad actually, because he was such a sports nut, loved the [University of Georgia] Bulldogs, loved Georgia. And I remember him saying to me once, you know, "We went to the schools we went to because we had to. You can go anywhere. You can go to any school. The law is not gonna keep you from going to any school." And so I wanted to go to a place they couldn't. And that big white college down the road there in Athens was a place that they couldn't. So that's--that plus Charlayne, and then I went to a cheerleading camp and saw the campus and how beautiful it was. And I thought about the letters I got from my sister when she--my oldest sister--she went to Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina], and she would write me letters and say, "My dorm room is old" (laughter), you know, "The buildings are falling down." And I went to this college and dorms were nice; buildings weren't falling down. So I said I think I can swing with this school right here. So looking back on it, I should have taken the free college. I should have taken what was available to me for free at-- Speaker 1: And what was available for free? Speaker 2: Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] was going-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh be-- Speaker 2: --to be-- Speaker 1: --because of the program, yeah. Speaker 2: Because--yes. But again, I was like I--psychology and-- Speaker 1: Morris Brown and Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], right? Speaker 2: Right, either Morris Brown or Spelman. And like I said, I, I yearned to go beyond where I was. I had always felt I--that there was--the world was a great big place to go out and dabble in. And to limit my world from the beginning didn't seem to make sense. But I didn't wanna go too far away, 'cause I needed to be able to get home to see my mother [Mattie Antoinette Mariano]. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 117420 Speaker 1: Okay, so University of Georgia in Athens [Georgia]. Now, now did you do anything ov--over the summer before you went--you enrolled in school? Speaker 2: The summer of 1980-- Speaker 1: Or before we even get to that, like, was there anything special about graduation? Did you--or did you have any special honors at graduation or anything? Speaker 2: I did. I had--I was in the top ten percent of my class. I had won the English award, which was a dictionary and a leather-bound copy of the works of William Shakespeare, for having the highest GPA in English classes. But I didn't have a scholarship for anything. I had--no, I did have a tiny little scholarship that pretty much would have bought me books for one or two semesters. It wasn't much at all. So I had--I was in the National Honors Society, and the [National] Beta Club and those kinds of things, and 'Who's Who' ['Among American High School Students'], the typical things that the academically inclined kids end up in. And I had been--I had been part of gifted this and accelerated that for so long that I said to myself, "I hope when I go to school I can just be average." I just wanna be regular, get my Saturdays back and that kind of thing, and boy, did I learn how to be regular. Speaker 1: So, so what happened at, at the University of Georgia? Speaker 2: Oh, I discovered just how regular I was. I came in there with some credits from advanced placement in English and, and language arts and things like that. But math, I got tossed in remedial kids like, we'll start you at Math 100 (laughter), you know. I remem--I the SA--the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] a few times just to get my score up high enough. The, the verbal part was great; the math not so much. So there was that weird imbalance. Here I have way too many credits in this area, and I'm starting from scratch over here. So math and science were a struggle. And then I was just sort of a free associate--oh yeah, I think I'll take Statistics 200, you know, the--all the boneheaded mistakes that college kids make. So I did--I did a lot of that. Speaker 1: Okay, now was there a black student organization at the Uni--University of Georgia? Speaker 2: Yes, there was a Black Student Union, and the Committee for Black Programs, and the Pomoja Gospel Choir, and the Black Theatrical Ensemble, and Abeneefoo Kuo, which was the Black Honor Society. All those things were happening down there in Athens, which it also turned out to be an exciting time to be in school there, because my freshman year they had the illustrious Hershel Walker showing up on campus. He was in my class, and I think actually he turned up at my orientation session. Speaker 1: Now Hershel Walker, for those who don't know now, is a tremendous-- Speaker 2: A prolific college running back, yes. Speaker 1: Right, and he, he was a--he had a--I think he could run faster than anybody in college in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so too. Speaker 1: Had those strong and big-- Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty, pretty husky dude. And we were in the same class. That season the football team won the national championship. They were undefeated. It was a charmed time in Athens too. There were a few people on the track team who were Olympians. The women's basketball team was great. The men's basketball team had the human highlight film, Dominique Wilkins, on it. Yeah, it was a--it was a charmed time there also. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd, I'd say so, yeah. Dominique Wilkins was second only to Michael Jordan in--you know, in terms of highlights in his career. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Everybody thought he was like the, the--yeah, next, next thing to Michael Jordan. Speaker 2: As far as dunking? Speaker 1: Dunking and every--any other thing that-- Speaker 2: Dunking and statistics, wow. Speaker 1: I mean, he was--he was one of the great basketball-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: --players of that era. Speaker 2: --he was a great dancer too. At some of the parties, he would just come fetch me because I would da--I'd just dance and dance and dance with him. Yeah, he said that's pop lockin' partner right there, and we'd (laughter), we'd dance. On time I remember my very good girlfriend, Toni, and I had gone to the nearest grocery story to campus, and we were hauling out groceries back. And there's Dominique coming around the curb in his fancy--I think it was a re--Buick Regal car. And, and he stopped and said do ya'll need a ride, you know with those groceries? And were yes, boy, we need a--so he helps us with the groceries. He picked us up on North Cam- not North Campus--on, on the edge of campus near one of the dorms that we didn't live in, and brought us around past Sanford Stadium across the bridge to where our dorm was, and then stopped a few, you know, bloc--a couple of blocks away from our dorm like okay, here you are. Toni said no, you got to take us to our dorm. What's the matter with you? And made him take the groceries up and everything. It was actually kind of amusin'. Story_ID: 117421 Speaker 1: Okay, you had these big sports stars on campus. Speaker 2: Big sports stars on campus, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Now, now were there speakers on campus that came through that you remember that spoke of--to the student body? Speaker 2: I don't really remember the speakers, no. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: No. There were bands. The SOS Band came to, to campus. They brought what they called the Indiana University Soul Review down there, but there was plenty of band action in town already because the B-52's were in Athens [Georgia], and they were, you know, a frat band at the time. The frats would hire them to play frat parties, and they would play at this place near campus called O'Malley's, which was just on the opposite side of our dorm. Our dorm was right adjacent to the football stadium. And there was another band--why am I blanking on the bands? There are two of them there in Athens at the time. Two great Athens bands came out during that era as well. I know one B-52's. I'll think of the other before the interview is over I hope. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so a lot of campus life and the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty lively. Speaker 1: Now there were any special pro--professors in terms of journalism, 'cause what--when did you, you go into journalism at-- Speaker 2: Right after my sophomore year I said you know, this biology thing ain't working out. My grades are trash. And I took a class called--during my sophomore year, I took a class called Black Rhetoric, and it was taught by a speech communications may--professor named Thurman Garner. And I had already read a lot of the material he'd covered, stuff like--I mean, I was that kid that would do--I, I had come across stuff like a copy of 'Soul on Ice' under my sister's bed and had already read it, you know. So, so you know, I was just intrigued by his--by what he was teaching, and I took his class. And he covered a lot of Langston Hughes, a lot of Harlem Renaissance, tying in the culture to the literature and bringing it all forward. And I--that was comfortable ground for me. So sometimes I went to class; sometimes I didn't. I was slackin' and hangin' out on the--on the campus. And I remember one day at--toward the end of the quarter--we were on the quarter system--he told me I had the highest GPA in the class. I went, "What?" And I got a--I got an--I think I got an A. I don't think I got a B. I got an--I think I got an A from him. Apparently, I was that person throwing the curve off, and I was--(unclear) me? Tearing biology up like I am, I did this well in this class, you know. But he was the first professor that I had in Athens who told me my brain worked. You know what I mean? Because I sort of felt Athens on a lot of levels was a discouraging environment, where I didn't get a lot of validation for having any intellect. Speaker 1: Now this where--this is where you, you said most of the time that, that things were race--were racially motivated, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So you really could kind of feel that atmosphere? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think that's probably why. Maybe that was why I was saying it like that, 'cause I was aware. Story_ID: 117422 Speaker 1: All right, so now, now did you work on the school newspaper in [University of Georgia,] Athens [Georgia]-- Speaker 2: The Red and Black? No, there was a black paper in town that got started up called the Athens Courier. And I wrote an article or two for them before they folded, and I got no pay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that was my first--the first thing I had written. I wrote an--it was an article about Yolanda King and Attallah Shabazz working together in a theatrical production ['Stepping into Tomorrow,' 1983]. Speaker 1: I remember that, yes. Speaker 2: And I had met Yolanda the, the year before. That was in 1983, and I had met Yolanda the year before when I worked for her at the King Center [for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia], where I finagled myself an internship (laughter), at which had no pay. It was an unpaid internship. They just let me hang around. But I worked in the archive there--the library there. They were sorting through boxes and boxes of King papers at the time. So I had to tag and, and collate pages of King--[Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King's personal notes and different things. And when they didn't have anything like that for me to do, they sent me to help Yolanda with correspondence and stuff like that. And I just--that's how I met her, so when this new--newspaper pops up, I said well, I--they're coming to town with their play, I can get the interview. Speaker 1: That's interesting 'cause we [The HistoryMakers], we, we as--we were in San Francisco [California]--well, you know, (unclear)--yeah, [University of California-] Berkeley, where, where [HM] Clayborne Carson just, you know, finished editing the King papers. Well, he's still working--still I think ongoing pro--project, but he's published several volumes of the King papers. Speaker 2: Yeah, I have-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I have--it's the one--the first one that came out, the red book [Clayborne Carson, ed., 'The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr., Volume I: Called to Serve, January 1929-June 1951' (University of California Press, 1992)], I have that one at home, yeah. Speaker 1: So your work contributed, I'm sure, to his being able to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, work on that project. Speaker 2: Well, it was mainly putting on a legal pad what papers were in what boxes. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: It was not a lot of stuff. And I remember saying, "Gee whiz, this man had terrible handwriting." I couldn't understand any of it. I, I remember thinking he could write prescriptions for doctors. You know how doctors notoriously have bad handwriting? It's like I couldn't understand a world. It was like chicken scratch. Speaker 1: I don't remember that, 'cause we had--we didn't finish Clayborne Carson. We're going back. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think the week, week after next, and we'll be talking to him about, you know. Speaker 2: And I, I met daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.] in the elevator. And then later that same day they sent for me saying, "Go down Abba Rib Shack and get his rib order." It was one of those kind of internships, you know. I was a person to be utilized and, and there was--it wasn't even formal with anything, but I got a lot ha--hangin'--a lot out of hangin' around that place that summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the summer of 1982. Story_ID: 117423 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you, you graduated at '84 [1984], right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I transferred away in December of '83 [1983]. Well, I dropped out of school [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] in December of '83 [1983]. I just--I had personal pressure going on with this little boyfriend who I had been dating since high school, and I needed to take care of that. I ran out of money. What else happened? Mainly I ran out of money. And at, at the time, you know, it was the Reagan years, and there was an insensitive cut made to education funds, where they, they cut Pell Grants to the minimum and replaced them with loans. If you were receiving any other form of assistance, they made you ineligible--they, they discounted that again--they counted that against your student aid elig--eligibility. And by my father [Harold Ross] being deceased, I was receiving Social Security Survivor Death Benefits, so they failed--that meant I could use that money to pay for college. So that meant--that made me ineligible for enough grant money. I just ran out of money, and I got tired of struggling. And I got annoyed and I just fell apart. I said I'm not going back to school. I need to get some things together. And I was gonna take one quarter off, and one quarter turned into two. And by--and then two quarters turned into a year. And my mother came into my bedroom at home--I took a job at what was then Richway, which you--a discount store and eventually became Target. It was eventually purchased and, and became part of the Target chain. Speaker 1: Richway like a, a derivative of, of Rich's. Speaker 2: Of Rich's. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it was Richway then--very much like Target now with, you know, red and everything. And, and I was--I worked there as a customer service person. And my mother--I, I purged the little boyfriend, replaced him with another boyfriend, so I was beeboppin' through life. And my mother came to my bedroom one Saturday morning and sat down on the edge of the bed and said, "So what are you doing?" And I said, "Oh, I think Phyllis and I are gonna go to the mall later," blah, blah. She said, "No, with your life." (Laughter) And I said, "What do you mean? Are you going back to school?" And I said, "I don't really know." And she said well, "If you go back to school you can stay, but if you're not going to be in school you need to find somewhere to live." So I said, "School, here I come," (laughter), and I transferred to Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now that's in Atlanta. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, the Georgia State Campus. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 117424 Speaker 1: And that actually I think was fortuitous. I mean, I was reaching a point in Athens [Georgia] where I couldn't find a job. And when I came home to Atlanta [Georgia], boom, I got a job. I was at Richway. Then I left Richway when I started--I started in Georgia--at Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia] in the winter of 1985. And, and they had--I went to the journalism department, and they had a, a book full of jobs there, you know, little part-time jobs. And there in the book they were advertising for copy clerks at the 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution' and a library clerk at the 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution.' So I applied for the library clerk job because it paid a dollar more an hour than the copy clerk jobs in the newsroom. And it was thirty hours a week. So I took that job, worked part time, and went to Georgia State--went to class part time. And so it--like I said, it worked out to be fortuitous because that meant I was accumulating newspaper experience, albeit in the morgue (laughter) filing pictures. But, so I, I took classes according to what I could afford to eke out with my meager funds, even if one quarter--all I had was one class. So I jokingly called that the "princess-passing-through-here plan" (laughter)--and did that. And, and then in the summer of '86 [1986] I--well, in the winter, over that academic year, my journalism professor, whose name was George Greiff, suggested that I go over to a job fair that the ASNE [American Society of News Editors] was having at Clark-Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]. It was called 'Minorities in the Newsroom.' And they were recruiting for various positions, and I needed an internship. So he said, "Go over there and see what internships you can apply to do next summer," and, and he said, "Just show up. They don't have to know that you're not a student at that school, you know, just show up." So I went over there and signed up for interviews with whomever. And of course, all the fancy ones were taken. The ABCs and the NBCs of the world were taken. The, the, the big newspapers were taken, so I applied for--I, I, I applied for interview time with UPI [United Press International], and the 'Macon Telegraph' [Macon, Georgia], and the 'Columbus Ledger-Enquirer' [Columbus, Georgia]. That's all I could get. But the next day was a football Saturday, and apparently the students at Clark-Atlanta like footballs better than job fairs because when I went back, a lot of these people who had signed up for things never showed up. So the recruiters were sort of walking around there looking for people to interview. And I was at the--I showed up for my UPI interview, and the UPI recruiter was not there yet. So I'm-- Speaker 2: At the game (laughter)? Speaker 1: --sitting at the empty UPI table waitin' for the guy. And next to it, over here, kind of across, there was a table for where the Associated Press recruiter was sitting, waiting for whoever had signed for him. So I went over to him and I said since you're waitin' and I'm waitin', can I talk to you about this? And he said sure. His name was [Herman] Lamar Matthews. He was the assistant bureau chief in the Atlanta bureau, and he talked to me about AP's internship program. So I showed him the one clipping I had, which was an article about a, a Georgia State professor who had died in a skydiving crash, and a ton of class work. And I told him okay, I know I don't have enough clips, but whatever do you have to have to work for ya'll? So he told me I needed to get more writing experience. He told me I needed to fill out the application. He told me all the things to do, and at the time I was--in addition to working at the Atlanta paper, I was writing for the 'The Signal,' the Georgia State paper. So every time I wrote an article for the 'The Signal,' I would literally walk it up Marietta Street from Georgia State to the AP bureau there in Atlanta to give it to Lamar Matthews. I mean, you gotta remember this is the '80s [1980s]. This is before email. You know, I didn't wanna trust something--it might get lost in the mail. Somebody may decide he didn't need to see it, so I wanted to hand it to him personally. Literally, every article I wrote for the next month or two I walked it up Marietta Street to him so he could read it. So once I had accumulated about five or six of 'em, he said, "Okay, that's enough," and had me come in and take the news writing test, which was the hardest test I ever took. I went, "My God, I don't this stuff." I, I felt like I was wildly guessing. I, I left there drained and exhausted. But in February of '86 [1986], he called and said I had been accepted for AP's internship program, so that summer I went and did the AP internship program. I had planned to go to summer school, but earning money over the summer seemed like a better idea. Story_ID: 117425 Speaker 1: Now I wanna go back and ask you about the AP [Associated Press] in--news writing test, because I think some--if somebod--a young person's watching this, they, they wanna know like what the difference is between like news writing--a news writing test and a writing test--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, okay, was something like the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] or some other test you might have to write an essay. On that AP test I took, and they don't do this test anymore, so nobody should expect to ever have this formula work for them. They had a section where you had to correct the style on the sentences, not the grammar, the style--news style. They had a section where they gave you a set of facts and told you to write a news story from that facts--those facts, and they had three of those. Then they told you take one of those and convert into a broadcast script. And then some of those sentences that we had to correct and, and, and--so it was a combination of copyediting and writing; doing it for a newspaper, and doing it for a TV or radio station. And it wore me out (laughter). I was using skill sets I didn't even know I had, but I guess I-- Speaker 1: Had you been trained in those--in a different--in those, those dis--distinctions in terms of writing? Speaker 2: I had no knowledge of broadcast at all. I hadn't taken any broadcasting classes. I had only taken news writing courses. And so I thought I could handle AP style well enough. I thought I could handle putting a news story together. I knew editing symbols from having worked at 'The Signal,' you know. I just with TV I said well, "Let me work off of what I know TV reports to sound like to me and look like to me." So you--I had to go off of guest ingenuity, I guess is what you would call that, and a--apparently it worked. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so you, you, you started ini--interning at AP in the summer of-- Speaker 2: 1986. Speaker 1: 1986, okay. Speaker 2: And the way that things were structured with the internship program then, if you successfully complete it, the internship program, they offered you a job after graduation. So I had a job offer in had when I finished the internship, and I went back to school [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]. So here we are a year later and there's Mr. Greiff again encouraging me to go back to the same job fair, which this time instead of it being at Clark-Atlanta [University], it was in--it was in Alabama. It was in Birmingham. So me and a couple of kids from school piled into a car. We drove over to Alabama and that one was better attended, but I squeezed in with whoever could interview me at the time. And I sat down then with [HM] Paul Delaney from the 'New York Times.' I was sitting there at a table talking to him. He was interviewing me for the 'Times' regional group, and up walks Lamar Matthews. And he says, "What are you doing here? You already have a job." So Paul Delaney looks at me and says, "You already have a job (laughter)? You have a job offer?" I said, "Well, yeah," and I explained the AP internship. So then Paul took me back to the 'New York Ti-' he went back to the 'New York Times' folks and said, "I've got this kid. You should look at her." So they came a calling. And as I was in the last throes of school at Georgia State, they came a callin'. So there was a little bit of a pull and tug between AP and the 'New York Times' regional group, but I ended up going with AP simply because they were going to place me in Atlanta, and the 'Times' regional--which is where I'm from and I could still live at home for free (laughter). And the 'New York Times' regional group I would have to relocate to Jacksonville [Florida] and then go on a rotation--I think it was Jacksonville, but it was a Florida city--and then go on a rotation to several smaller papers owned the regional group for two years. Then after that, I would have joined the 'Times' staff in New York. And it just seemed too much for me. I didn't wanna do all that moving around. Story_ID: 117426 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they did tussle over me a little bit. Speaker 1: That's something I haven't--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So [HM] Paul Delaney and Lamar Matthews were actually-- Speaker 2: Got into a little tug-of-war, yeah. So when my AP internship had ended, I, I went back--so did my job, because I at--to, to go backward a little bit, I, I had to give up my 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution' night clerking job to take the AP internship. And so I tried to cut a little deal where I recruited one of my friends who--fellow journalism major who needed a--needed a job for the summer. I felt okay, you can--she's willing to work for me for the summer, and then I can come back in the fall. But the 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution' wasn't having it (laughter). It's like once you quit, you quit. You don't come back, so I had to learn that. I couldn't just put a placeholder in my job, so I had to find another job. And I took a job at, at the 'Atlanta Business Chronicle,' which was a trade publication, and it was also a clerk researcher position. So I did that while I was back at Georgia State. And I didn't really like that job too great. It was farther away. It was out in the suburbs, as opposed to the city, so getting to--getting to work after class was a mess. I had this little car. I had a Dodge Dart Swinger 1974. And I had to put a screwdriver on the alternator to get it to start, you know. So I--long story short, I had crashed my car, and so I was without a car for a minute. And, and I--so I had to give up the 'Business Chronicle.' I said, "I can't get there; forget it." So then I needed another job, and by now we're rolling over into the spring of 1987. And I'm at home pondering what to do and still taking classes, trying to wrap it up by the end of the summer--wrap up school by the end of the summer. And I got a call from Lamar Matthews saying, "When can you come to work?" And I blew the dust out of my wallet and said, "Tomorrow?" (laughter). It turned out they needed a vacation relief person, and I already was someone they had trained. And he asked me did I wanna do that job? And so I said, "Yes, I need a job." So they hired me that spring of '87 [1987]. They brought me back in the spring of '87 [1987], and they flexed up my schedule for me while I finished my classes at Georgia State. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's, that's a long story, but no, I didn't graduate from (laughter) Georgia in 1984. Speaker 1: All right, all right, so but you, you actually graduated from Georgia State in '87 [1987]? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 117427 Speaker 1: All right, the time at AP [Associated Press], you started off as a general assignment reporter? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, didn't feel much different from the internship. The bureau was very full of very seasoned, professional people, and I was green as a blade of grass. And I just kind of felt like maybe I needed to come in the door and do what I know I can do, and I knew--I knew native black Atlanta very well. So I was--we had this big fat rolodex on the desk, the old kind, you know, the round one with the knobs on the side and the cards all in the middle? And so I looked and in there and I said, "This phone number for Coretta Scott King looks awfully old," and decided to update that, and then began looking in all the other numbers and information we had. And "Oh, we haven't written anything in a long time" about this or that. And began to find various little racial angles of things I could pursue there from Atlanta [Georgia], in addition to the things they gave me to do, 'cause I had a whole bunch of assignments and I felt that was value added. That was something I knew I could do, and the appreciated that. So I--I sort of found a niche in between working, because once they--once they said okay, so how was graduation? I said it was great. They said okay, great, next schedule you'll be working five P.M. to one A.M. Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, and then you're off Thursday and Friday, and then you work midnight to eight A.M. Saturday and Sunday. So you'll be doing the split shift for a while. So I went okay. Cinderella just turned her--her, her carriage just turned into a pumpkin here (laughter). So this was my first year at AP. I worked a night--what they call night rewrite shift. And it involved taking in all the news we got contributed from other places and rewriting it; making calls on the breaking stories; going out on the breaking stores; and then on the weekends I was the overnight editor, and all I--I did this big long thing called 'The Coming Week in Georgia.' And it was just a, a litany of events that we knew from pri--that we got from press releases and things like that. And I felt a bit removed from the glamour of the student journalism I had been doing, you know. But I said, "But this has a paycheck attached to it. I might as well keep doing it," so I stuck with it. Story_ID: 117428 Speaker 1: Now, I don't wanna skip anything--over anything important but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in '89 [1989] you were promoted, right--to legislative reporter? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And just, just give, give us a sense of how that happened. Speaker 2: Well, Maynard Jackson decided to run for mayor again. You know, they had term-limited him so he decided to have Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] hold the job 'til he got back; so then he came back, and it was a cool political story. And the news editor at the time said oh, "I think you can do this story. Go have a good time with it." And so I wrote about Maynard Jackson, and that sort of whet an appetite for politics. Up until then, I was open to pretty much any journalistic assignment. At my core I wanted to be a sportswriter, but discovered while I was in the midst of the crappy five P.M. to one A.M. shift that that's pretty close to what sportswriters work all the time, and did I want to spend my whole career working at night and on the weekends. And the short answer was no. Can I cover banking (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, that--that's true. I think a lot of people don't really understand--but yes, sportswriters do-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --they come to the games, so-- Speaker 2: And I said, "I like sports, but not that much." I, I realized I needed to be a spectator and comment on it when the mood struck and find something else that whet my appetite. And politics seemed to be a daytime undertaking so I went with that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I wrote about Maynard Jackson's return to city hall. And then they said well, "Let's send you to the legislature," where I worked with the very great state house reporter for AP [Associated Press]. His name was Dick Pettis. And Dick Pettis was tall and gangly and thin, and very unassuming. And I learned so much from him in terms of how to handle politicians, how to put your questions, how to sneak around the rest of the press corps and get your question in, things like that. And I--in, in, in school, when I was at Georgia State [University] I'd had reporting classes where I tailed the reporters. And I had gone out--among the reporters, I had gone out on beat with was [HM] Nathan McCall. At the time, Nathan was covering city hall for the 'AJC' ['Atlanta Journal-Constitution], and yet their approach was a little different. You know, Dick was more of a nose-to-the-grindstone and get the news. And all--I saw how all these people trusted him and the things he did to engender their trust in, in terms of the way he handled them. And so I learned a lot from him about how to--how to handle people who give you information, how to be respectful about it, how to make sure you got what you needed out of 'em and didn't get compromised. So it, it was quite a learning--it was very much an on-the-job learning experience, but I got a lot out of that. Story_ID: 117429 Speaker 1: Okay, what was going in the Georgia State Legislature in those days? Speaker 2: At the time, they were getting ready for redistricting, 1990 redistricting. Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] decided to run for the--for governor. I think he ran for governor. Yeah, he ran for governor. So did Zell Miller, who was the lieutenant governor. And I saw him every day, because he presided over the state senate, and that's what I was sent to cover. Dick Pettis preferred the Georgia House [of Representatives], because it was livelier and you know, full of colorful characters. And the senate was smaller and a lot duller, you know. So I got thrust into cover the governor's race and watching Andrew Young, you know, this luminary who I knew had done so much outside of just the garden-variety political arena, you know, trying to become a governor. It was strange to see the compromising that he was asked to do to try to win this job, and that there were places where people wouldn't shake his hand. I, I remember--because the, the race between those two men got down to a runoff, and you know how runoffs work, you know. If you don't get the majority of the vote, you have to go into a runoff. And then that strengthens the other--one candidate considerably over another. So Zell Miller defeated Young in the runoff. I mean, Young had to battle to get Miller down below 50 percent for a runoff. He had to like force it into a runoff, but he just didn't--the times weren't right I don't think. And at the time, Harvey Gantt was running in North Carolina [for U.S. Senate]. And, and so the night Young lost, I was interviewing him about what happened, because he, he didn't really-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Oh yeah, the night Young lost he, he, I think, had left his rear flank exposed because he failed to truly shore up his base of support in black Atlanta. So Miller was able to carve out some support in the black vote, and then there was some turnout issue. So the, the black vote he thought--the black he turnout he thought he would get kind of didn't really--wasn't really enough to put him over the top. So he was acknowledging this and you know, talking to us. But he said "Hey, I feel great; I'm relieved now." And I'm standing there lookin' at him about like you're lookin' at me now (laughter), with my glasses down on my nose. And a 'Newsweek' magazine photographer took a picture of this, and they used it to illustrate the 'Newsweek' coverage of Young talking to black supporters. And I'm thinking no, he wasn't talking to a black supporter. He was talking to me. I'm a journalist--duh, hello. But it was kind of cool to see that picture show up in 'Newsweek.' Speaker 1: Now was that Andy Young's last attempt to--at public office? Speaker 2: I believe so. Yeah, I believe so. I mean, he had been a congressman; he had been UN ambassador. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He had been mayor. I'm trying to think if he became mayor again, 'ca--'cause I left Atlanta [Georgia] in 1992, so I lost track. I don't think he became mayor again though. Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's, he's part, part owner of (unclear) now (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, he's doing-- Speaker 1: Oh, he's, he's doing (unclear). Speaker 2: He's doing the-- Speaker 1: He's-- Speaker 2: --fun stuff he's always wanted to do I think. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He's, he's really served, you know, well, you know, his lifetime so. But that's his--that was his last debate--major campaign I guess. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 117430 Speaker 1: Okay, so here we are 19-- Speaker 2: Ninety-ish. Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992]. You're working-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --with Dick Pettis at the [Georgia] State House. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were talking about the Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] campaign for governor ver--versus Zell Miller where he [Young] lost. And this reflected on the career of Andy Young. So you were-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I actually interviewed--in '92 [1992] I, I met Clinton--Bill Clinton--when he came through there on a campaign swing. And Mrs. Clinton--Hillary Clinton--I sat in--I was one of several journalists who were interviewing her when she came to town. And it as right be--I think it as right before the Gennifer Flowers thing [allegations of affair between Clinton and Flowers] broke. Speaker 1: Oh, oh. Speaker 2: And then I got sent to some reception that Clinton was appearing at just to watch for things that we could funnel into the Flowers coverage. It was really interesting. Speaker 1: Now was Gennifer Flowers--was she from Texas or, or Georgia? Speaker 2: Arkansas, I thought. Speaker 1: Oh, Arkansas, oh that's--okay. Yeah, that was one of the first scandals of, of the one that-- Speaker 2: Yes, one of-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --what they call the "bimbo eruptions." Story_ID: 117431 Speaker 1: Now so during this period of time from my notes here, you basically transfer from Georgia to Washington [D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did the legislature for three years, I think. And I had started to get a--started to get a little maxed out on it, where I felt I had topped out in terms of what I was getting out of it. And I was starting to feel yeah, I can--I think I--I, I don't think I wanna hang around for another term of this, like next year. I, I wanna grow into something else. And that--I noticed a vacancy was posted for an arts reporter actually--arts and humanities like the museums, the Smithsonian [Institution], etc., here in Washington. So I applied for that. And I hadn't ever really expressed a desire to leave the [Associated Press Atlanta, Georgia] bureau at that point. I had been there for five years and had carved out a pretty good niche for myself. But I knew in order to grow as a journalist, at some point you have to migrate to a different media market. And this one seemed to have all the elements of what I wanted to do in terms of politics and national reporting. So I applied for the first vacancy I saw in Washington. And I was in the system. And this is the spring of '92 [1992], and the Rodney King verdict came down, and the, the riots popped off. So AP was hunting around, you know, saying hmm, "Who are we gonna send to the riots? How are we gonna cover these riots?" And in the midst of that, a little, small riot happened in Atlanta at the Atlanta University Center, where the students got rowdy. I was working a night shift and the CNN Center, where AP's bureau was a that the time, was put on lockdown. What happened is some students decided to march from the Atlanta University Center over to city hall, where they were gonna talk to the mayor about something. And it, it got out of hand, and some folks got arrested. And then they made their way back to campus. And I think this--the--a police car got flipped over and burned, and they, they looted the bookstore. So it got pretty wild over there. And CNN Center was locked down, and I was not locked down because I was working a night shift and it hadn't started yet. So they called me and said, "Hey, you know you're the only reporter we got out there, right. We need you to go over to the hospital and look for casualties; and we need you to go to these different places." I went to the hospital, Grady [Memorial] Hospital, which normal is a beehive (laughter), you know. But it didn't have anything out of its ordinary load. And they seemed to be a little adrift in terms of what they were asking me to do. So I said, "Tell you what, I'll go over to the AIDS Center." So I went over to the AIDS Center and got there in the midst of the rioting and was in the middle of the street. They had--I had a company issued cell phone, circa 1992, so it was about this big. Speaker 1: With a rubber antenna on it? Speaker 2: Yeah, the big one, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I was just in the middle of the street, street reporting. And they got the kids to try to calm the kids down. The cops tossed some tear gas. So it ended up being a weird scene, and, and ended up handling this riot. So I never got to the other riot. But I came in--I remember coming in. I had been--at that point, I had maybe been out there for about--I don't know--ten hours or so. And I came floatin' into the bureau really late that night tear-gassy and (laughter)--from being in this, this protest. And the bureau chief told me: "Oh yeah, Jonathan Wolman, the bureau chief in Washington, called and they wanna fly you up for an interview." I mean, literally I found this out on the same day I got tear-gassed at (unclear) cover the riots. So I said okay. They arranged a flight, and I think maybe three days later I flew up here to Washington for an interview with Jon Wolman, then the bureau chief. And I toured the bureau; it wasn't this location. We were at 2021 K Street at the time. And he talked to me not about the job I had applied for. They gave that one to someone else. But he wanted to talk to me about a new position on urban affairs that he wanted to create I guess in response to what had just happened with the riots, that he felt it was time to go back to reporting on cities and what happens in them. And I already had this track record of reporting along this vein from Atlanta. So he offered me a position to come here to do that. I mean, he didn't do all this in a day. I mean, this is the way it evolved. So as of June of 1992, I came here to Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And to do the urban affairs beat. Story_ID: 117432 Speaker 1: Now had Bill Clinton been elected by this time, or was he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That was in the middle of the '92 [1992] campaign. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was in the middle of the '92 [1992] campaign. Speaker 1: Okay, so the election wouldn't happen until-- Speaker 2: And Ross Perot happened. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: So I did like a little skinny taste. I think I did a couple of Ross Perot stories, and that was about it, of the '92 [1992] campaign. Speaker 1: Now Bill Clinton--so you were lucky to be in Washington [D.C.] during his whole--I mean his whole career, right, as, as pres-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --his pra--presidential Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I was here. Speaker 1: Both, both terms? Speaker 2: Both terms. Speaker 1: And you know he's been called "The Black President" before we actually elected a black president. Do you--what, what did you think of Bill Clinton? Do, do you think he deserved that and that ti--title? And why did black people have such an affinity for him? Speaker 2: He had appropriately black sensitivities. That's really what it is. He had moments where he was profoundly white. I mean (laughter), he just knew how to plant himself and talk to black people on that black level. And he had relationships that went back many, many years with many black people. So it was--it was natural for him. But yeah, he could be very white. He did things that weren't always in the interest of black people, you know. So we just had--that we black people in America had that affinity for him because he knew when to push the right black button. Speaker 1: I suppose. Yeah, it's--yeah, okay. Speaker 2: I mean, I remember--even though we're gettin' out of our little chronological order on things, I was at the state dinner that he threw for the president of Ghana [Flt. Lt. Jerry John Rawlings]. And I was at his table along with Representative [HM John] Conyers [D-Michigan], and Linda Johnson-Rice, from Johnson Publications, and Dennis Green, who was then the coach of the Minnesota Vikings, and Eunice Kennedy Shriver, and several other people. I was at his table. So Linda John--Kenny G. was the entertainment, and at one point Linda Johnson Rice was trying to get the president to do the raise the roof. You know, raise the roof, Mr. President, you know. And cornball that he is, he went, "Yeah!" (thumbs up) (laughter)--was so not the raise the roof. But to me that was one of his profoundly white guy moments. Story_ID: 117433 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, so well-- Speaker 2: We can rewind back now to-- Speaker 1: All right, back to '92 [1992], so. Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992], ninety-three [1993]-- Speaker 1: The campaign--Ross Perot is running against--he's a, a third-party candidate. Speaker 2: Third-party candidate against-- Speaker 1: Against-- Speaker 2: --incumbent president-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: George H. W. Bush-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and Democrat Bill Clinton. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the scene that was happening then. Speaker 1: Yeah, the new Supreme Court Justice was Clarence Thomas. Speaker 2: Clarence Thomas. Speaker 1: So, so these are just some of the things I'm just trying to--some of the things in the news--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Some of the things that went down during that era. We had the, the [HM] Lani Guinier nomination debacle went on. I got a piece of that. Speaker 1: She didn't get the position [U.S. Attorney General]. Speaker 2: She did not. Speaker 1: She was blocked by the Republicans. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had-- Speaker 1: What was the reason that they gave for blocking her or what was the-- Speaker 2: That she had these radical writings. And that was the first time really I had witnessed the unfolding of a "Washington [D.C.] drumbeat," where someone--how, how they can gin up a controversy to take someone down. That was the first time I'd ever seen how that happens, where it can start off real small and clearly explainable; but because someone let it fester, it grew and grew and grew and grew. And typically, they're all huge misunderstandings 'til by the time the person who is the victim of this thing is trying to explain themselves, it's too late; and the explanations require far more complicated explaining than was necessary at the beginning. It's the same thing that went down with Robert Bork, you know, when he was nominated for the Supreme Court. All these things seem to come out of a huge misunderstanding. And that--but that was the first time I had really witnessed one of those. We had Ben Chavis [HM Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.] elected as the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], where he promptly announced that he wanted to bring [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan in out of the rain and, and mainstream him among other civil rights activists, given the work that he does with black people. And that really rankled--upset many Jews who had long history of supporting the NAACP, and then there were scandals associated with that too. So it was his rise and fall. Speaker 1: Yeah, the scandalous fall was him spending I think to the tune of seven hundred and something thousand dollars to keep a-- Speaker 2: To sa-- Speaker 1: --woman quiet about-- Speaker 2: Yes, out-- Speaker 1: --an affair. Speaker 2: --co--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Out of the-- Speaker 2: --under the table-- Speaker 1: --budget. Speaker 2: --settlement of a sexual harassment claim. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's out of the budget of the NAAC-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --out of their money. Speaker 2: --he didn't really tell anybody he was doing this. And also you had Henry Cisneros as housing secretary, one of the first really significant Latino cabinet members, who was doing really good things with housing policy and tra--transforming cities, but also had an affair thing happen to him. And as a matter of fact, those two stories, Chavis and Cisneros, collided in of all places, at NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] in Atlanta [Georgia] that summer of 1994. Well, it was really the UNITY [Journalists of Color] Conference, so all the Journalists of Color groups were meeting together for-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --the first time. Speaker 1: They formed a, a new organization-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --too. Speaker 2: And they ended up holding like news conferences at these things to address those two breaking stories. And I was summoned to work. I had taken time off to go to that convention, but I, I said if you need me I'll be at this convention. And they had to hunt me down and put me to work on Chavis-Cisneros, in that setting. Story_ID: 117434 Speaker 1: I know who we haven't mentioned is [HM] DeWayne Wickham, who's one of your mentors, right? Speaker 2: (Laughter) He told you about the chair didn't he? Speaker 1: Well, he re--now tell, tell us the story-- Speaker 2: He told you-- Speaker 1: --about DeWayne Wickham. Speaker 2: --about that chair. At the time that the, the whole [HM Benjamin F.] Chavis [Jr.] thing [NAACP payments scandal] was going on, I had, again, employing the techniques I learned from the great Dick Pettis on source development and, and getting people to tell you things, and I had done a ton of source reporting in that avenue. And I mean I wa-NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] board members were calling me at five in the morning and all sorts of things; it was sort of crazy. But there was a coterie of reporters here in Washington [D.C.] who all were aggressively hunting that story. DeWayne was a columnist and, to rewind again, I went to the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] convention in Kansas City [Missouri] in 1991. I decided I need some mentors. So I identified who the big--bigheaded journalists were at this convention, and he was one of them. And I said okay, he'd be a good mentor; [HM] George Curry, he'd be a good mentor. So I just went to them, since they were there in Kansas City, and said, "I need mentors. Would you mentor me?" And they both said, "Yeah, but it's up to you. You know, you gotta make it happen." So I, upon arriving in town, let DeWayne know I'm now in Washington. I have come from Atlanta [Georgia] to Washington. He was in the hunt on the NAACP story as well for his column and had the sourcing, because he was in Baltimore [Maryland] and, and knew skillions of people in the NAACP headquarters and knew all, all the prominent figures. So he loved to call me and tick me off to things. "Did you hear about this?" "Did you hear about that?" And a lot of it I had heard about it, but some of it I went: "Oh, tell me more about that; what's happening?" (Laughter) So--and, and he gave me good guidance. I would call him up and say, "How do I handle this? Now what do you do with this?" You know, and so by 1994, at the same UNITY [Journalists of Color] Convention where Chavis and [U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Henry] Cisneros kind of immolated, they had an announced that there would be a news conference about Chavis there. So the journalists were gathering. And I got there early 'cause I wanted my seat on the front row, and I had saved a seat for a colleague, Paul Shepard, then from the 'Cleveland Plain Dealer.' So I had worked some sources over before because on the AP [Associated Press] habit you gotta have something to lay down, and I found it was better to have a story laid down that you could then top with new information so you're not writing your story from scratch and you can break it faster--again, techniques I learned from AP. So I had to step out of the room while we--you know, we had amassed to, to get the news. I stepped out to file a short story to hold the place until the news conference happened, and I asked Paul to hold my chair and he did. But you know, DeWayne comes in, and he's with these old heads who DeWayne--according to DeWayne, we take the front row, you know, and you green young people get to the back. So I came back to claim my chair as he was eyeballing it. And I said, "Don't sit there; that's my chair." And so he--in his version of events I kicked him out of the chair. I guess sometimes he says I picked him up by the shoulders and tossed him out of the chair. I just said, "No, that's my chair; don't sit in my chair. I'm back now; that's my chair. See that bag under it? That's my bag" (laughter). That was all it was. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But he loves to tell that story, and he will be greatly pleased to know that I sat here with you and told that story 'cause I'm always trying to kill it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, yeah, but, but he's been a mentor over the years in terms of-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mentor, supporter, friend. Great guy. Story_ID: 117435 Speaker 1: All right, so nine--so back with the Clinton mis--so you become the--a White House reporter in '95 [1995]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, now this is his [President Bill Clinton] second--this is approaching his second-- Speaker 2: Approaching his-- Speaker 1: --term. Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --as he's getting ready to go into a campaign for reelection. Speaker 1: And this is gone be a tough one, because in '94 [1994], [Representative] Newt Gingrich had his friends and his-- Speaker 2: Republican Revolution. Speaker 1: That's right. Right, the 'Contract'--is it 'on' or 'With America?' Which one is it? Speaker 2: Contract they--well, 'Contract with America' is what Gingrich and the, the Republican Revolution folks called it. The liberal factions that hated it called it "Contract on America." Speaker 1: Right. That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, but when he came into power, I remember being part of a group interview with black journalists that Newt Gingrich did, and on C-SPAN and everything. And he was there talking about his agenda for dealing with race, and dealing with urban poverty, and all these different things. And you know, I've--I, I kind of viewed it as some skullduggery going on. And there was a little exchange he and I had at that--(unclear) like, "What would you say to a child who can't help where they were born and, and needs things, you know, with, with this self-'lift yourself by your bootstraps' philosophy you're talking about? What do you say to that child? They don't have any bootstraps, you know." So he said, "I would say, 'Get an education.'" I said, "But they can't. The school's crappy. Then what?" You know, so that ended up on C-SPAN, and it was actually kind of--kind of confrontational but I, I mean, I was--wasn't mean or anything. I was just challenging him about where he was coming from, so. Speaker 1: Now did you know him before here, here in Georgia--I mean--I mean back I Georgia? Speaker 2: Not really, no. No, I knew of him. He had taught at West Georgia College [now University of West Georgia, Carrolton, Georgia] and had run for Congress before, and actually had more of a liberal record, but couldn't han--the Eastern Airlines union workers didn't like the guy so they--you know. And I think there was a pilot strike or some--this was in the '80s [1980s], and it predated me. So I wasn't involved as a journalist in covering any of that stuff, so I didn't get to know him on that level. I didn't really get to know him until he was in his role as a House Speaker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And to talk to him in that capacity there. Speaker 1: So this is--'cause say you got like Republican-controlled Congress, much like we have today [2013], with a liberal Democratic pres--president. And yeah, so this--there's this tug-of-war going on. Speaker 2: Yes and in the--in that mix Bill Clinton tried to introduce health reform--healthcare reform-- Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: --and put his-- Speaker 1: --deja vu. Speaker 2: --extremely smart wife, the first lady [Hillary Clinton], on it, which rankled many people because they said, "As first lady, you need to focus on being the first lady." But if you've got the smarts of Hillary Clinton in your house, why wouldn't you use them? So I could kind of see where both of those issues stood, that no first lady had really had that role. I think the closest to come to it might have been Eleanor Roosevelt, you know. Betty Ford did a lot. She had her way. She stayed within the confines of first ladydom, but she did transform the role. But Hillary Clinton was not trying to be, as she said, your stand by your man, bake cookies kind of first lady. So I think that upset people, and they thought she was trying to be president, and that this was a co-president kind of setup, and given the times we were in, you know. We weren't quite as evolved as a nation as we are now, so. But the window between '92 [1992] and '95 [1995], you know, I filled with a whole lot of that kind of coverage, about opportunity, about lack of, about race, about political scandal and falling down. You know, some very interesting times those were. And there were several of us on, on that race beat track here in Washington [D.C.]. It was really a high time. I mean, we had Lynn Duke over at the Washington Post and Monty Young at 'Newsday,' and Steve Holmes at the New York Times, and Paul Shepard, like I said, at the Cleveland Plain Dealer, even though he wasn't local, and Sam Fulwood I think at the time was at the L.A. Times. And so, you know, there were many of us on the same trail covering racial issues at that time. It was quite exciting, yeah. Story_ID: 117436 Speaker 1: Okay, and also that was a time period, though, it wasn't happening in Washington [D.C.], but the O.J. Simpson case. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right, and so the national climate kind of called for it. I, I really think [Associated Press Washington Bureau Chief] Jon Wolman was very prescient with the Rodney King situation to say it's time to focus on this again, yeah. And lots of the majors followed that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now the major, I guess, issue that--well, one of the major issues was the Monica Lewinsky scandal during {President Bill] Clinton's Administration. So, so you were--you were a White House reporter during-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --this period time. Speaker 2: I mean I, I never--this is really ironic, even as I covered politics down there in Georgia, I never had the White House as a goal. I never even conceived it. I thought who get--who gets to do that? But I had--I had gone in 1995--summer of '95 [1995]--late summer I went to the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] Convention in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], which was a very politically charged convention, because among the things that they had done was scheduled an execution for Mumia Abu-Jamal. And NABJ went into an activist stance, and said, "He is a former president of the Pennsylvania--of the--of the Philadelphia chapter of our organization, and how dare you schedule his execution while we're in your town?" And it was wild and radical and you know, exciting. I know I've used that word exciting a lot, but, but this was pretty exciting. I came off that heady convention and came back to work. Jon Wolman had called me into his office as soon as I got to work that day. And I went, "Oh my God, what did I do? Am I late?" (Laughter) "I might have to explain myself." And so he asked how the NABJ Convention went. I said it was great. We talked about those things. And he said, "Okay, good; well, I'm sending you to the White House." And I went, "What--like, what?" And he said, "Yeah, I, I have been watching the work that you're, and I think you can handle this, and I need you to go to the White House. And you're gonna be doing this, and we'll start you in that assignment, you know, next month." And I went, "But wait, wait," 'cause I was harkening back to the conversation I had had all those years earlier with Harmon Perry about how you make a difference in terms of the images and the news, the news demand, and, and what people need to know where race is concerned. And, and that had been where I thought I'd take this career once I had settled on it. And I didn't expect to be diverted into this world. And I said, "What about my current job?" I said, "I need to think about this." And I don't know that he's ever had anybody say "I gotta think about whether I wanna go to the White House beat or not," but he says, "Okay, take, take a--take today and think about it. And let me know something tomorrow or something like that," he said. And I (unclear) oh God, and so I had to call my mentors up and ask them what they thought about this. I called [HM] DeWayne [Wickham] and he said, "You better take that job, girl." I called [HM] George Curry and he said, "Take that job. Black folk will be here when you get back." And Sam Fulwood [of the Los Angeles Times] said, "Oh, you can handle that. You've been reporting on black people; that's a lot harder." (Laughter) And so I said, "Okay, I guess I'll do this," and I made Jon promise I could have my beat back if it didn't work out (Laughter). So in September of '95 [1995] I transferred over to our White House coverage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And unbeknownst to me at the time, I was the first African-American woman to do that for AP. And it's more than a century of history. AP had never had a, a--had never assigned a black woman to that job. There had been a black man assigned, Wendell Goler, who is now with Fox News, was AP radio's White House correspondent. But all that time I thought there had been one before me, and didn't realize I was breaking ground that way. And, and throughout any of this, none of this felt like I was breaking ground, you know. It just felt like I was keeping my head low and doing what I was expected to do. Story_ID: 117437 Speaker 1: So you're at the, the closing part of the [President Bill] Clinton administration, the last four years basically. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Right, and the campaign and the last four years where Clinton's running against Bob Dole and, and Ross Perot, right? Speaker 2: Again, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, who gets about eight percent of the vote I think. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, so, so what, what was that like? Any, any high--highlights from that period? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, there are highlights from that too. I was with Clinton on his train trek into the Democratic [National] Convention in Chicago [Illinois] in '96 [1996]. It was a train--it was a bus tour. He did this bus tour and train ride into Chicago to accept the nomination, so I'd been with him for at least a week. It was starting to get old. I was exhausted. And once we were headed in, we went into Michigan on, on train. And, and we went royal--we headed into Royal Oak, Michigan, and they had a rally for him there. And there were a couple of us on this trip. There was Deborah Mathis from USA Today and myself. And we had two press cars on the train. And on the way into Royal Oak, I looked around and said, "I'm the only black person in here." Like, "Where in the heck are all the black people?" Because when you arrived for these rallies, you know, the camera crews had black camera men and just kind of (unclear). On the train--I had gotten used to seeing these folks. And I got on the train, and it hadn't really occurred to me at that juncture that I was it. Story_ID: 117438 Speaker 1: So I'm sitting in that train car [on President Bill Clinton's 1996 campaign tour] realizing just how white my environment had been. You know, I would have moments where in traveling with the president [Bill Clinton] or doing different things, every now and then I'd realize I'm the only black person on this plane right now; or I'm the only black person walking through here; or when Clinton would arrive and they would drag the press corps in, and I would see the faces of the black people there, either kitchen or workers or different people at rallies, looking at me like, "Yeah, girl, you with the president." 'Cause they don't differentiate between who's media and who's not, who's staff and who's with Clinton. And so I would see this proud look come across their faces. And so it would remind me of my blackness in that moment. And that was one of them. I'm on this train headed into Royal Oak, Michigan, going I'm the only per--black person in this car. And so we get to Royal Oak, and they had this big honkin' rally set up, hundreds of people, and they had these bleachers. And they had set off a section of the bleachers for us. And so I scampered up to like the top of the bleachers so I could look out and get an idea of how big that crowd was. And I was lookin' around scannin' and then I looked, and looked down and I said, "That's Rosa Parks." A police woman had wheeled her up in a wheelchair to come to this rally. So she was just there beside the bleachers looking up at us and looking at the crowd and everything, taking it in to be at this rally. So Rosa Parks is here. And I, I just to have to say I--she's one of my heroes--I mean, real life--like real talk, hero, because I remember picking her to do a little Negro History Week project when I was in the--when I was like ten; and she physically resembled the women in my mother's family. I could envision this--these women through her doing these great things. And I just said, "I could go over here and thank Rosa Parks for what she's done." You know how you get the angel and the devil on your shoulder? The angel's saying, "You need to go over there and thank Rosa Parks for what she's done." And the devil's over here saying, "Don't get in trouble. The rally might start and you aren't covering anything, and then what?" And I said, "Now I'm going over here," so I went over to her. And plus--another thing that cataga- catapulted me over there, I was like, "This is my (unclear). I gotta go over here," so I went over to her. I waited my turn 'cause there were a few other people there to see her and shake her hand. And then I told her who I was and then I reminded her I had met her in 1986 when she came to Atlanta [Georgia] to endorse either [HM] Julian Bond or [HM] John Lewis for [U.S.] Congress. And they had a news conference, and she got in the news conference and said, "Well, they both my boys. I, I can't pick one over the other" (laughter). And I reminded her of that, but then I thanked--I said, "I wanna thank you for what you did on that bus in Montgomery [Alabama]. Because of you--you know. How do I know I wouldn't have been in a segregated car on that train, even if I was allowed to come and cover the president? And then I was able to come into this town today in an integrated railcar; and it's because of you, and I thank you for that." And she said, "Well, you're welcome and you just keep doing the good things you do." And I asked her to take a picture with me, and hit somebody, 'cause I used to carry these little disposable cameras with me. And, and someone indulged me and took a picture, and I have that picture framed in my home to this day. Story_ID: 117439 Speaker 1: Yeah. That was a--that was a great moment on the campaign trail. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The highlight of the campaign for me. I mean, I have forgotten a lot of those speeches and stuff I covered ex- with the possible exception of the late night campaign fundraiser, where [Presdient] Bill Clinton said that--he was talking about the, the mummy they found in Peru, the, the fifteen-year-old girl mummy they found in Peru and how well preserved she was. And he was jokin' saying that was a good lookin' mummy. "If I was single, I'd take that mum- mummy out." (Laughter) And I'm like, "Really? Oh no, why'd you do that? It's almost 2:30 in the morning. We aren't gonna get any sleep." So with the exception of that, that, meeting Rosa Parks was the highlight of it for me, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and had the, of course, the [1996] Democratic [National] Convention in Chicago [Illinois] at the end of that train trip, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, and we took the train into Chicago. And I did think about the 1968 [Democratic National] Convention in Chicago. And I wanted to write a book contrasting the two, but it didn't feel different enough to me. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The differences just didn't--I mean, we had no violence to compare. The protests were different. It all-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --just seem-- Speaker 2: --confined to a certain area. I think the mayor [Richard M. Daley] had already--had locked things down where they were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, and so they were making sure none of that stuff happened again, you know. Speaker 2: And they built wrought-iron fences all over the city. Speaker 1: Right, so it ended up being an aspect of the overall story that I didn't have responsibility for, so I said, "I won't be writing that." So I just did my feeding and took a picture with the balloons when they dropped, you know. Speaker 2: Okay, but--now, now was it '97 [1997] that Hillary [Clinton] got the youth health bill? It was--I forget the name of it, but it's a bill for, for youth, some, some sort of a health plan for young pe--people that she did get passed. Speaker 1: Oh, CHIPs [State Children's Insurance Program (SCHIP)], Childhood-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --Insurance Program? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was able to get that part through. That was around when she wrote her book, 'It Takes a Village.' Story_ID: 117440 Speaker 1: I mean, early on in covering the White House, I traveled with Mrs. [Hillary] Clinton to Latin America, and then in '97 [1997] went with her to Africa on her tour of Africa. Speaker 2: Now that had to be noteworthy. Speaker 1: That was profound, yes. That was profound because I had not been to Africa, so I was going in, in quite a--quite an elaborate way. And we--the first stop was Senegal, and we had flown for many, many hours. And she toured Goree Island [le de Goree, Dakar, Senegal] and the slave house there. So coming into Africa for the first time in my life, I'm taken in through a slave house, where clearly my ancestor left. It could have been that same doorway. I don't know; maybe it was a different one. I mean, it was a very emotional thing. I really expected to cry. We had been speculating on the flight over how we all might feel. And I had tissue in case I cried, you know, in my little jacket pocket. And when we got there and we were taking the tour with the curator, whose name was [Boubacar] Joseph N'Daiye, and he showed us the room where they would put the recalcitrant people the room where they would lay the babies who were born and--or who were sucklings. And the virgins were over here in this room, and the men were over there in that room. And, and I just got angry, because you could see the proximity where literally this is the wall of the house, and this horror is happening over here. And outside people are walking right past it like it's just an ordinary day, and it angered me so. So when the curator talked about Josephine [de Beauharnais] and how Napoleon [Bonaparte] had--she had encouraged Napoleon to restore the slave trade in France and ended up back in Martinique as a slave herself [sic, this did not happen], he made the comment: "And so on behalf of my ancestors, you know, I say well done." And that's when I went, "Can we talk about your ancestors because they--did they work here? Like, they were walking right past this door, right?" you know, and got very, very angry, just blind with anger. And I was just-"I don't have to listen to this," so I walked away. And I was very angry 'cau- because it was hurtful, you know, to really confront that legacy of slavery like that. So I had some saltiness for the Senegalese for a long time through that whole tour, and then got to Tanzania and felt a very visible connection to Africa there with the Maasai. We had visited a village--a, a Maasai village there and met some of the women. And Vicki Mabrey, who at the time was working for CBS, and I were talking to the women. And Vicki asked me to take a picture of her with some of the women because her mother wanted to compare facial features and that kind of things with Africans for our ancestry. So as we're taking a picture, one of the women who was working as a, you know, translator said, "The, the, the other women wanted to know how are you African and you're such a strange color," talking to her and me like this; like, "You're diff--you're a weird color." And I said, "Well, we are diluted." It was a (unclear), I said, "We're diluted." And they laughed like okay, 'cause they--this, this conversation was happening. We were--at, at--through a couple of interpretations--I mean, we were speaking in English, which our driver translated into Swahili. He did not speak Maa. Well, one of the women, her name was Nanya (ph.) Mall (ph.), she spoke Swahili. So she would translate his Swahili into Maa for the women so it was a double interpretation going on. That's why there was some confusion when I said when I said we are diluted. And they were like, "Oh, okay"--like, really? And we found ourselves having to explain slavery in a five-minute recap or so--five-second recap of slavery. And how do you condense all that pain down into a summary that they can understand? And so the way Nanya Mall explained it by the time the Swahili got converted into Maa, she said, "They are what happens when all the people of the world get mixed together. And still the Africa remains obvious." And so that's when they all went, "Oh, okay." And we began to compare skin. 'Cause as she explained it, she took my hand and put it here, and Karen Breslau from 'Newsweek' magazine, who is white who was with us, and put her hand there, and Nanya Mall put her hand--her very dark hand--here. And she's cluck, cluck, ca, ca--explaining it, and they went--they all went, "Oh," like, "I get it now." And so it was--we looked like a Camay skin ad commercial (laughter)--Camay soap ad, comparing the skin. Up walks Annie Leibovitz, the celebrity photographer who was tagging along to shoot images. And she said, "Wait, wait, do that again;" and she took a picture of us comparing skin, which is also hanging in my house and you know. So I felt better about what happened in Senegal by the time we got to Tanzania, none of which has anything to do with the first lady, but that who we were talking about. Speaker 2: But yeah--well, yeah, that's an experience that, you know, is worth sharing. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 117441 Speaker 1: At the end of the--I'd mentioned before, the end of the '90s [1990s] was the Monica Lewinsky scandal. So you were around the White House when that was going on, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now what are your impressions of that era? Speaker 2: Very difficult time personally for the first family, just very, very tough. Washington [D.C.]'s whole political hackosphere was having a field day on both sides with it. It made for some surreal political theater; things like--at the time, [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson had a Sunday talk show on CNN. Both sides were Jesse Jackson. And he reverted into being a minister, and was sitting there interviewing one of Clinton's pastoral advisors about sin and adultery and King David. And this is--you know, usually Sunday talk shows are sort of like what the Republicans did, what the Democrats did (laughter). And this--those kind of surreal moments would happen, you know. The night of the moment in question where the president met Monica Lewinsky when she brought him pizza during the government shutdown, I was at the White House that day late, but obviously didn't see any of that stuff because they contained us in the briefing room area. We didn't have that kind of access to the West Wing. Then I was there when the whole thing unraveled, and the president did have to admit that yes, he did have this relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. And he came back from Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] to do that. I had been with them in Martha's Vineyard, flew back to Washington for this emergency he handled, was there at the White House as the Clintons took that walk together to Marine One to go back to the Vineyard, and then went back to the Vineyard with them. So it was just very surreal and very--I could see very difficult thing for that family. Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed to me I, I guess just from watching the newscast and, and such that [then White House Communications Director] George Stephanopoulos really took this tough. You know, he said (unclear) really just lose faith in, in the president of the result of that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it was a rough-- Speaker 1: --I mean, of all the-- Speaker 2: --time. Speaker 1: --pe--people I remember, I remember him take--taking it harder than the First Lady [Hilary Clinton] seemed to--(unclear). Speaker 2: And, and journalistically, it was a struggle because you found yourself delving very deeply into the personal lives of people who are the leaders of the free world or the political figures of our time. And, and there's a part of you that says, "There should be a boundary here; like, I shouldn't know all this stuff." I thought about the era--the times when [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt was president, and the press corps knew he couldn't walk and never let on. And it seemed to me--where is the sanctity, and like where do you draw the line on the basis of humanity? And that's something that I carried through the whole thing, including after Clinton's time was up and George W. Bush became president too. Speaker 1: What do you think happened? Was it--is it just a proliferation of news media and the competition amongst the news media that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --makes this happen? Speaker 2: It, it was 24-hour-- Speaker 1: 'Cause, 'cause I-- Speaker 2: --news cycle that we had drifted into and the need to feed the beast that led people to say there are no limits. The Internet was burgeoning at the time, so you had your 'Drudge Report' out there and, and people trying to see what they could do with the Web. I sort of wonder whether it would have been worse like now with so much web proliferation out there; would that situation have been worse? Because at least then the, the Internet was still new enough to where it hadn't evolved to where we're now here with millions of bloggers offering opinions and-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --things like that. Speaker 1: --there have been so many scandals on both sides of the aisle these days, in terms of people's sexuality and their--and their--who their dating in, in--in and outside of marriage and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yes, and that's still-- Speaker 1: Do you think that-- Speaker 2: There's a part of me that still feels like there should be boundaries, that, that at some point you have to respect their private lives the way you want your own private life to be respected. And then as a journalist you say, "But don't people have the right to know?" And it's, it's a--it's a, a push me/pull you thing that happens within you as a journalist, where you're trying to balance what is ethically sound, the ethically sound approach to these highly personal things. Story_ID: 117442 Speaker 1: Have you ever known something that, that you didn't tell (laughter)--I mean, about--you know, I mean--you said that the-- Speaker 2: About any president? Speaker 1: Yeah, about, about any high official that you guys said well, I don't think this is-- Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: --you know, worth-- Speaker 2: No, but at the same time I've been asked to do--to write things I thought might be sleazy and I'm--and (unclear) I'm not gonna sleaze that way. Case in point, the National Enquirer was on the verge of reporting [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson, Sr. had a daughter outside of his marriage--had a child outside his marriage. And that rumor was taking hold, and so a lot of us were reporting this. I wanna say may be 1999 or somewhere in there--2000, 2001--somewhere in that window. And we had to chase that, and it felt unsavory to me, but I said gotta do it. So I called him and said that this was happening--left him a message saying this is going on, and "Can you talk to me about this?" And you could've shocked me when he called me back and confirmed it. So he called me back and confirmed it I think out of the realization that if I tell AP [Associated Press] the world knows, and I don't have to tell nine hundred people. I just told all nine hundred of 'em by telling this one person. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --'cause this is--as you--if National Enquirer reports it-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I mean there are people that read-- Speaker 2: They had a-- Speaker 1: --read every week, but there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there's also a level of disrespect for National Enquirer-- Speaker 2: Exactly, and-- Speaker 1: --that you know, he--then they could report that he has an alien daughter from another planet too. Speaker 2: They could. Speaker 1: And that's the kind of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, now that would probably be the Weekly World News (laughter)--(unclear). That's the tabloid that would do that. But, but he took the thunder out of the National Enquirer's scoop by confirming it to me. And I thought about the pain that kind of thing causes families and really felt for his family, but I had to put the news out. And he did say, "Yes, it's true." So what do you do with that, not report it? Speaker 1: So were you the first to get that--to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to have that confirmed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, from him, yes. Speaker 1: --first credible-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And it was about eleven o'clock at night. And I mean I had called him at about ten just saying, "Hey, you know, these report--this report's coming. I heard it--they're gonna put it out tomorrow." And I had also heard 'Newsday' had managed to confirm it or something, and they were gonna publish. That's the rumor and that was the rumor I was hearing, and "Can you talk to me about this?" I fully expected him to say, "No, I can't talk about that." Instead, he told me, "Yes, it's true." Speaker 1: Okay, did, did you ask him to give you any details on the phone about it? Speaker 2: Yes, he, he gave me a statement with some details to it, and that he was working with his family on it. I--I'm fuzzy on the article itself, you know. But I'm sure I could pull the clips and, and read the article to you, but-- Speaker 1: Now do you think--now you would probably know the answer to this better than I would, but do you think that Jesse Jackson having a, a daughter out of wedlock, or Bill Clinton fooling around with Monica Lewins--Lew--Lew--Lewinsky would-or of Anthony Weiner shooting a picture of himself and texting someone--would that be a story in Europe or Asia or some place or? Speaker 2: Yes, but not for the ramifications it has here, more for its salaciousness. When-- Speaker 1: That wouldn't be used to discredit somebody's political sta--stance or-- Speaker 2: No, I think people would compartmentalize it. I think they look at it like here's him as a politician; here's him as the texting guy. But the way American political systems operate, those things become metaphors for who you are and your character. And then we have this tendency to deify our leaders and expect them to meet a per--a standard of perfection that no human can meet. And then we end up, well, there's a rumor of this with this guy; there are rumors about that, and you chase a--and, and you're chasing rumors at that point. How often are rumors fact? You know, and just because it's a fact, does that then make it the truth. So that's sort of a weird gray area to get into, and, and it's a slippery slope too. So I've tended to want not--want no parts of those kinds of things. You know, I didn't want any real part of Monica's blue dress or what really happened when President [George W.] Bush hurt his eye. And he said he scratched it with his glasses, but other people--rumors said that he was drunk, and I sort of feel that's not where we need to be. It's, it's unsavory. Story_ID: 117443 Speaker 1: Now, what are your thoughts about the election of 2000? Now this is a disputed election, now you were covering--still covering the White House, right? Speaker 2: I was still covering the White House. And I was really more in a death march mode, as in [Bill] Clinton's presidency was in its death throes, you know. I was not on the campaign trail hard like that, so I didn't have that intimate detail about any candidate. I-- Speaker 1: Yeah, was there anything memorable about Clinton's last days? He's this personable president. Everybody who's ever worked for him, ever met him, tells me--that, that I've interviewed, tell me that he was--he has a singular presence, and you think you're his best friend when he's talking to you. And, and--I mean, was there anything that nags--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We could have a good time around that guy--you can. And people didn't really know whether you could have that kind of a good time around [George W.] Bush, 'cause they didn't know him like that. And he was more structured, kind of hospital corners about a lot of things, even though--even as he was, you know, trying to pal around and be a nice guy. In a one on one kind of situation he was easy to talk to as well, but he was part of a political machine. So you had Bush the political machine and Bush the man. You had Clinton the political machine and Clinton the man, you know. So you knew when that was on and when that was off. And then when, when something like the election comes up, it--and, and a complication like what happened with the 2000 election, it just puts a gray area between those two things; you know, you have to bridge one to the other. Speaker 1: Okay, well, were you surprised when George Bush was elected? I mean, you know, through the (unclear)--I mean the--I guess the-- Speaker 2: How the process worked you mean? Speaker 1: Interference with the--you know, well, the--through the [U.S. and Florida] Supreme Courts in--interceding on behalf of-- Speaker 2: I was more surprised by all the triggers that happened, as in--here, here in our shop [the Associated Press Washington, D.C. bureau], you know, wa--wa--on election night as the results were comin' in, our boss said we can't call that election for Florida--Florida for Bush. It's too close. It's too close to call. The networks were beginning to call it for Bush--I mean for Gore--I'm sorry--they were beginning to say Gore had been elected, and I think maybe one network said Bush. That night I was in New York with Clinton, because you know, Mrs. [Hilary Rodham] Clinton had her own Senate thing to pursue. So I was removed from the hoi polloi of our newsroom and just getting it from the updates that whenever I would check in--had to check in on the returns and updates and to file what I knew the Clintons to be doing. So when I heard all these other networks calling the election and we had not, I said something's up. Something's up 'cause AP not calling the election means this isn't over. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, it's not over. So once that happened, it becomes okay, it's too close to call. So what do you do when it's too close to call? And then okay, now that we know we have to do a recount, what do you do after that? And oh, where does the process go? What if it's not resolved before January 20? All the triggers were surprising to me, just to see that process unfold, to see it make its way over to the Supreme Court. And you talk about all the checks and balances you learned about how government works. And you see the way our democracy is supposed to work. It was--it was kind of unsettling to see them have to dust off the rules that we had never employed to address this problem. You know, normally elections are pretty easy to resolve. Whoever got the most votes wins, and how the Electoral College kicks in. It's--you know, it's pretty clear, and that's a well-traveled road. We know how to work on that. But when you have this big exception come along, and there is a process dealing with it, but we've never really done that before, how do you--how does that work? And, and trying to go by the rules and make sure it got done the way it's been spelled out as part of our democratic principles was quite odd to watch, you know. Story_ID: 117444 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--well, your (unclear)--your in a--so you're in the White House after the [2000] election. And what was the transition like and what was the difference between [Bill] Clinton White House and the [George W.] Bush White House? Speaker 2: One of my colleagues once said that traveling with Bill Clinton was like touring the--like going out on the road with a college sophomore, you know, lots of hyperactivity--gotta see, gotta see, gotta see, gotta go do this--very heavy schedule, late nights; and then Bush was quiet, you know--not a lot of activity. He liked to go to bed very early. You know, he was like eight o'clock he's in bed. So it was a strange transition. It-- Speaker 1: As opposed to Clinton, how, how--when, when, when, when would--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Night owl, night-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --owl, would travel, you know, come in late from wherever, and stay on the plane--stay on Air Force One for an hour playing hearts with his staff. Clinton would go to California to raise money. He was a very aggressive fundraiser. Bush would travel and be back by five o'clock, which really--yay, 'cause we get a break (laughter). But it, it, it also felt different. It, it, it didn't feel active. The Clinton White House felt very active; the Bush White House, more laid back and kind of quiet; Clinton White House, more of a beehive of activity, lots of people coming in and out; the Bush White House was more self-contained and again, quiet, yeah. Speaker 1: Now what about the African-American members of the cabinet and staff during the Clinton years and the African-American staff during the Bush years--during the Bush the Republicans have bragged that, that Bush brought more African Americans in the White House than Clinton did. Speaker 2: He brought many in; yes he did. It was just a change in who the personnel were and who--what they were doing, just like Democrats and Republicans are different. And, and they I think were involved in a higher level on a--on different subject matters, where the Democrats had black officials involved heavily on the domestic side, domestic policy. Bush relied heavily on black advisors for foreign policy. And there were just different crews of people, you know. I think Bush had the record he had over time. I think Clinton was in more of a hurry, so he brought in larger people in a way--in a--in a big way in the beginning--larger number of people. Bush kind of fed 'em in over time, so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now you were with--well, you know, well, two of the prominent Bush cabinet mem--members are [HM Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell and Condoleezza Rice--(unclear) she wasn't a cab mem--member in the beginning, but as his advisor--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, she was the national security advisor. Speaker 1: National security advisor. Yeah, so what was that relationship like--I mean, between Bush and those two? Was it warm or was it just business or what was it? Speaker 2: It was warm business. It was sort of collegial. You could tell he trusted them, but it was business, you know. I didn't see a [HM] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.] roll up in there the way he would with Clinton. It was all business, just very crisp, very professional, you know. It didn't seem that interpersonal, even though you could tell there was a great degree of trust and warmth between the secreta--between Condi Rice and the president. And, and even that, too, was like professional respect. So it's kind of hard to compare the two; they're very apples and oranges, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 117445 Speaker 1: Now you were--you took a--tell us about the trip to Florida, the 9/11-- Speaker 2: The 9/11-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --pool? Nine-eleven [9/11] of 2001 was--that was supposed to be just kind of this pro forma trip to Florida, the president trying to talk about education and what he planned to do in that area. You know, he was just getting--really just getting what he was calling [the] No Child Left Behind [Act (NCLB)]; it was kind of in its formative stages. This was, I think, a get-out-of-the-heat of Washington [D.C.] junket. More than anything else, it gave him time with his brother in Florida, and the economy was startin' to simmer. Eco--economic issues were startin' to simmer, and he didn't wanna have to talk about the economy. So he wanted to divert and change topic and talk education. The [Second] Intifada that had begun in the Middle East under [Bill] Clinton continued. And at some point it was gonna become his to deal with, even as they were saying things like oh, you know, Clinton's aggressive diplomacy is why we're dealing with this now. "It's his fault, not ours;" "We inherited this," etc. So he wanted, I think, to just kind of take a trip that could--that could cast the national conversation in a different direction. So he was supposed to go to the UN shortly thereafter. So this was considered in a lot of corners of the press corps "that crappy trip to Florida." Because it started on Sunday; ended on Tuesdays, so some folks didn't wanna get--you know, we were startin' to get a little spoiled by Bush's easy travel habits (laughter), and so some folks just didn't wanna do a--give up a weekend day for that. So even though I had done a trip just prior to that, and I can't even recall where we went. I think it might have been a one day out and back thing. I was, again, assigned to do this trip, myself and Scott Lindlaw, my colleague here. You know, we traveled in pairs in AP at that point. So we went with the president to Florida. And I remember September 10 we had gone I wanna say to Jacksonville [Florida]. The president had, you know, given a little easy--some easy little comments about education. We were down in Sarasota [Florida] kind of early, so I think we arrived there maybe five or six in the evening. And the president was down early, so we kind of took over the bar at this hotel where we were all staying. And everybody was convivial and chatty. And we were leaving the next morning, and it was an easy thing because he had a speech on education at the school, and then we'd be back at midday. Because I was coming off the road, I was gonna have my day to myself after we landed in Andrews [Air Force Base]. And I went, "Yes, I can get a manicure. I was gonna visit a friend at the hospital," and different things like that. So September 10 was fun, you know. It was a beautiful day. Sarasota smelled terrible; they had red tide and we were jokin' about that. It kind of smells like a boiled egg. We joked about--around about that. The Secret Service agents were mingling too 'cause every, every, everybody was just really having a good time there at the little bungalow style hotel where we were all staying. And the next morning, you know, Bush got up very early for jogging. He liked to jog at like five in the morning. He got up early to do that. And the way my travel colleague, Scott, and I parsed our duties, I outranked him in seniority so I said, "You do the jog pool. I'll take Air Force One home." So for him it was, "Okay, I get my pool stint over early, and then I can be in the filing center and leave at leisure." I got to sleep in more, like six A.M., instead of five--four--to get up for that pool call and, and you know, do that one pool at the school and head in. Story_ID: 117446 Speaker 1: It was gonna be fairly light lifting that morning [September 11, 2001]. So we left the hotel, maybe eight? And took the motorcade over to Emma [E.] Booker Elementary School [Sarasota, Florida]. And as were driving up, my cell phone rang, and it was Scott. And he said, "Hey, a plane has hit the World Trade Center [New York, New York]." And I said, "What kind of plane?" He says, "I don't know; it's just on the CNN crawler, and I'm gonna try to find some stuff out." I said, "Okay, I'll ask around here." I thought twin-engine Cessna--like what idiot smacked a twin-engine Cessna into the side of that building? Did they not see that--called our desk here in Washington [D.C.] to try to get some details, and they didn't have any more either, just scant information. So I said I'd try to find whoever I could get in [President George W.] Bush's party to see if they'd been told anything. And by this time we'd arrived at the school. And, and none of his aids lingered to talk to the press or spin us in any kind of way like they normally would. They--everybody just jetted off for the school, so I didn't get to ask anybody anything. And as we got there, there were a few members of the traveling press who were non-pool who had gone to the school in advance to pre-position. And they came out to meet us and said, "A jet hit the trade"--I said, "A jet hit the Trade Cen--?" "Yeah, and on pur--," and, and one was like, "On purpose; that looked deliberate; it didn't look accidental to me." And right at that time, we began to get the word that a second plane had hit. So this is in the 8:30 A.M.--9:00 A.M. window--we're trying--and, and they took the pool, those of us who were in the pool, over to the second-grade classroom where we were supposed to watch the president do a reading lesson with the class and the teacher. So we were holding there in that room and discussing among ourselves who can we find to try to get to--get anything on this stuff that's happening. And we're waiting and waiting, and, and Bush hadn't come out. And I think he was supposed to be in that room at around 8:30--8:30--8:40, somewhere according to the schedule. So he finally came in and took a seat with the teacher. And he looked disturbed like he had something on his mind, and--but he was going along with the lesson. So we decided to wait until the lesson's over, and we'll ask him about this thing. And, at about 9:05, Andy Card [White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card] came through the side door the president had entered the room in. And he's in the middle of watching this teacher do the reading drill with the kids, and they're reciting their little part, and Andy Card whispered to the president, and that's when he told the president that a second plane had hit the World Trade Center. And I, I saw Bush's face just whiten, and he lost his concentration on what he was doing with the kids. And you could tell he was sitting there saying, "If I panic, these cameras are gonna film it; I don't wanna scare these kids." You know when you can see someone measuring how to respond to something? And I was standing there and said okay, I noted the time off the classroom clock--this is when this happened. And Jay Carney and I were in the pool together. He was working for Time magazine, and I told Jay, I think Andy--I said the president's face tells us that, that he just--his president's face just told us everything we, we wanna know. So we didn't get to--we tried to yell a question at him, and he cut us off and said I'm, I'm about to give some remarks in the--in the auditorium. So we go to the main area. I think it was the school library where they had parents and teachers and--there to hear the president's education speech; and instead they hear the president's announcement that we had been hit by a terrorist attack. And so that was the first time I had heard anything significant beyond this plane and who in the world would do this. And when he said terrorist attack, I said, "Oh my God, this not the [Alfred P.] Murrah [Federal] Building [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma]"; you know, this is not domestic terrorism. I kind of felt like this is global and bad. And he also announced we were going back to Washington, so there was no time to think. You know, we had to scramble. And we were totin' all our stuff anyway, because we were headed back on the last leg. And because it had been a short trip, for me it was just a carry-on type bag. So I just--I had to haul my, my suitcase, my laptop, my big straw purse, you know, haul it, like really run. They had us run to the motorcade and zip across town to the airport to leave. Story_ID: 117447 Speaker 1: And I was calling, checking in with my desk, couldn't barely get through on the cell phone with anything, kept trying to dial. And I'm sitting there holding it and it rang, and I looked and it was my sister calling from Atlanta [Georgia]. And so I answered it because it was a person, and maybe I could get her to make a call for me from a landline. And she said, "Where are you? Where, where are you? Are you safe?" And I said, "Of course I'm safe. I'm with the President [George W. Bush]. Of course, I'm safe." She said, "'Cause I heard about the plane crash. Where are you?" I said, "I'm in Florida. We're getting ready to go back, and I'll check in with you once I have a chance to check in. Would you call, call my job and tell 'em this in case I can't get through?" And, and she said, "Ya'll are gone take off soon?" And I said, "Yeah, and don't tell Mama [Mattie Antoinette Mariano] I'm flying," 'cause our mother didn't fly. She lived with my sister, and I said, "Just please don't tell her that I'm flying 'cause I didn't want her to worry." She was a worry-wart. She would worry all day. She would worry herself into a tizzy, and, and plus she had a fear of flying, so she didn't know that I was flying right then. So I basically asked my sister, the minister, to tell lies to our mother, which she proceeded to do for the next fourteen hours. And after we got to the airport, I checked in with my bureau chief here, Sandy. I told her we were getting ready to leave Sarasota [Florida]. We probably would get a briefing on the plane, and I would call in pool reports from the plane. She said, "Okay, a plane has hit the Pentagon; I gotta go." And I didn't know at that point that we were talking be--beyond New York. But my sister knew about the Pentagon plane, and that's what she was referring to when she said I heard about the plane crash. So she nev--just never got a chance to tell me that it was that plane. Speaker 2: Okay, so you ended up in, in the air with the president flying ov--you're on Air Force One, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Flying around for I don't know how many hours until they figured out? Speaker 1: We circled at--for at least three--we--I noticed that we were able to keep the same Florida local affiliate for the entire flight. And we--you know we had no idea where we were going, but we cleared--when we, we got on the plane, I said, "There's no way we can go back to Washington because they had a crash at the Pentagon. Why would they take him back there?" So I knew we'd probably have to go somewhere else. Speaker 2: So where, where did you wind up? Speaker 1: We wound up going to an airbase in Louisiana. I wanna say Offutt Air Force Base [sic, Offutt AFB, Nebraska is the location of USSTRATCOM], but it might be a different name. I can't remember all the names now, but we went--we went to Louisiana. And we were flying in and saw the country gettin' low, you know. And I said, "Is this--are we in Lou--are we in the Gulf Coast or are we in Mexico?" you know? What if we've landed in another country? 'Cause if he had gone that close to Canada or that close to Mexico, and technically he left the border, would--wouldn't there be ramifications for that. That--isn't that called abdication? Like, would they tell us we were in Florida or Louisiana or Mobile, Alabama, and we're actually in Mexico? You know, I was having all these random thoughts, but we were in Louisiana at, at a military base, which was on high alert. And the soldiers were on the--on the runway with machine guns when we came off. And he made a statement there at that airbase. They asked us to hold it until we were in the air again. So I, I thought once we were on the ground we'd stay on the ground. But no, we took off again and went from there to [United States] Strategic Command in Nebraska [USSTRATCOM, Offutt AFB], so we're talking maybe from about 10:45--10:55 that morning until around 6:00 P.M. or so that evening-6:00 or 7:00 that evening--about eight, nine hours total. Speaker 2: So what were you privy to in terms of the conversation on the plane? I mean, did they--was it--I mean, in a situation like--at a time like this, I would guess a lot of things was just top secret--top secret--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah, absolutely--very little. They shared very little with [Press Secretary] Ari Fleischer. They did tell us that the president had called [Russian president] Vladimir Putin in Russia to let him know that we were under attack and I guess, and don't push that red button (laughter)--don't push that red button because we've been attacked; we're not the attacker. He also spoke with the vice president--Vice President [Dick] Cheney and, and with his National Security Advisor Condi Rice [Condoleezza Rice], who were in the Situation Room back at the White House. When we got to Strategic Command, you know, they had stripped us down to what they called the nuclear bunker pool. So where there were twelve of us when we arrived in Louisiana, they had stripped us down to five to take with him to Strategic Command. And they told us we don't know how many days we'll be out. We'll just let you know when we're going back. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so this is--so this is your last year in the White House. This is 2--2001 this is going, right? Speaker 1: No, I was there until 2002. I left in June of 2002. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, so you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --were there through the beginning of 2002, at least. Speaker 1: Well, you know, that, that whole day was kind of harrowing. And even though--even though we clearly were protected and safe, I felt we also were disposable, you know? Like, what's to stop anybody from doing anything to take out the President of the United States? That's still possible. And then you become one of the X number of others who died with him (laughter)--the anonymous others. So you come to grips with some mortality in that situation. Story_ID: 117448 Speaker 1: Now the subsequent activities of the [President George W.] Bush Administration--I mean the--an [2001] invasion of Afghanistan, you know, to find Osama Bin Laden, which they didn't--they weren't able to do, and then the--well, subsequent--well, the, the invasion of Iraq, which, which astonished me at home 'cause I did--I, I knew they didn't have anything to do with it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, and the-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --whole debate about WMD [Weapons of Mass Destruction]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --who had and who didn't and-- Speaker 1: So that was beginning to cook up while--before--while you were there, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you-- Speaker 2: All of that cooked up--the "Axis of Evil"--WMD, you know, the war against terror and how you have to--we have to come up with a new way of fighting these things, erosion of civil liberties. What--that was the beginning of us becoming an ID-based society, where you know there were many rights of citizenship that did not involve you having to dra--drag out your driver's license. But look at what we live with today where they want you to show your driver's license to get the discount card at the grocery store. All of those are legacies of 9/11, and the erosion of freedoms, freedoms that we willingly parted with for the sake of protecting our national security. Speaker 1: What were the discussions around the White House around those--I mean, did you--I mean, Republicans are always concerned about big government, and yet this is a--I think we have our biggest government emerged-- Speaker 2: Created a-- Speaker 1: --after this. Speaker 2: --brand new federal agency, yeah--added to the bureaucracy, so to speak, by creating the Department of Homeland Security. Not really, it was sort of like this is what we've got to do--almost like everyone made a uniform decision. This is what we've got to do. Story_ID: 117449 Speaker 1: Okay, it seems to me I, I don't--now you, you left in 2002. What, what was--what was--did you--did you wanna leave the White House at this juncture, or did you-- Speaker 2: Yes, I wanted-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to leave. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had really started to feel some fatigue with the travel, the personal sacrifice, all of that around 2000. And so yeah, I was looking for what you do after that. Because when I got promoted to that beat in '95 [1995], it wasn't really part of my plan, so I felt like I got loaded into a canon and fired out of a canon. So once you've been catapulted that way, you can't just do any old thing after that. You have to come up with something that's challenging, you know. I wanted a challenge, and I also wanted a break. And I was viewing the White House be--as golden handcuffs, where it glitters, and it's shiny and coveted, but it's a prison in a lot of ways because you're limited in what you can do; and you'd better go somewhere better from that and not down. You need to go up from that and not down. So when you're that far up on the top, how do you--how do you trans- transcend? And so it was a challenge to really sort out what I wanted to, where I wanted to go with it. And I said I'd gotten intrigued by national security prior to 9/11 really and foreign affairs, so I decided to--my bureau chief came with an offer to do world service, as in how we put the news together for people in foreign countries. And I said what we're dealing with right now, I'd like to do that. So I became an editor, but I also wrote--was still writing. I did, you know, news analyses and whatnot. Speaker 1: Okay, so your official title was World Services Editor-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, for AP [Associated Press]. So well, what are the highlights of that period of time? Speaker 2: Oh, the war in Afghanistan popped off. I ended up having to do a temporary stint as our foreign affairs editor, because the foreign affairs editor left in the midst of that. That's when the really grim things started happening like beheadings. And so shepherding coverage about that was odd. I began to, to do some globetrotting with someone other than presidents and first ladies, you know. So I did some travel with then-Secretary of State [HM Gen.] Colin Powell. So it was on--more on a diplomatic stance and different. Having this dual posture of being an editor sometimes and supervising reporters who things, and being a writer sometimes and traveling was, was kind of rough going, you know. But I said I wanted a big challenge when I left the White House, now I've got it. Things have since settled down a, a whole lot, because that's where I was professionally. Personally, I said September 11 had taught me that I needed to get back to basics. I needed to, to shore up my personal family relationships, and give those more love than I had been, you know. So I decided to--I said this will give me the chance to do things like go to Atlanta [Georgia] and spend more time with my mother [Mattie Antoinette Mariano], and hold the nieces and nephews that come while they're babies, and things like that; and that was nice. Scaling it back a bit off the daily grind of the White House was a very good move, and I don't regret that one bit. Story_ID: 117450 Speaker 1: All right, okay, so 2004 you were appointed news editor for the Associated Press's regional reporters here in [Washington] D.C., right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so what were your duties there? I mean, they're almost self-explanatory, but, but (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I sort of moved away from the foreign affairs realm and back to a domestic policy bailiwick by handling the reporters who did the stories for the states from Washington [D.C.]. It was more of a pure editing role and not the bifurcated function I had by writing analyses and still doing reporting on top of editing. So it was pure editor, more reporters, and dealing with domestic issues. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But--well, let me just ask you about 2--2003. I didn't--I wanna ask this question. I may just go on and ask it. But there's been a lot of talk since 2003, when the Iraq War was launched, that the press basically gave [George W.] Bush a pass, you know, on that. I know a lot of the network news media--I've heard people actually say on the air that they weren't as tough on the Bush Administration as they should have been, you know, in terms of the Iraq War. So do you have any feelings about that? Speaker 2: I think that there were some people who were still very tough, you know. I think of [Hearst Newspapers White House columnist] Helen Thomas, who was very tough on Bush and every president that came through there. I also think that the White House press corps had changed personnel a good bit. Many of them were people who had been on the campaign trail with Bush and were chummy with him. And I also think that the Bush White House developed a modus operandi that made it a daily struggle to push for access. So when you have to fight so many battles every day, it's like death by a thousand paper cuts; you get fatigued. And I think the press corps became exhausted with the battles. And when you're constantly battling that way, it's hard to hold up that torch for freedom. You know, when, when it's just a struggle to say I gotta keep my press credentials, so I have to make sure I appeal to their six times a week or some--you know, various small, little access battles were going on constantly. So I think they were punch-drunk from that, exhausted from that. You know how Muhammad Ali would exhaust his competitors by going into the rope-a-dope? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Now they were doing--they were rope-a-doped by the White House and, and forced to fight a--fight constantly until they were tired. So it's--it, it--I think they just lost the energy for the fight. Story_ID: 117451 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's an analysis I hadn't heard of that before. That's--so, so well what happened as the news editor for the Regional Reporter? So you, you--you're basically doing editing mostly, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Yes, basically. Speaker 2: A good deal of peace and quiet (laughter). You know, I did things like--that I had not had a chance to really do while I was globetrottin' around, like buy a house. So it was a settling time for me. And, and it gave me a chance to do formally what I had been doing informally for many years, and that is shaping and mentoring younger journalists. And to see them blossom was nice--see them come along and blossom, because some of them today, you know, today there's--there--a few of them are still around. And I've sent one off to the 'Wall Street Journal'; and one is on the camp--political campaign beat, has done the White House beat; one-- Speaker 1: What, what, what was that mechanism for that, the in--internship with AP [Associated Press] or, or something through the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] or what? Speaker 2: Oh, well, you mean what started that in me before I began to shape the reporters I had? Speaker 1: No, I mean what is--what is a formal pro--process of mentoring? You did have some kind of former pro--process of mentoring or, or was it-- Speaker 2: It was more informal-- Speaker 1: --just informal, okay. Speaker 2: --informal--AP interns; people who would approach me at NABJ saying, "I need a mentor." Other people who would say, "I saw your article. Would you in--mentor me"--and, and willfully trying to help people. But I had been mentoring fellow journalists since my first year as a journalist really. So we're talkin' since the late 1980s. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your, your role as a mentor and editor set up the position you took in 2010 as the first ever race and ethnicity editor at AP? Speaker 2: No, not really (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 117452 Speaker 1: I had been, at that point, regional editor for about six years, and I was feeling, again, that I needed a challenge. But I was looking around at the demographic change in this country and said: "How in the world is this industry going to cover news in the future if it doesn't begin to get its arms around the way the audience has changed?" If you don't know your audience, you can't possibly communicate well with anyone. And the industry was very retrenched, in terms of how it dealt with minorities, how it dealt with this news. Again, harkening back to that same conversation I had with Harmon Perry in my mother's dining room, how can you change things from the inside? So I thought it would be prescient to begin to get a grip on the demographic changes now, and find a way to speak to these audiences with the information they're looking for. I remember reading reports about social media habits of people of color, and what--found they were the biggest--that minorities, especially blacks and Hispanics, were the biggest users of Twitter. So I said, well, that's because they're looking for information, and maybe we need to make the effort to give them the information they're looking for. 'Cause see then you reach an audience, and that's an area of growth, where given what our industry has undergone, you need to find new audiences and you need to find growth; so why not do it now before it all reaches critical mass? Then you have a--you have a process in place where you know how to get that done. So that's where my head was with, and figured why not give it a try? So AP [Associated Press] said yeah, let's do that. And it's been quite an experiment to try to get things going from scratch, because by doing it this way--of course I had nothing. They gave me nothing so I had to get creative in terms of trying to make sure we meet demand. And it's still a challenge, still very much an uphill struggle, but it's necessary. You know, race can be such a greasy pig to try to grab and explain properly. You don't know what's racial and what's not racial, and that--because of that, we tend to minimize it; we tend not to want to talk about it; we tend to wanna try to report it in a dumbed-down fashion; we tend to want to try to make it apply to everybody. We tend to want to not, not rub sensitivities raw. And it's almost impossible to be effective at it if you don't do any of those things. So at some point, someone has to make a good-faith effort to try to do it, to learn how to do it right. And that's where my head was with that too; like, why not--why can't we be the one to try to do it? I mean, the AP has done this with everybody--everything else in the industry. We got the industry going on CRTs [cathode ray tubes]. We've expanded into new horizons since using the telegraph to convey information. So to me this was the equivalent of what they were talking about in the 1840s, 1850s when the AP came along, about how to--how to better give information to the people according to what they want. And, and I think other media indus--entities will be smart to do that too and not look at it like "I got to report on the minorities" and--almost like it's an anthropological project, or reporting it like this is-"Gee, look at what minorities are doing today." It's--no, you treat it with the sophistication that it's due. You add--you, you provide this coverage with the same level of thoroughness, depth, and follow-up that you would give to sports, or business, or politics, or entertainment. Story_ID: 117453 Speaker 1: I mean, AP's [Associated Press] role in this would be to educate the American pub--public just in terms of race and ethnicity, 'cause-- Speaker 2: Well, that's how our industry's role. We have a--we have a responsibility to inform. And we have a respon--we have a responsibility to impart information that people can translate into knowledge. You know, that's, that's what this whole industry was created for, so people will know what was going on, so the governed would know what the governors are doing, so you understand what's happening in the society where you live. And doesn't this qualify something that's happening in the society where we live? I mean, it's going on around us all day, every day. We, we have to accept the notion that the demographics have changed. And the people we are talking to now are not your, you know, couple with 2.2 children livin' in Kansas in a house with a white picket fence; everyone looks different now. They're coming from countries all over the world, you know. We can't take the 1950s approach to who the audience is anymore; it's just not gonna work. Speaker 1: Yeah, the whole 9-1-1 [9/11, September 11, 2001] disaster kind of spoke to some of that in a--in a profound way. I mean, the, the people that actually died were, were a diverse group of people. There-- Speaker 2: Yes, I mean-- Speaker 1: --the victims after the incident; the, the angry white Americans were going after Sikhs that--thought they were Muslims and-- Speaker 2: Thinking they were--yes-- Speaker 1: --all kinds of-- Speaker 2: --Sikhs thinking they were Muslims just because they wear a headpiece, and--look, the very pool that traveled with the president on 9/11 was a diverse pool. I mean, the pool of twelve reporters that were there included three--no, four black people, a Pakistani American, an Egyptian American, white women, white men, an Asian American. That was a very diverse pool of just the reporters who were with the president. When that twelve got paired down to five, three of the five were bla--African Americans. So that alone tells you the country had changed before the scab got pulled off and you saw what the wound really was there. And you gotta deal with that. Story_ID: 117454 Speaker 1: Okay, so what have been some of the successes of, of this initiative by AP [Associated Press] at this point? Speaker 2: Of the race and ethnicity coverage? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, starting off at the bat--off the bat, we did a FOIA [Freedom of Information Act request]. At least this is a story I'm very proud of. There had been some scattered local reports about a cemetery in Folsom, California, where the graves had the N-word on 'em--"Here lies" N-word, or here lies-"Transplanted from N-word Hills Cemetery." And these people had been made to what was supposed to be a dignified resting place with an epithet. And some of the dead people in those graves were white people; some were white children; some were black children. They, they were from a time where people gave that name to a geographic area, and so these bodies, when they were moved to build a damn in Folsom, nobody thought anything about calling it N-word Hills Cemetery on the gravestones; no one gave a thought. And we filed a FOIA request to--in understanding from the Army Corps of Engineers just who made the decision to put these graves there like that in the first place. And the Army Corps was shocked by its own laxness in that situation. And their response to our FOIA, they issued an apology and said we'll get to the bottom of how this ended up this way. And it ended up being caught in a triangulation of local, state, county ordinances with federal corps responsibilities. And the upshot of it was some subcontractor of a subcontractor just didn't care, and we reported this, and that story got great mileage. And the Army Corps changed the resp--changed some of its procedures because of it; the local county made the decision to take those--take that name off those graves and put new graves down. So that felt like some progress there. Speaker 1: And by FOIA you mean the Freedom of In-- Speaker 2: Freedom of Information-- Speaker 1: --formation-- Speaker 2: --Act Request, to try to look at the documents behind--what--you know, it had been 50 years earlier. What happened? You know, how did this end up like this? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the story we're proud of. We did a piece explaining the black spies during the Civil War and who they were, like Harriet Tubman and some of the great things that they did. And that story got a lot of mileage. You really gotta begin with the history because so much of it has been untold. So any time you can do reporting that puts things in historical context is smart. Ju--for the fiftieth anniversary of the [1963] March on Washington this year we did a comprehensive package explaining why there weren't very many Hispanics at that march; explaining the role of immi--what, what it meant to immigrants; the Gay Rights Movement and Bayard Rustin and his role there as an organizer. All of that was incorporated into the spot copying, and, and that gay--that, that Bayard Rustin was a closeted gay man. In dealing with this monumental moment in history, we dusted off the original AP coverage from 1963 and, and put that out there, again, trying to give people an understanding of the history. We have to remember and be very aware of the fact that in getting our education, we weren't told a lot of things, so you can't assume people know all this stuff right off the bat; you just can't assume that. So I try to deal with the fundamentals of the history. I personally wrote an analysis this year about the meaning of the president of the United States identifying himself with a dead young black man and why that mattered; that it was significant for President Obama to say, "I was Trayvon Martin" X number of years ago. So down the line, these will become even more important. The value of them will be magnified through the lens of history, because you're writing the first draft of history all the time with everything that we do. I think our industry has moved too far away from understanding that as we go about putting out information. There's too much acceptance of inaccuracy, you know. People like to say oh, I didn't get that right; oh, I'll fix it, don't worry about it. But you have to value accuracy in what you're reporting because it matters. Down the line historian rely on media accounts, as they begin to put the history together. So if you're giving them whack (laughter)--whack media accounts, they have to hunt that much harder for the truth. Help 'em out; give 'em accurate information from the jump. Speaker 1: Exactly. We live in a time--well, today, as we sit here, this is 150th anniversary of the Civil War and the 50th anniversary of the Civil Rights Movement, so every year kind of marks something significant event, you know, 60--you know. Speaker 2: Oh, with the seismic social change of the 1960s, we're gonna hit 50th anniversaries of significance from now--for the next decade, you know. And, and we do have to think about that; we do. I mean, from now until 2023, we're going to deal with the 50th anniversary of pretty much everything from the Civil Rights Act to man walking on the moon to Watergate. And we only end up with retelling the history. So at least the previous didn't--generations did the best job they could in trying to tell the story, so try to improve it beyond what they did. Don't try to make it worse. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm messing the reporting of this up (laughter). Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 117455 Speaker 1: Now what--now what are you going to do next? Now you--you're--are--do you have any retirement plans or plans to write a book or, or to--I mean, what, what are you--you're, you're a good writer; you've seen a lot, you know. What, what do you do next? Speaker 2: Everyone has told me, "Sonya, write a book," "Sonya, write a book." And even I've said, "Yeah, I'm, I'm writin' a book." And I've written some things. I should write a book. I--sometimes I feel like I wanna do it; sometimes I don't, you know. I, I commit to doing it, but I don't really get it done. I have other books I wanna do. Quietly as it's kept, in terms of political reporting, black women have been at that vanguard for a long time, especially when it comes to reporting on presidents. It's been us up in that White House a lot. So that's an untold story. I wanna find those untold stories and tell bold stories, even if it amounts to looking back through the history to get it right. I want to do that. I want to dabble in some entrepreneurial pursuits in terms of how we can get creative about using the mediums that are available to us and the changes that they've brought, like imbuing the blogosphere with more journalistic standard, using it in new ways, trying to get a grip on understand black Twitter (laughter). I think about all those things. I used to say, you know, "I'm gonna go to law school if I can't make this journalism thing work out" (laughter). So, I don't know. Maybe I'll play around with that. I, I--I'm very open and lookin' at a whole lot of things that I wanna do. I've, I've had people tell me, "You know Sonya, you need to take yourself to a newspaper and be a columnist," but I don't see that. I've had others tell me, "I think your name should be in play to be the editor of a newspaper," but I don't see that. I'm trying to follow true passions about the craft and not vicissitudes of the industry. And so all I'm--I'm open to a lot of suggestion, but right now everybody, even my sister, sister the author, has said, "Write a book"; I'm sick of it; write a book (laughter), so. Speaker 1: So you're still--you're still deliberating about what-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the next move is. Speaker 2: Yes, I think a--I think a book will get written, just which one I don't know. Speaker 1: Are, are you enjoying what you're doing now? Speaker 2: Sometimes, and sometimes I just wanna walk out ev--(laughter)--sometimes I just wanna walk away, but I said, "I started this. I need to finish it, and I need to make sure it's in a good place." I need to make sure that this foot--that this is a footprint we can put on the industry. I see now what people are startin' to think about covering race under those terms. Right after AP [Associated Press] named me to my position--about a year later maybe-NPR [National Public Radio] created its race reporting project with some grant money. As I was coming into my position, the [Robert C.] Maynard Institute [for Journalism Education (MIJE)] started the 'America Wire.' You've got New America Media there, which is a consortium of minority and ethnic media, like eight hundred or so of them, and they combine their resources. The 'New York Times' just named a race and ethnicity reporter. That's her title, race and ethnicity reporter. I felt good about that because I felt, even thought the industry hardly ever pauses the recognize such things, I wanna say, "We did all of that, and we did it first," you know. We were at the gate on it. We opened the door on that, and I want to see more people in the industry, more, more organizations in the industry walk through that door. Their headed in that direction. You know, you've got--NBC's got the Grio and NBC Latino. And Fox News has Fox Latino. And, and AO--HuffPost [the Huffington Post] has HuffPost Black Voices. You know, you've got a lot going on out there in, in trying to really engage these audiences. So if you're a media outlet and you're not trying to go in that direction, you're headed up the wrong path. So I want my imprimatur on that. If that's a change that I helped to effect, I'm down with that program. Story_ID: 117456 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major move that you would--you wish you hadn't made or could go back and undo? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, I wouldn't have dropped out of college [University of Georgia] in the first place (laughter). But you know, God has His way and His plan. So if I hadn't, maybe I would not have been in the place I needed to be at the time I needed to be to land in the place I needed to be to do the things we just spent the past few hours talking about. So I think it was all divinely ordered, and I gotta respect that. But if it were left to me, yeah, I just would have plowed right on through University of Georgia and then probably would've ended up working at an insurance company (laughter). Speaker 1: Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: I--I'm worried about our children, especially our girls. I'm worried about our girls. You know our girls are smart and wonderful, and they're never really told that often enough. They're told, "Wear these tight clothes for me," "Have my baby, and have more babies," and "Don't be athletic, "Don't be smart," and it's counterintuitive, it's counterproductive. Our girls need more love, and they need to be told you're smart and you're valuable. And there's a lot you can do, and don't accept these mixed messages that this society is sending you, that to succeed you have to be a 'Real Housewife' or on 'Love and Hip Hop' or--you know, you, you gotta align with the celebrity rapper and athlete, and you gotta shake (laughter) it to get ahead. There's so much more you can do. You're--our young women have an ingenuity and a creativity that's unparalleled in my opinion, and they need to be validated with it; that's all. They just--I worry about them, them with that. Because of our legacy in this country of slavery and families being torn apart, it'll fall to them more than anybody to hold our families together, just like it's been for generations of black women. And I don't know that they're, they're well prepared for it. I don't feel my generation's done a good job preparing them for it. And I know as a girl, I wasn't told, "Go run and jump and be active and play with the boys," you know, with--almost socialized to be housecats. And that's a road to nowhere in a lot of ways. I, I want our young women to believe more in themselves, and I want us, the rest of society, to validate them more than we do. So yeah, that's a concern I have for the black community. The value of it--you know, work, work with your education wherever you can get it. Work with your education. You know, don't have shame about it. And I don't know that the--I don't know that the losses we've suffered since the Great Recession is easy for us to recover from, you know. I don't--I don't know that, that we'll get out of that trap fast enough for some of the current youth to get what they need, which is validation and support, you know. I feel for our young men, who it's getting to the point they can't walk the street in innocence. I, I guess I want--I want this society to care more about their innocence. And just because they grow tall and muscular, there's still something about them that's innocent. And dragging 'em off into the criminal justice system is not exactly an innocence preservation plan. So care about--I want--I, I wish we could care more about the innocence of black children, and particularly black boys. Other than that, I want manna from heaven and safe homes for everybody (laughter), 'cause the--otherwise, we continue to suffer, you know. We don't--we don't have--we suffer when we don't have to. Story_ID: 117457 Speaker 1: Again, look--looking back at everything you've done to this point today, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: You sure I can't get somebody else to come in and articulate that (laughter)? I hadn't put a lot of thought into my legacy. I guess if I had to say anything about a legacy, I hope I've shown somebody that anybody can do this kind of thing you set your mind to it. Don't think that becoming the eyes and the ears for other people in the world is something that's reserved for the super smart people or the Ivy League graduates, the Harvard and Yale crowd or--you know. I want your average, regular little black girl from the west side of Atlanta [Georgia] to say I can do that. So--'cause I did it. I wasn't expecting it. Like I said, I, I was kind of nebulous about a goal, dropped out of college, and dropped back into college, and was kind of content going okay, well, I'll just work at Richway, you know. Without thinking about what life has handed you already, just decide to get out there and really do what you know you do well. You know you do it well, just do it. That's kind of Nike simple isn't it, but yeah, so. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now tell us something about--now, now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you ever get married or, or did you-- Speaker 2: No, I'm not-- Speaker 1: --got mar-- Speaker 2: --married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not married. I'm just a permanently occupied space (laughter). But no, I'm not married. Speaker 1: Any children or, or-- Speaker 2: No children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, lots of nieces and nephews. Speaker 1: Okay, so you have a extended family and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay--and significant pe--people in your life. Speaker 2: And I have a significant man. I do have a significant man, and that's what we are, significant (laughter). One of my friends jokingly called him Stedman [Graham] (laughter), but he's not Stedman 'cause I'm not Oprah [Winfrey] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: And you know a lot of people look at--(unclear) "Well, Oprah did it," but come on; Oprah is an outsized success. So it's hard to tell somebody who's, you know, sittin' in not the greatest school system in the world, and sometimes they dangle their participles that they can be Oprah. So maybe if we scale it back a little bit to just regular old Joe journ--Jane journalist--and you wanna do that? Okay, you can hold me up as an example of that, but you know, so. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there--is there anything that we have not discussed that we need to definitely mention or talk about in--before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Ooh, that's the kind of thing I think of tomorrow (laughter)--not gone think of that tomorrow. I can't--no, I can't think of anything right now. I'm good at thinking of it after you turn the camera off though (laughter). I was like I'm, I'm your girl for that. I'll come at it the last minute, but I'll marinate on it. Can I marinate on it while you ask your last question? Speaker 1: I suppose so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I suppose so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But thank you for your answers thus far. Story_ID: 117458 Speaker 1: But the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different, just a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, this is that gravestone question (laughter). This is-oh, "Your epitaph will be-" (laughter). (Pause) I don't know. I hope people will remember me as having done somethin' good for somebody. You know, one, one of my proteges told me, you know, "You can be a cold bucket of water sometimes," 'cause I often lack tact as I describe things or in the--in the--in the throes of journalism. You know, I can be less than tactful, especially when it comes to getting the things that need to be done done. So a lot of people haven't really seen that side--that, that kind side of me. So I hope somebody can remember that I was kind. My mother used to say, you know, like, "Be nice to be people 'cause you draw more flies with honey than vinegar." And I said to her, "Mommy, who wants more flies?" So maybe I hope they'll remember that I tried to put more honey than vinegar in this world. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Well, thank you. You're tough. Speaker 1: Oh--..