 Story_ID: 656309 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Deburst Gines [Denise Gines], interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please, your full name? Speaker 2: My name is David F. Richards, Jr. [HistoryMaker David Richards]. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: D-A-V-I-D; F is the middle initial; R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S, J-R. Speaker 1: And what does the F stand for? Speaker 2: Forest. Speaker 1: Spell Forest for me. Spell Forest for me. Speaker 2: F-O-R-E-S-T. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: March 19, 1929. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: In Sedalia, Missouri. Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: At my home at 4622 Lanier Drive, Savannah, Georgia, 31405. Speaker 1: All right. And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the 10th of February, 2017. Speaker 1: All right. And what was your former occupation? Speaker 2: My former occupation was in the U.S. Army. Speaker 1: All right, fantastic. Speaker 2: I've had various other occupations after retiring from the service. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, well, we will, will talk about that as well. Story_ID: 656310 Speaker 1: I'm just going to ask a few very basic questions, okay? What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite food? What do you like to eat? Speaker 2: No, not necessarily. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, I guess after traveling throughout the world with Uncle Sam all those years, that's the reason why vacations are just another thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No. Growing up in Missouri, we had all four seasons, and then you look forward to that. But after being here in Georgia, I guess the summertime is the favorite time. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite saying or quote? Speaker 2: My favorite saying and quote was when I was president of our class, before graduation [from C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri], was success awaits at labor's gates. Story_ID: 656311 Speaker 1: All right. Let's begin by talking about your family lineage, your genealogy. Tell me your mother's name and it--spell it for me, and when and where she was born, if you know that information. Speaker 2: Her name was Julia Christina Diggs Richards [Christina Diggs Richards], and she was born in Fayette, Missouri in 1898. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: She was 105 when she passed. Speaker 1: All right. Did your mother share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. It was a hectic time that she was going through, seeing two centuries passing and how they survived, and the number of people and siblings that were in her family that didn't survive some of the diseases during those times. There wasn't any medical-- Speaker 1: They didn't have much medical--okay. How many siblings did your mother have? Speaker 2: I believe she had eleven, and there was only three of them that survived. Speaker 1: And do you know what types of diseases there were--that was--that time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) During that time I don't recall whether or not it was scarlet fever or one of the diseases that wasn't curable at that particular time during those years. Speaker 1: How much education did your mother have? Speaker 2: She finished high school and went on to college and was a teacher. Speaker 1: Do you know what school she attended? Speaker 2: She taught in Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas] there in Arkansas and in Muskogee, Oklahoma, and did work at the State Fair Community College for adult education in Sedalia, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. What university or college did she attend? Speaker 2: It was George R. Smith College. Speaker 1: And that was where? Speaker 2: In Sedalia, Missouri. Speaker 1: Sedalia, Missouri, okay. And what about your grandparents on your mother's side, her mother and father? Did you know your grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother for a brief, short, period of time. She passed when I was at an early age, and I don't know too much about, about her. Speaker 1: Do you know her name? Speaker 2: Annie Diggs [Anna Diggs]. Speaker 1: And do you know anything about her husband, what his name would be? Speaker 2: William Diggs, I believe. I never did meet him. Story_ID: 656312 Speaker 1: Let's go to your, your father. Tell me your father's name and where and when he was born. Speaker 2: My father's name was David F. Richards, Sr. [David Richards, Sr.], and he was born in Howard County, Missouri. And he was born in 1896, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. And how much education did he have? Speaker 2: He had about a sixth grade education. Speaker 1: And how many siblings did he have? Speaker 2: He had, there were six siblings that he had. Speaker 1: All right. And what did he do as an occupation? Speaker 2: After World War I [WWI], he was working with the Missouri Pacific Railroad as a blacksmith helper. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And he retired from that after forty-two years. Speaker 1: Was he, was he in the [U.S.] military at all? Speaker 2: Yes, in World War I. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about his parents? Speaker 2: His, his mother was named Susie Richards, and his father was named William Richards. Speaker 1: And do you know much about them? Speaker 2: No, I really don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know where they, where they lived? Speaker 2: No, they came from somewhere over in Howard County, Missouri at an early age and settled in Sedalia, Missouri. Story_ID: 656313 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother [Christina Diggs Richards] and father [David Richards, Sr.]. Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Well, I think that it happened when he came back from service. And after World War I [WWI], they met and it blossomed out into a happy marriage, and they were married for sixty-three years before he passed. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you as a child growing up, tell me about your household. How many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: I had one sister. Speaker 1: And what was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Julia Violetta [Julia Richards Harris]. Story_ID: 656314 Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Well, I guess going to school and doing the things that other young boys would be doing; going to, going to school, going to church, and enjoying life. Story_ID: 656315 Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood? Well, let's start with your house. The house that you grew up in, can you describe it for me, and then maybe a square block, and tell me who lived in the neighborhood, who your friends were? Speaker 2: Yes. I was born in the house that I lived in, and it was a close, close knitted neighborhood. I knew everyone there in the streets. And so there were, I believe maybe five or six children that were in the block, and we all went to school together. Speaker 1: Okay. I'd like you to give me a description of the house that you lived in. Did you have indoor plumbing? What, you know, how--did your mother [Christina Diggs Richards] cook? What type of stove you had? Did you share a bedroom? You know, kind of give me some descriptions of your house. Speaker 2: Well, we had a three bedroom house, and I guess we did have indoor plumbing, one of the few houses during that time that did have indoor plumbing. And so, that was about the extent of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you each have--your sister [Julia Richards Harris] and yourself--each have your own bedroom? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, if you would walk a square block, were there just houses? Was it all residential? Were there--where was the closest store, and who owned the stores? Speaker 2: There was a store on the corner from us that was owned by--I forget the name of the store. But we traded with the people there, because it was close by. Speaker 1: And who were some of your friends in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, I had--all of them were my friends, because we grew up together. Speaker 1: I know, but I'm asking you for their names. Who was your buddy? Who did you hang out with? What kind of games did you all play in the street? Speaker 2: Well, I really didn't hang out, because after school I would deliver papers. And after delivering the papers in the morning and in the evening, it was time for me to get my lessons. And when I graduated from high school [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri], four days after graduation from high school, I went into the [U.S. military] service. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's stay in elementary school [Lincoln School, Sedalia, Missouri] right now, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I want to talk more about the relationship that you had with, you know, your friends in the community. You know, so as a child, what activities--did you just have church activities? Did you--what other activities in the neighborhood were there for you to do? I understand that in elementary school, you know, usually kids do play on the weekends. Did you play baseball? What type--I mean what was it that you did besides go to school? Speaker 2: There was very little activities as far as athletics in that small town. And they had sandlot baseball, or something like this here. But as I say, most of the time I would be trying to make a dollar, which wasn't, wasn't very much at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, yes, because this was during the Depression [Great Depression]. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Story_ID: 656316 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you said your father [David Richards, Sr.]--what did your father do? Speaker 2: He was a blacksmith helper with the Missouri Pacific Railroad. That was a railroad town. Speaker 1: And what--your mother [Christina Diggs Richards] was a teacher? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. At what school did she teach? Where did she teach? Speaker 2: She taught in Muskogee, Oklahoma and Philander Smith [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas], and then at the community college [State Fair Community College] in Sedalia, Missouri, for adult education. Speaker 1: Okay. During this time when you are in elementary school [Lincoln School, Sedalia, Missouri], your mother is a teacher? Speaker 2: No, she was a housewife. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so she was a housewife at that time? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 656317 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: It was C.C. Hubbard [Lincoln School, Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers? Were any of them influential in anything that you might have wanted to achieve? Speaker 2: Well, all of them. It was a close knit community, and if I got out of line, well, they would always report that to my mother [Christina Diggs Richards]. And so they were very instrumental in my career, and encouraging me to do the best that I could. Speaker 1: In elementary school, did you think about what you would want to be when you grew up? Speaker 2: Yes. I had an ambition to be a physician, because of a doctor that was very close to the family. And so, I was thinking that might what I would want to do. Speaker 1: Okay. And were there doctors that came to visit? Were there--okay, we're gonna stop. Can we stop? Story_ID: 656318 Speaker 1: If you think about a sound, a sight, or a smell that would take you back to that time, what would you tell me? What sounds take you back to that time? What do you hear when you're out playing or walking or going to school, or even sitting in your house? Speaker 2: Really, I guess during that time it didn't register too much. And as far as the smells, I have no knowledge of any particular thing. I was very fortunate that my father [David Richards, Sr.] was working and we weren't bothered too much with the Depression [Great Depression], because he was doing the employment. And so, I really can't say that it was too much of a hassle or inconvenience during that time as far as I know, because I may have been too young to even realize it. I never thought about it. Story_ID: 656319 Speaker 1: Where did you play in the, in the neighborhood? Was there a playground? Was there a field? Where did you play during the day? Speaker 2: No, we played in the yard, we had an area large enough to play croquet. And we had a park that was maybe two blocks away, and we could go over there and play sandlot baseball or softball. And I played basketball at school, but other than that, that's--we didn't have a designated playground during that time, or nowhere in our block. It was just residential homes. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your mother [Christina Diggs Richards], was your mother a good cook? Speaker 2: Yes, she was. She, she liked to cook, and her specialty was in home economics. And she was going to go to Bethune-Cookman [Bethune-Cookman College; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida] as an instructor for Mary McLeod Bethune when she was president there, but then, well, her mother [Anna Diggs] took ill and she decided to forgo that and come back to Missouri and take care of her mother until she passed. Speaker 1: All right. So, did you like to smell your mother's cooking? Was there some specialty that you looked forward to when she would cook it? Speaker 2: Well, we liked the clover leaf rolls, and anything that she cooked, and the cakes and the pies. She taught me how to do the cooking in case something would happen to her, or if I got married to someone who wasn't going to cook or couldn't cook. So, I had no problem with cooking. And I guess that was my hobby more or less before leaving high school [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri], on the weekends. Speaker 1: All right. Did you belong to any other organizations, maybe the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or the 4-H club? Any, any type of organizations? Speaker 2: Well, I belonged to the Boy Scouts; we had the Boy Scouts. But other organizations, I have no knowledge of, because as I say, in a small town like this here, we didn't have a lot of the athletic programs and things like that. Speaker 1: How many people do you think lived in this town? Speaker 2: I would estimate maybe thirty-five thousand, or something like that. Speaker 1: All right. So, in your neighborhood, was it totally segregated? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. We had--well, we had segregation in the school and into the hotels and things like that. So, anytime they would have meetings or things like this, the people would house them into their homes. They'd bring them into their homes, and then most of the time they would end up at our house for their meals. My mother was the chef, I guess, I call it, and they always enjoyed coming there to eat. Speaker 1: What were your other chores? Speaker 2: Oh, my chores were bringing it the kindling and the coal when I would come in from delivering papers in the evening, and help feed the, the swine; we raised hogs. And so by that time, it was time for me to get my lessons and get ready for the early morning delivery of the papers again. Speaker 1: Okay. What age were you when you started delivering papers? Speaker 2: I would say around twelve or thirteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 656320 Speaker 1: All right so, let's talk about your elementary school. What was the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: It was C.C. Hubbard elementary school [Lincoln School, Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay, you did say that. So you went to school in the first, first grade, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, so this would have been about 1935. Tell me, who were your teachers? Do you remember any teachers? Speaker 2: Oh, there was Miss Richardson [ph.], Ms. Hubbard [Princess Webb Hubbard] and her daughter, Miss Hubbard; Miss Sadie Henderson, Professor Gooch [C.H. Gooch]. Those were in the elementary school. There was Miss Claire Horde [ph.], Miss Alma Alexander [ph.]. Speaker 1: It's amazing you remember them from elementary school. How was the school set up? Was there a classroom for each grade? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They changed the elementary school from Lincoln elementary school to C.C. Hubbard, because he was the, he was the principal there for a long period of time, and they were doing that to honor him. Speaker 1: Okay. And was Miss Hubbard, the Miss Hubbards who were the teachers there, were they related to him? Speaker 2: Yes, one of them was his wife and the other one was his daughter. Story_ID: 656321 Speaker 1: --Through school through eighth grade at, at, at Hubbard [Lincoln School, Sedalia, Missouri]. And, then what was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: It was C.C. Hubbard High [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and how did, how did--did you, did you walk to school? Were the two schools close? To you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was all in one building. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Two, two adjoining buildings. The elementary school was on one end and the high school was on the other end. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now in high school were you involved in activities like maybe the student council? Or were there any--you played basketball. Was there anything else that you were interested in in high school? Speaker 2: I belonged to the chorus and the choral group, and the debating. Also tried to play football until I got a broken leg. But other than that, that was about the extent of it. And then during that time, I was still delivering papers until graduation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, tell me about--do you want to tell us the story about playing football and how you broke your leg? Speaker 1: Well, I guess it's just one of those things that happened. It's a contact sport, and I was vying for a quarterback position and some more were vying for the same position. And so, I--the only thing I know is that on one of the plays a couple of them took vengeance out, and I got a broken leg. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. And, and the chorus, what did you, what part did you sing? Speaker 1: I was singing baritone. Speaker 2: And what was your favorite music? What type of music were you learning in the chorus at your school? Speaker 1: During that time we sang songs, some hymns and a few gospel songs. We didn't have all of the (background noise) type of gospel songs that they have now. Story_ID: 656322 Speaker 1: So, tell me about, about church. What, what church did you attend? Speaker 2: I attended Taylor Chapel Methodist Church [Taylor Chapel United Methodist Church, Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about your church. Speaker 2: Well, we had the boys section that we were always trying to see who would have the best attendance. And I was elected to go to the Methodist youth conference, representing the church. And we had social affairs to raise money for the church. And so it was a, a challenge, and it was a competitive thing. We only had very few people in the church, because it's a small community. Speaker 1: It was just a few. Do you remember who your pastor was? Speaker 2: We had Reverend A.L. Reynolds and Reverend Warwick [ph.], and I think after that it was--I was graduating from high school [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri] and I went right into [the U.S. military] service. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 656323 Speaker 1: In high school--let me see--what year did you graduate from high school [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]? Speaker 2: In May of 1946. Speaker 1: Okay, 19-, all right. And before--did you go to--was there a high school prom? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about the prom. Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was okay. We enjoyed going out dancing and having a nice time. The proms at that time weren't the same as what the proms are today. We didn't have any hotels or cafeterias where you'd go and hang out half the night and things like this. But you were, you were just thankful that you had made it to that point where you were having your junior or senior prom. Speaker 1: Did--okay, where was the prom held? Did you take a date? Speaker 2: No, I don't think I did. Speaker 1: Do you remember where the prom was held? Speaker 2: It was in, out at Liberty Park [Sedalia, Missouri]. They had a hall that would accommodate the, the people, of any size, for a dance or something like that. Story_ID: 656324 Speaker 1: Did your family go on any vacations? Speaker 2: Yes, with my father [David Richards, Sr.] being on the railroad [Missouri Pacific Railroad], being--we were able to take vacations every year. We had passes and we traveled each, each year going somewhere. And my mother [Christina Diggs Richards] was heavily involved in civic organizations, the National Council of Women organization [National Council of Negro Women] and church organizations, and they would be at various places. So, it didn't cost us anything, just putting in time to get a pass to go on the various railroads. And so, we looked forward to that each, each year. Speaker 1: Where were some of the places that you went on vacation? Speaker 2: Well, we went to Chicago [Illinois], St. Louis [Missouri], Kansas City [Missouri], New York [New York], Detroit [Michigan]; Meridian, Mississippi. Speaker 1: And what was it like traveling on the railroad? Speaker 2: Well, it was something that you got an enjoyable time for it. You'd pack up your lunches and you weren't allowed to be going into the dining rooms, or else--maybe so, but it was easier for my mother to fix lunches, and we would eat from the, from the lunch that she'd be preparing for us. Story_ID: 656325 Speaker 1: Tell me about--now this is still--this is right--we're, we're getting ready to graduate from high school [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]. But as a young man, where did your, where did you go to shop? What was shopping like? Was there a downtown? Was there a movie theater? You know, did you go to movies? Tell me some of the things that were going on in the town. Speaker 2: Well, we had a movie theater, and we'd go and look at the Westerns on Saturday afternoons; that would be an outing. And shopping was uptown, where we purchased clothing. And a drugstore for any medications, something like this. Speaker 1: Did you have a doctor's office in town? Was there a dentist? Where did you get healthcare? Speaker 2: We had a family doctor. And I guess a general practitioner took care of all of our needs, plus home remedies. I know my doctor came in and set my leg when I got it broken. So, he was able to do that. And as I say, they didn't have orthopedic surgeons and things like this here, as far as I know. Story_ID: 656326 Speaker 1: Now you're getting ready to graduate from high school [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]. And what makes you decide, or were you--what--how do you go to the [U.S.] military? Speaker 2: Well, during that time I think there was more of a sense of patriotism right at the close of the war. It had been completely declared, the close of World War II [WWII], and my father [David Richards, Sr.] was a veteran of World War I [WWI] and I wanted to follow in his footsteps. And four days after graduating from high school at seventeen years old, I was in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: Where did you go? Where was your first--what was your first stop? Where did you do basic training? Speaker 2: I did my basic training at Camp Lee, Virginia, which is now Fort Lee, Virginia. Speaker 1: And tell me what--was this your first experience really of being away from home? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: And so, tell me what that experience was like for you. Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't too bad, because you're in there with lots of more people. You're about the youngest one there, and there was a mixture of older people in there that couldn't read or write, and you found yourself writing letters for, for them and reading their mail for some of the older fellows that were in there. And after that, they thought that I was a commanding officer's son, and I was only four months after being seventeen years old. So, that was the extent of doing that basic training and everything like that. Speaker 1: You said they thought you were the commander's son? Why was that? Speaker 2: Beg your pardon? Speaker 1: Why was that, that they thought you were the commander's son? Speaker 2: Because I was so young. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: Right. I was the youngest one in that organization, I was only seventeen. Speaker 1: So, talk to me about the segregated Army. Speaker 2: Well, during that time it was all segregated. On one, one side of Camp Lee was for the Caucasians, and the other side was for the African Americans. During that time it was for Negroes or blacks, whatever you might want to distinguish it as. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you find that everything was working fine? Were there any, any problems? Speaker 2: Well, during that time it was a way of life, and you, you really didn't recognize so much about it, because you were there together. Until after you would get away from the in- instalu- installation, then you'd find where they'd be segregation in the outlying town in Virginia where it was definitely segregated. You couldn't go in these places, and things like this here. Story_ID: 656327 Speaker 1: When you finished Fort Lee [Camp Lee; Fort Lee, Virginia] basic training, where are you stationed next? Speaker 2: Well, around three months after I was in basic training, finishing basic training, I was shipped to Camp Stoneman, California [Camp Stoneman, Pittsburg, California] and going to the western Pacific. And that was when you found the rude awakening of and how fortunate you were growing up under conditions there that you can never fathom, where people had to eat out of garbage cans and things like this here. Speaker 1: Okay, and what happens next? Speaker 2: Well, the people were devastated and they had no way of life. And when we were at the dining facility, the mess hall, what we called it at that time, there was always food that was left, and it would be brought to the gate of the installation and the people would gather outside to get the results and the remnants of what was left from our meals because there was no other way of getting anything to eat. And that's when you really realized how fortunate you were, because you had never witnessed anything like that. You didn't even see it on TV, because we didn't have TV at home during that time, and so when these were situations like this, you were just wondering how is it that we were so fortunate that we didn't go without any food and everything like this here. And you had to wait and take it out of the garbage pails and things like this. And although it was good, it was all mixed, because that's the only food that they had coming into them. And the children and grown people there--it was--you would see how emaciated some of them were, because that was the only way of getting something to eat. Story_ID: 656328 Speaker 1: What were you trained in when you went into, into the service? What were you trained to do? Speaker 2: Well, we took infantry training, but during the segregated times, we would end up being in supply groups and transportation, or stevedores, manual labor, and things of this nature. And I was fortunate enough to know that when we got in the Philippines they were going to have an audition for anyone that had any knowledge or musical background, and it just so happened that I had played in the school band for about six years. And all of the music that we were having at that time for the [U.S.] Army--the marches and things of this nature--John Philip Sousa and 'Stars and Stripes Forever' ['The Stars and Stripes Forever'] and 'The Washington Post' things like this here. So, when they mentioned that you could go in and have an audition, I was in the transportation outfit. So, I readily went over and had an audition. And I picked up my clarinet, picked up a clarinet, and went through all the music, because this is what we'd been playing all along there in high school [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]. We didn't have the high performance and things like this; we were only playing marches. And so, it was very impressive to the people there that we were doing this, so I was automatically put in charge of the reed section and was promoted on account of my knowledge of music. And music was my forte at that particular time, and they--that was when we had the 227th Army band [ph.]. It originated there in the Philippines, and from there we went to Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] and we played for the ships coming in and going out. And I had been in the choral group, and we would sing over the radio on Sunday mornings. And we would go to Ryukyus' headquarters [Ryukyu Islands, Japan] once a month and put on a concert with all the military music and everything like this. We had a jazz band that had--we would go on the weekends and play for the officers' club up in the northern portion of, of Okinawa for the officers and their wives. And so, that was the way of life. Story_ID: 656329 Speaker 1: We didn't mention when you were in high school [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]--you, you did mention the, the chorus. But in high school, so that's where you began to play the clarinet? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I started playing the clarinet in the sixth grade [at Lincoln School, Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Oh, in the sixth grade. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So you were pretty good by the time you got to high school? Speaker 2: Right, that's the reason why I had no problem going in and playing all those marches. That was the only thing that we were doing. We didn't do those configurations and everything. We'd just have the parades and things like this. Speaker 1: Did you learn how to read music? Speaker 2: Yes, and that was one of the things that you had to. And my mother [Christina Diggs Richards] was a choir director for seventy-five years, and I was brought up in a musical environment, learning how to play the piano and reading music. And the music teacher, she would have us singing the songs by the notes. And each group, then you'd have to get up and sing your portion of it, and things like this here. And there was certain songs that if you went to that school, by the time you finished those four years of high school, you knew it front and back, like the "Hallelujah Chorus" ['Messiah,' George Frideric Handel], and 'Invictus' and things like this here. And so it stuck with you for years, and everything like this. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And we had, we had devotion services at the school every week. And we'd have assembly there and our professor would sing, would be singing hymns at that particular time. So, we would go into the auditorium and you would sing those songs, and you got graded on your performance. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So I see you had a really great background in music, so when you got to the [U.S.] Army you were able to be put in charge. So, I see why. All right, so now let me ask you about the officers' club. Now, everybody in your band--this was--because it was segregated, everyone was black. Did--the officers' club was for--it was just for white officers, wasn't it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was. Speaker 1: All right. So you played--it was all black entertainment that played in the white clubs? Speaker 2: Right. We had--I think it was around six or seven of us that played some old jazz songs that Tommy Dorsey and Bing Crosby and some of those giants were--and we had music there that we played for them, and it was in the northern part of Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Where did the black soldiers go out for entertainment? Where did they go? Was there a place that they went to? Speaker 2: Not--they would go to a little club or something like this here, but there wasn't any, any type of formal entertainment places. Story_ID: 656330 Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about being promoted, going to another rank? Was that something that was happening in, in your company? What company did you belong to? Speaker 2: Well, at that time it was one of those things of how you got promoted or when you'd be promoted. And so, there was a process that you would have to go through, and so often it would be that you weren't on the favorite list to get promoted. But you have to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) I'm sorry. Speaker 2: You have to have perseverance and just keep on doing what you, what you have to do. That's the reason why I always said that success awaits at labor's gates. Story_ID: 656331 Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-seven [1947] and 19--what happens in 1948? Speaker 2: Well, I was on Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] at that particular time. Speaker 1: Okay. And President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] does what? Speaker 2: Well, we left the Philippines and went, we left the Philippines in 1947 and went to Okinawa. And I was on Okinawa when President Truman signed the dese- desegregation order [Executive Order 9981]. And after that, I came back to the states there the first part of, or the latter part of 1948, when my tour had been completed. Speaker 1: And so, what happens next when you come back to the states? Speaker 2: It was--time for my enlistment, time was up. And I got out and was going to use the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] to go to school, and at that time I went to the College of Mortuary Science in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. And what made you decide to go to that school? Speaker 2: Well, I thought that--I guess I was nineteen years old, and I guess it was one of those things, you know, where you see the hearses and the long cars. And I never had a car or nothing like this here, so I thought it would be a good profession. And I decided that I would do this, and I was able to take my apprentice work from a friend of ours in Sedalia [Missouri]. And after doing that, I went on to the College of Mortuary Science. Speaker 1: So, you say you worked for a funeral home first? Speaker 2: Yes, taking the apprentice work. Speaker 1: Apprentice work. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What was the name of the, the funeral home? Speaker 2: Beg your pardon? Speaker 1: What was the name of the funeral home? Speaker 2: Alexander Funeral Home [Alexander May Funeral Home, Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: And you say that was in Vandalia? Speaker 2: No, that was in Sedalia. Speaker 1: Sedalia. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And so, you drove the cars. And what else did you do? Speaker 2: Well, you learn how to embalm and conduct the funerals. And then you went off to St. Louis for a formal education for a year of practical work, taking all the subject matter that was necessary, and then taking the state board and passing that and getting your license as an embalmer and funeral director. And that was the name of the game at that particular time. Story_ID: 656332 Speaker 1: So you said that this funeral home [Alexander May Funeral Home, Sedalia, Missouri] was owned by a friend of yours? Because it seems like funeral homes are usually kind of family-oriented. Like-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause everybody can't get in. Speaker 2: Right. And this is what I found out after being in, in that. Going to Kansas City [Missouri], that's when I actually found out it was more or less a family oriented situation. The funeral home that I was working for--there were a couple of them there--they were family oriented, family owned. And what drove me back into the [U.S. military] service was that after the family that I gave their son his apprentice work okay, then that was when they were having night funerals in Kansas City. And after he got his license, well, then well he decided when he wanted to work and when he didn't want to work. And after you have a night funeral, you'd have the remains to be prepared for the next day, and things like this here. So, I just thought that that wasn't what I really was cut out to do; I was going to be a whipping post for that. So I went to the recruiter and found out that I hadn't been out too long that I couldn't reenlist. And so I said, "Well, sign me up." And I decided that I would--I had talked with them about making arrangements to have different working hours and compensation, but it fell on deaf ears. So, I said, "Well, there's no need in me running into a stone wall." I just went in and decided to take my license down, and I said, "If you don't think I'm leaving, count the days I'm gone." And then they wanted to negotiate, but it was too late, because--, "When are you leaving?" "Tomorrow." And so that was my decision, and so that was it. And there in the Midwest, if you're familiar with it, headstones and grave markers out there, out there in those open prairies, you don't have anything knocking out the wind and the rain and the snow and things like this here, or the heat. And so, I said there's a better way of life. Then I went, went back into the service. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After about four years, I went back into service. Speaker 1: So what year are we talking about, that you go back into the service? Speaker 2: I went back in the, in the service in 1954. Story_ID: 656333 Speaker 1: So, now as you go back in, you were in the band the first time. So, what, what happens when you go back in? Do you get a new job? Speaker 2: Yes, I went--at that particular time it was Fort Lee, Virginia by then. And I went to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, and after going there to Fort Bragg, you're in an airborne unit, and you had to go through all of the rigmarole and things that the airborne people were doing. So, you might as well grab hold to what you're doing and get paid for it, and so I went to airborne training down at Fort Benning [Georgia]. And then coming back to Fort Bragg, I went to rigger school there at Fort Lee. Speaker 1: Rigger school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, let's, let's talk about the airborne training. Tell me what that training was like, and what did it consist of? Speaker 2: Well, during that time it was the elite organization of the [U.S.] Army, and they tried every way that they could to weed you out. They didn't want you in there because it was all volunteer, and as I said, it was elite. And so, but I was determined to not give up. And so I made it through that three weeks of training that was at Fort La- I mean Fort Benning and went back to Fort Bragg, to my parent unit. And then I went to rigger school, which was another volunteer area in the airborne operations. And so they would try to weed you out there, because at that particular time there were very few African Americans that were in, in the rigger field. Speaker 1: Okay. I still would like a little more information about the airborne training before we go to rigger school. Because, what were you training to do? I mean-- Speaker 2: To be a paratrooper. Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me about being a paratrooper. Did you have to learn how to pack parachutes? Speaker 2: No, you didn't do that until you went to rigger school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was the training? Just jumping out of planes? Tell me what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: --what did you learn to do in the airborne training? Speaker 2: Well, you did everything on a running situation, you ran all the time. You had to get physically fit and you'd take the training there to make you able to make the parachute landing falls--how you fall after making a jump. That's when you would--that's where I learned how to eat very rapidly at lunchtime, because the last ones that were left in the mess hall had to help clean up. And then you'd make noon formation, and if you were late or if your uniform was messed up, you would get extra pushups and things like this. And so as I said, it was one of those things where they tried to weed you out. And that's one of the things that did happen, and they weeded out lots of the young black soldiers, because they just gave up. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now you're off to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a lot of harassment. Speaker 1: Harassment? Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 656334 Speaker 1: All right, so now you're off to rigger school. So now, tell me what rigger school entails? What do you learn there? Speaker 2: Well you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Step by step (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, you, you had three different phases in rigger school. You had the parachute pack, the maintenance and the aerial delivery system. And the first phase of it would be the parachute packing. You'd have a certain period of time to pack the parachute, and they would recognize that you might be doing something wrong, and the instructor would let you go on and do this until almost time for your time allotted to finish. Then they would find that you did this area wrong and they would have you pull it down, pull the parachute down, and then you'd have to start again. And so then, you'd run out of the time allotted to do this. So that was another thing, that you'd be weeded out, because you weren't accepted because it was more or less an elite field, and they didn't want you in there. And so as I said, I was determined to pay attention to detail. And they'd have X ray training sessions. You would go and take that, and then you'd have the maintenance area where you'd learn how to put patches on damaged parachutes, suspension lines, and things like this here. You'd learn how to put the right suspensions on the heavy drop loads that you'd have, and what you'd have to do drop supplies and equipment. Dropping supplies and equipment--it wouldn't do you any good if you dropped a howitzer and it would be damaged by the time it hit the ground, it would be of no use to the troops. So, you had to learn how to prepare your heavy, heavy drop containers and platforms so that when you had the air delivery items, it would land properly and the people would be able to use it, just like using your jeeps and three quarter tons. And later on we dropped vehicles up to thirty-five thousand pounds; tanks and everything like this. Speaker 1: You dropped thirty-five thousand pounds? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I guess, we would imagine they were on planes? Speaker 2: Yeah, out of the air at the end of the aircraft. And so as I said, if it wasn't rigged properly, when it would land--if it wasn't operational it was no good to the people on the ground to be using. So you had to make sure that it was properly--the parachutes had to be properly prepared, packed, rigged, and have the right type of insulation and shock absorbing material which would sustain the shock when those items would be, when they would be landing. And so, that was your test. Story_ID: 656335 Speaker 1: All right so once you fin- finish rigger school, then what happens next? Speaker 2: You went back to your parent organization (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) -Zation, okay. And your parent organization was? Speaker 2: There at--in Fort Bragg [North Carolina], which was the 612 aerial delivery company [612th Quartermaster Aerial Supply Company] and the airborne electronic board, where we tested the parachutes and we tested the airdrop equipment. And after we put on significant enough tests, then it would be released to be used for troop use, where the airborne units could go on and use them. But we actually put on the field test for those items. Speaker 1: Okay, so now when, when you're back in and you do, abou- you do thirty years, correct? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So during that time from this time, in '83 [1983], tell me about times that you get promoted, and tell me about the different things that you did in that time. Speaker 2: Well, after leaving Fort Bragg [North Carolina]--I was at Fort Bragg for ten years in the same unit, and then went to the Arctic Test Center [U.S. Army Arctic Test Center; U.S. Army Cold Regions Test Center] in Fort Greely, Alaska, and we tested the air items and parachutes and things that would be needed in the event of a conflict with Russia. Because that was during the Cold War. And I spent two testing seasons up there in Fort Greely, Alaska, and there we had three different temperature ranges of testing. There were item engineers from various organizations who would want to sell the [U.S.] Army different types of items for airdropping. We had from ten below zero [degrees] to twenty-five below, and from twenty-five to forty below. Then if we got word that it was forty degrees below or lower, we would be dropping up on the Brooks Range and you could look across the Bering Sea, looking at Russia. And you'd have to make sure that those items would sustain the ambient temperatures. Some of them failed, and some of them didn't. And so, that was what we were doing there. And then all of this was coming out of Natick laboratories, the research and development center for the Army [U.S. Army Natick Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center, Natick, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 656336 Speaker 1: After doing that, Vietnam [Vietnam War] came along and they pulled me out of the Arctic Test Center [U.S. Army Arctic Test Center; U.S. Army Cold Regions Test Center, Fort Greely, Alaska] to go to Natick laboratories [U.S. Army Natick Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center, Natick, Massachusetts]. And that's where you'd work on the breadboard items with new configurations of parachutes that they would be using that would be expendable, because normally you'd have to recover the parachutes. But in the jungle area and things like this, you didn't have people available to go in and recover the parachutes, and it wouldn't be cost effective, plus loss of life. And so we had the opportunity to get involved with the engineers on making modifications on the existing parachutes and coming up with new types of parachutes from paper and low cost material that, that it wouldn't matter whether or not you'd get it back or not from, from the jungle area. Story_ID: 656337 Speaker 1: What about pro- promotions for you during those years? Speaker 2: Well, it was a very close situation being in the enlist- enlisted area; it wasn't that many openings within your organization. And then there was fewer promotions that came about in the warrant field. So, I made the promotions up to E-7 in the enlisted field while I was there at, from Alaska [U.S. Army Arctic Test Center; U.S. Army Cold Regions Test Center, Fort Greely, Alaska] up to Natick laboratories [U.S. Army Natick Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center, Natick, Massachusetts]. And at that time I had applied for a warrant in the airdrop engineering field three different times at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] and up in Alaska, and it was to no avail because as they would say, it was a very closed type field, and there's only one or two vacancies available. And there in Natick laboratories, I was telling them that I will retry it again. And so, there was another one of the sergeants and I had applied, and I told them, "Well, he will make this cutoff and be promoted, and I will be passed over again." And so it was sort of disbelieving to the colonel and the general, I guess, with me making that statement. Because there at Fort Bragg, I came out top on the list for getting a warrant a couple of times. And true enough, I got word back that this fellow was promoted and got his warrant. It just so happened that the general said that, "There must be something wrong, because I'm on the promotion board, and my recommendation for you was higher than this individual. When can you go to Washington [D.C.]?" And, "We have some questions that we need answers." And he said, "Well, when can you go?" I said, "Well, I work for you." So, you know, they had these red phones and things like this here on his desk. So he called and told them that he was sending me down there to the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] because we had some questions to answer. And when I went in, the major that was supposed to be greeting me, he went on sick call that day; he had another individual or a major that was sitting in his stead. And so when I went in, he wanted to know, "Well, come in and have a cigarette." "I don't smoke." "Have a cup of coffee." "I had a cup of coffee on the plane." There were some things there that wasn't clear to us about what happened, how I was overlooked. The, the general had already called to find out about it. Story_ID: 656338 Speaker 1: We'll go ahead and, and finish you telling me about--at this point, you're, you are looking to be promoted as a warrant officer? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, we'll go back to it, because you're an E-7 at this time, but you didn't explain how you got promoted before that. So, let's finish this story and then we'll just go back a little bit, okay? Speaker 2: Well, we can go on. Because, you would get propoted--you'd get promoted there from an E-1 to the E-6, and then E-7, E-8, E-9. And there was very few positions there in the rigging field that you have E-8 or E-9. They didn't have too many airborne units. They'd have a first sergeant, which is an E-8, and E-9 was a sergeant major. And so unless you were at the school, and so you'd spend all that time in the enlisted group. But I was determined, and by the grace of God I was able to pursue it and overcome the pitfalls, and got promoted to W-1 in the warrant field. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so tell me about--now you go into the office, and there was a different person there then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so pick up from there. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, he wanted to say, "Well, come in and have a cup of coffee." "Well I don't care for any. And I had one on, had a cup on the plane." "Have a cigarette." "Well, I don't smoke." There were some things that we don't have a clear understanding on, and so I was writing all these answers down. And I said, "Thank you for your time. I see that you're very busy, and I'm quite sure that I'll take this report back to the general." And when I got back, I gave him all of that information. And it was on Christmas Eve, and incidentally I was working at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] there in Natick, Massachusetts in the men's department. So-- Speaker 1: Wait, I'm sorry. You were working where? Speaker 2: Part time. Speaker 1: While you were in the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Because I was working there at Sears in the men's department at Natick laboratories [U.S. Army Natick Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center, Natick, Massachusetts]. And so, this was part time. And after we would make modifications on the parachute's breadboard items, we would leave Natick and go to El Centro, California out in the desert and put on the tests where we'd have ample space to observe and record all the information for the functions of it, and everything like this. And the manager came in and said, "Dave [HistoryMaker David Richards], the colonel wants to talk with you." And so when I answered the phone--because I had just left the office--and he said, "Well, it looks like they've opened up a new warrant position, and you're being considered as the next warrant." Because it was limited; there were only a certain amount of warrants within the field. And so that was how it was, that I was promoted to a warrant. Story_ID: 656339 Speaker 1: And what is the, the job of a warrant officer? Speaker 2: Well, my job was to supervise: to make sure that the shocks were running properly, and the parachute maintenance, and the packing, and also the delivery. And your larger organizations like the 82nd [82nd Airborne Division] or the 101st [101st Airborne Division], at that particular time you'd have a warrant in the parachute packing area. Then you'd have one there in the maintenance, and you'd have one in the area of delivery. That was your responsibility, making sure that your troops were trained properly, and your responsibility was to make sure that everything worked properly there, because they say that their life depended upon your proficiency; there were zero defects. And so, quality insurance. And so then, well, if you get into an outfit where you're in charge of all those areas, and so that was what I ended up doing. Speaker 1: Okay. And what year was this that you became a warrant officer? Speaker 2: In 1968. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 656340 Speaker 1: Tell me about what was going in the [U.S.] Army. And, and you were, you said that you were working part time. So, that means you were also in civilian life, it seems like, if you were working in a department store [Sears, Roebuck and Co.]. Why were you working in a department store? Speaker 2: Oh, it was an opportunity there for me to make some more money. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. So were you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because I-- Speaker 1: --had you gotten married and had children? Speaker 2: Yes, I had, I'd gotten married and had children. Speaker 1: When did you get married, and who did you marry? Speaker 2: I was married in June of 1959. And this was a supplement to your pay. Speaker 1: All right. And who did you marry? Speaker 2: The lady that's upstairs. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, what's her name? Speaker 2: Swannie Ann Richards [Swannie Moore Richards]. Speaker 1: All right. Is there a story about how you met Swannie? Speaker 2: Yes, I met her at--she was a schoolteacher. And she and one of her friends came by the NCO club [non-commissioned officer club]. Her friend was coming by to see her husband, and so she came in with her, and I just happened to meet her. And so I struck up a conversation with her, and so I said, "Well, why don't I call you sometime?" And so she said, "Oh, that's no problem." And so she told the boy who attended there, "Give me a--." She said, "Give me a piece of that sack over there," and she wrote her phone number down on it. So I just took it and said, "Okay," and I escorted them out to the car. And I said, "Well, is it okay if I give you a call?" "Oh, yes." "Okay." So I guess about the middle of the week I called her and everything, and we just started communicating. And I guess a couple of years later, well, we got married. Speaker 1: Okay. And how many children did you have? Speaker 2: I have three. Speaker 1: And what are their names? Speaker 2: David III [David Richards III], he just came in up here from, he's the one there in Decatur [Georgia]; he's a pastor. I have a daughter that's Yvette [Yvette Richards], and she's the past president for the National Council of Negro Women. And then I have the youngest one, she's a dentist in Durham, North Carolina. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Bonnye Anthony [Bonnye Richards Anthony]. Story_ID: 656341 Speaker 1: Okay so now, during this time also, a lot of things are going on in the 1960s, you know, with civil rights. Would you give us some reflections on those years of civil rights, you know, during the time of Kennedy and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and the assassinations going on in the country? Speaker 2: Well, actually, during that time I was at Fort Bragg [North Carolina], and we were doing riot training for that, in the event that there was any hostilities going on at Fayetteville, North Carolina, so we'd be ready for that type of training. But other than that--and then it went to the Arctic Test Center [U.S. Army Arctic Test Center; U.S. Army Cold Regions Test Center, Fort Greely, Alaska]. So-- Speaker 1: It went to what? Speaker 2: It went to the Arctic Test Center. And so, I wasn't involved with any of the activities as far as civil right movements and everything like this. Speaker 1: No, no, I understand that, because you were in the service. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I was just asking you for a reflection of what you thought about what was going on. The [U.S.] Army--now you went from being in a segregated unit-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to one that was desegregated. But there was there a lot of change going on? Had there been a lot of change, I should say? Speaker 2: There was quite a bit of change, but it really didn't take a, take effect until after the desegregation proclamation by President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] in 1948 [Executive Order 9981]. It was over in the early part of the '50s [1950s] before they started really seeing a big difference in the movement of blacks and whites into the organizations. Speaker 1: Right. But were there any challenges for you? Was the promotion thing just one thing that you encountered that you thought was discrimination? Were there other incidences for you? Speaker 2: Well, yes, because not only from--in our field it was, it was very limited, and the good old boy syndrome was still in effect as far as in the warrant field. And some of them didn't have to go through that process; it all depended on who was drinking beer with them on the weekend, and who would go fishing and hunting with them. Well I wasn't in that area, and so there were very few--well, there was--when I retired, I was the only CW-4 in the rigging field who was African American. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: There were a few more that were weeded out, but they never did get to the point where they made W-4. There are quite a few of them now, but still at that particular time I was the first one that went all the way from A-1 to E-7 and from W-1 to W-4, and was recommended and was honored in the hall of fame [Parachute Rigger Warrant Officer Hall of Fame] at, at Fort Lee [Virginia] in 1983. Story_ID: 656342 Speaker 1: What year did you retire from the [U.S.] military? Speaker 2: January the 31st, 1983. Speaker 1: All right. And you made it to the hall of fame [Parachute Rigger Warrant Officer Hall of Fame, Fort Lee, Virginia] that same year? Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: They have to wait until after you retire to honor you there for that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now in 1983 you retire. And what city are--where do you settle with your family? Speaker 2: Right here in Savannah, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what is your next step? What do you do after you retire from the military? Speaker 2: Well, my first job was I guess about a week later. I was hired by Bob James [HistoryMaker Robert James] at The Savannah Tribune, and I stayed there temporarily until a position opened up at the Savannah police department [Savannah-Chatham Metropolitan Police Department] in police staffing. And I went there and stayed there for twelve years. Speaker 1: All right. So, Robert James is one of our HistoryMakers as well. And The Savannah Tribune, what did you--how long were you there? And what was your position? Speaker 2: Well, my position was more or less of a salesperson wanting to see whether or not we could sell advertisements to the businesses, to a black weekly newspaper. Speaker 1: And how long were you there? Speaker 2: Really, I don't know; six or eight months. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 656343 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But the job became available there with the police department [Savannah-Chatham Metropolitan Police Department] for police staffing. And I went down and met the chief of police and I was hired, and I stayed on there for twelve years and retired from there. Speaker 2: Okay, so you said police staffing. What, what does that mean? Speaker 1: That was recruiting applicants and giving them their physical agility--giving them the tests--and letting them go in and interview with the chief and everything like this here. Physical examinations and everything, and getting them ready to go to the academy. And then after I was in there for four or five years, I guess, I took a job that was available for crime prevention. And so, I took that job in crime prevention and I retired from there as a crime prevention analyst. Speaker 2: What department was this? Was this still the police department? Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 2: Who was the police chief when you started this job? Speaker 1: Chief Gellatly [David Gellatly]. Speaker 2: All right. And what was a prevention analyst? What was your, what did you do as an analyst? Speaker 1: Well, we would, we'd go out and set up neighborhood watches. We'd go to the stores talking about shoplifting and things of this nature, and helping people recognizing the problems that they might encounter, and things like this here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And when you leave town, preventive maintenance more or less of what you need to do if you're leaving. You're cutting back on your shrubbery, and just general knowledge of what needs to be done for safeguarding your, your property, and not only your personal property, but your organiza- your stores and things like this here. Story_ID: 656344 Speaker 1: Was your wife [Swannie Moore Richards] a sto- stay at home mom or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she was a schoolteacher. Speaker 1: And so, so all right. And what school did she teach? Where did she teach? Speaker 2: She, she retired from Savannah State University [Savannah, Georgia] as a business emeriti. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, during that time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did you-- Speaker 2: During that time while I was stationed out here, everywhere that I was stationed where they had a university available, I would be taking courses for further education. And in 1978 I got my master's degree from Pepperdine [Pepperdine University, Malibu, California], and I started teaching for Saint Leo University [Saint Leo College; Saint Leo University Savannah Education Center, Savannah, Georgia]. Speaker 1: All right. So you got, where did you get your bachelor's degree? Speaker 2: From Park College [Park University] in Kansas City [sic. Parkville, Missouri]; well Pittsburg, Ka- Pittsburg, Missouri [sic.] there. Speaker 1: And that was what year? Speaker 2: That was in '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay, so in '75 [1975] you got your B.A. in--what type of degree was it? Speaker 2: Business administration. Speaker 1: Okay. And then in '78 [1978] you got your master's in business also? Speaker 2: Human resources from Pepperdine. Speaker 1: Okay. Were these classes that--were you able--I don't know if they had online classes. Were you going into the classroom to take these classes? Speaker 2: Well, they had off site areas there where they would have professors that would come in once a month. They'd give you the core subjects, and you'd have to reply to that and finish those up. And I was able to finish the--when I started that, I finished that within fifteen, fifteen months, and I was still in service. Story_ID: 656345 Speaker 1: All right. So then after the, the police department [Savannah-Chatham Metropolitan Police Department], that's when you began to--how, how did you decide you would like to be a, a professor? Was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was teaching all during that time also. I was teaching while I was still in [the U.S. military] service. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was teaching for Saint Leo [Saint Leo College; Saint Leo University Savannah Education Center, Savannah, Georgia] as an adjunct professor for twenty-eight years. Speaker 1: So what year did you start teaching? Speaker 2: In '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: In '78 [1978]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And what subject, what subjects were you teaching? Speaker 2: Human resources. Speaker 1: Okay. Were these online classes or did you go into classrooms (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they were in classrooms, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And from '78 [1978] until--you said how many years? Twenty-- Speaker 2: Twenty-eight. Speaker 1: So, until 2000? Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah, somewhere along there. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 656346 Speaker 1: So, what else is going on in your, your life between 1978 now? You were at the police department [Savannah-Chatham Metropolitan Police Department], you were also teaching. Is there anything else that was going on in your life that you would like to talk about? What other organizations did you belong to? Did you belong to any other organizations? Were you on--? Speaker 2: Well, can I give you a list of them (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, we have a list. Is there anything that you can remember that sticks out in your mind that you want to talk about? Speaker 2: Well, I guess the most important one is the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of Savannah, Inc., Savannah, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's dealing with the youth for mentoring, education, health and wellness, and economic development, and it's open to young men and young women. And as, as they go through the youth leadership academy, at the time that they graduate from high school, there's an opportunity for them to get a scholarship, and we try to provide that for them. Speaker 1: Okay. I know the color purple is your color, and I did see some Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc.] stuff around. Are you in any way involved with them? Speaker 2: Yes, I guess pretty much so, I guess maybe about forty years of it. Speaker 1: Did you pledge Omega? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me, when did you pledge? Speaker 2: While I was still in [the U.S. military] service. While I was in service I never did go to a, I never was on a campus to where you would have one of the organizations that you could pledge. But once I was settled here [Savannah, Georgia], I decided I would pledge Omega, and so that was what I did. And I think that I was the basileus there for two or three years--I mean about four or five years, and then the state and the district and superior service awards, and various awards for, for that in the education department of it. Story_ID: 656347 Speaker 1: I'm sorry, did you finish talking about the Martin Luther King observance committee [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Observance Day Association]? Did, did we finish that question? Did you--about-- Speaker 2: Yes, for the whole month, you know, you have the breakfast, you have the gospel fest, you have community service. They'd have the speakers coming in there with all the pastors, and then you have the wrap-up of the dance and things like this for the end of the celebration. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were also the board director for the Ralph Mark Gilbert-- Speaker 2: Civil Rights-- Speaker 1: --Civil Rights Museum [Ralph Mark Gilbert Civil Rights Museum, Savannah, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And did you know Ralph Mark Gilbert? Speaker 2: I never did meet him, no. Speaker 1: And as the director-- Speaker 2: I did know W.W. Law. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, well, what was your dealing with W.W. Law? Speaker 2: Ah-- Speaker 1: Were you a part of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you want to say something about him? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Did you want to say something about your relationship with him? Speaker 2: Well, the only thing it was, was that I was a member and I supported it. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Okay, so we were talking about Ralph Gilbert. Speaker 2: I was a charter member for the Mark Gilbert Civil Rights Museum. Speaker 1: All right and Chatham County [Georgia] jury commissioner? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell me what that was. Speaker 2: Well, we'd make a selection of who was on the jury, and making sure that it was adequately numbered with the age group and demographics, and things of this nature. Speaker 1: And the American Legion Post 500 [William P. Jordan American Legion Post 500, Savannah, Georgia]. You said that, you told me earlier that they were closed for renovations? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Was that someplace that-- Speaker 2: That's the American Legion, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Are there any other organizations that you'd like to talk about? I see that you were vice chair of Gateway Behavioral Sciences [sic.]. Speaker 2: Behavioral services [Gateway Behavioral Health Services]. We have eight counties where we have mental health providers for substance abuse and things of this nature. There are women with children and, and men with disabilities. They have group homes, and we have eight of them here in, in Savannah [Georgia]. We have eight counties that we have, that we operate out of, and distinctive housing. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any, any other organizations? Speaker 2: We have the Veterans Council [Veterans Council of Chatham County] and the Military Officers Association [Military Officers Association of America]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, what are you busying yourself with today? What do you do in your week? Speaker 2: Well, I've cut back on lots of these things, because the mind is willing, but the flesh gets weak (laughter). And so, but it's rewarding that I can do those things that, that we're doing something worthwhile to help the youth and things of this nature, and the community. Speaker 1: Are there some things that--what is it that you would like to do that you have not done yet? Or is there anything? Speaker 2: No, I think that I have a 360 circle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know where I'd put anything else in. Story_ID: 656348 Speaker 1: If you had to send a message to the future generation--because you know there's going to be generations for many, many, years-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) after we're all gone, that will be able to watch this interview of you and your life, and be very inspired. So, what message would you send to the future generation? Speaker 2: Well, I would, I would revert back to when I made that comment when I was the president of our high school [C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri], success awaits at labor's gates. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: You got to stay focused. You got to do something that's worthwhile. And to quote the Psalms 141:3-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --put a guard on your mouth. Select the door to my lips. You have to be careful what you say. Story_ID: 656349 Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: (Pause) Be true to yourself. (Pause) I was awarded the legacy award for the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of Savannah, Inc., Savannah, Georgia], and I guess it was something that--what they see is what they'll be. So, if I can project something that's worthwhile, it'll be worthwhile for them to do. Story_ID: 656350 Speaker 1: And what do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, (pause) I'd rather for them to say something worthwhile while I'm living, as opposed to telling all of those stories about how good I was after I lie and close my eyes (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have anything else? Is there anything that we did not talk about that you would like to talk about? Is there something else that you'd like to say? Speaker 2: Well, no, I'm just humbled. I want to be a humble servant and do what I can do to help my fellow men to be all that they can be. And so, if they do that and be true to themselves, we always can improve on what, what we can do. Although we know our limitations, I guess we can always do a little bit better. And with the, with the grace of God being our guide and protector, we'll be able to shine the light and make life better for those that come along behind us. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, if there's nothing else, I would like to thank you for taking the time to tell your story for The HistoryMakers. It's going to be most inspirational to the future generations. Speaker 2: Well, I'm humbled for the opportunity to be a portion of this, and even be considered. And thank you and your organization, and I hope that it might inspire someone along the way to go out and reach someone else in some small way, that it might brighten up their day-- Speaker 1: All right, you're welcome (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and make life better for them. Story_ID: 656351 Speaker 1: And before we go, I--you had the distinct honor of being the marshal for a parade. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Each year they have, the Veterans Council [Veterans Council of Chatham County] will nominate someone to be the parade marshal for the parade. It's an annual parade, and the commander for that year can select who they want to be the parade marshal. It so happened that around twenty-five years ago, one of my students that--he's the, he was the commander at that particular time, and so he recommended that I be the parade marshal for helping him and instilling in him through his academic career and things like this. And so, it was a distinct honor that I was selected for the parade marshal. And so that was representing the entire county, and I was humbled for that. Speaker 1: And what was the student's name? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What was the student's name? Speaker 2: Bill Quinlan [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. So Bill Quinlan, he was-- Speaker 2: He was one of my students there with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) one of your students at Saint Leo [Saint Leo College; Saint Leo University Savannah Education Center, Savannah, Georgia]? Speaker 2: At Saint Leo, uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. And then twenty-five years after-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's amazing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that he would be the commander and recommend you for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, you never know who you might touch. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Story_ID: 656352 Speaker 1: The fire chief that just passed not too long ago, Wesley Mel- Meadows [Wesley Meadows], he was one of my students. We have people in the government there who have been my students, and have been able to touch the lives of whole families; a mother and three of her children have been my students. And so I've forgotten their names, but I recognize their faces and things like this here. And I see them all the time. And that was one of the things there that I instilled into the troops that I had, that I wanted them to have an education. And when they would go to rigger school, they would come to the shop, and I'd say "Do you have your high school diploma? Do you have your GED [General Educational Development]?" They'd say, "Well, no, that's the reason why I joined the [U.S.] Army. I got tired of going to school." I said, "Well, if you're going to be a member of this organization, you will have a high school education." So, our parachute shop was right next door to the education center. They would come to work in the mornings, and in the afternoons they'd have afternoon courses and classes. I'd send them over to that, and they ended up getting their GEDs. And after they would do that, they ended up being instructors up at Fort Lee [Virginia], in school. So, it was a rewarding experience when I was inducted into the Hall of Fame [Parachute Rigger Warrant Officer Hall of Fame, Fort Lee, Virginia] that they turned out and showed up in honor of that, and also had a company commander that he needed some more time before being eliminated out of service because he didn't have a college education. So, I've helped someone along the way. Story_ID: 656353 Speaker 1: Oh, that's just one of the photos that they wanted in my dress uniform. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Do you know when it was taken? Was it for a specific occasion? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, just a standard [U.S.] Army photo? Speaker 1: Right, uh-huh. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Now, that's one there where I believe I was at R and R [rest and recuperation] over in Japan, back where you can see how young I was. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Where are you in the picture? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Where are you in the picture? Speaker 1: I'm the only one that put some color in it (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter) Laughter far left. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and this one? Speaker 1: That's one of the good things in our field, that I didn't have to worry about knowing everybody's name, because normally there, I--oh, that's one of the past commanders there, and that was my sash that I was using. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Why were you using that sash? Speaker 1: That was for the Veterans Day council for the parade, and I was accepting the award, one of the awards there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. And this is from the American Legion? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And this was during the Veterans Day. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 1: I was just getting ready to go somewhere in-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And this was me getting an award there from the German Army. That book under there, you might want to take a look at that. They recognized me from the German Army, and I was able to give them the American Jump Wings [Parachutist Badge] while I was there in mutual headquarters. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Were you there to train them? Speaker 1: No, I had the, I was the detachment commander there for five years, and I worked with the, with the German officers academy. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next, okay. Speaker 1: And that was one of the areas there where we were getting ready to go and jump. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So were you a rigging instructor, or jump-- Speaker 1: Well, I was a jump master for them. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: I went to their airborne operations, and I took my troops, took my troops with me so that they could get their, get their airborne wings there from the German Army. I didn't want it just for myself. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that was the general officer from the Fifth Corps [V Corps]. He was my commanding general there. They had him down there to-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, was that the same award ceremony or a different one? Speaker 1: It was at various times there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that was at one of the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] alliance meetings there. I was the liaison for mutual headquarters, and that was the members of the various NATO companies--countries that we would be supporting. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's the commanding general and the retiring commander there showing them how to pack the parachutes, and letting them do that. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Who's in this picture? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Who's in this picture? Speaker 1: Oh, that's one of the commanding officers up at the-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. So, all of this was Germany? Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And you say this is the jump seat that we're looking at right here? Speaker 1: Right. And I would go and jump with them, and I was the jump master during the operations. They would meet once a year, and the commanding general from the German Army is in there also. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, sir. This is? Speaker 2: That's the parade marshal, where they gave me the proclamation from the county [Chatham County, Georgia]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that it? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, sir, thank you. Speaker 2: Well, thank you...