 Story_ID: 19608 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite color is? Speaker 2: I suppose I like red. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, I like cruises. And we don't go to one particular place when you go on various cruises. And I have enjoyed doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. Your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think I have one. Speaker 1: Okay. Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I like Chicago [Illinois]. All you got to do is stand on the corner and it will change. Whatever it is. Whatever it is. Speaker 1: (Chuckle) Okay. And your favorite food? Speaker 2: I'm having some problem with that now. I was in the hospital for surgery. And it was major surgery. And that may have had something to do with my appetite. Because now, I eat whatever is put on the table. And I was trained to empty my plate and I can't make my friend not put so much food on the (chuckle) table. Story_ID: 19609 Speaker 1: What I want to do is start with your childhood. And now--where were you born? Speaker 2: In Knoxville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Knoxville, Tennessee. Okay, okay. So I'd like you to talk about, start out talking about your mother [Mary Turner] and father [John W. Rogers], and what life was like growing up young. Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in the South. Knoxville was--up to twelve years of age. But and Knoxville was a little better than most Southern places, and I lived in the city. I wasn't out in the rural areas. Many people say, "I came from such and such a place." And I used to kid them by saying, "You mean you came from seven miles from town." You see, been out there chopping cotton. Well (chuckle) I didn't have to do all that. And in Knoxville although it was prejudiced like everywhere else, and you were discriminated against, it was a little bit better. For example, there was one black policeman in the whole city. And at that time, they had 110,000 people in the city. The schools. We had two schools for the black kids, one, the high school and one of the elementary school. If they had any others, I'm not familiar with them. Maybe so that--the people that lived in my neighborhood at least, they fought for what they wanted. And if they wanted to bring a teacher or a principal in there, just like here. It was. I don't think they do it so much now, I guess. But at that time, they would have--well, they would have very--a great deal of difficulty in bringing somebody in there that they didn't think was prepared for the job. I had, for example, shop work in sixth grade. And had a manual training teacher that was a manual training teacher. He was trained in manual, doing manual work, or else he had been a--he done some of these things. I knew how to run a lathe just like I could do it in high school. I was running a lathe in grammar school--he had ten. He used to have, equipment that he used for, how should I put it? You could shape cookie cutters. Only sort of thing that you could do. Well, I knew how to make a crystal set, when I was a kid. And I could make it from memory. It's not that much to it. But I wouldn't have known what a crystal set was when I came to Chicago [Illinois]. We didn't have a radio in the house anyway. But, I can remember stringing the aerial on top of the roof and listening to the crystal set. That was the only radio we had. And even after I came to Chicago, that was the only radio we had. So the--it was not that bad in some sense. 'Cause we lived in a neighborhood where, the people had parents. And the parents who were interested in the children making something of themselves, I'll say. Children that were gonna go to school. 'Cause I lived almost within two or three doors of Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee], right across the street. I used to play over there on the campus. I used to know a lot of the people. As a matter of fact, Vernon Jarrett went to Knoxville College. But I didn't know him. I knew his brother. He had an older brother who was Jake--I forgot now. Speaker 1: Thomas. Speaker 2: But he (pause) Oh yeah. He is the, or was--he was the president of [Clark] Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]. You see. Well, I got to know those kinds of people right there on the campus of Knoxville College. Story_ID: 19610 Speaker 1: What was your family life, life like? Were you--how many kids in the family and what were your parents like? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Mary Turner] died when I was four years old, and my father [John W. Rogers] died when I was twelve. So anything I say about them it happened before I was twelve years old. And I really don't really remember my mother very well at all. My father, I can still remember. And it wasn't like here, down there, slapping you on your butt. It was not child abuse, you see, (chuckle). And, my daddy spoke, you did what he said do. That was all it was. I can remember once I was on my way to school and shooting marbles. I stopped on the way and was shooting marbles with some other kids. The first thing I knew, somebody was whipping me across my back (laughing), and I was getting up running to school. So it was unheard of bucking him or bucking the teachers. And I carried that with me though. Because when my son [John Rogers Jr.] came along, he came home complaining about the teacher. And I said, "Boy you're gonna have to live with this, and it's gonna be all your life. You're gonna have to get along with people in authority. You may as well start right now. So don't come here complaining to me. You figure out a way to get along with that teacher. That's your job to get along with that teacher." So that--we had good role models let's say. It was different from now when people believe in all this freedom and doing what--let them do what they want to do, so to speak. And we didn't have that. And I tell you, I lived right next door to a lady who was--her back door--it was kind of an angle street and her back door came out right to my back door. And every time I did something wrong outside, I'd look up there to see her coming out of her back door (chuckle) going over to my back door to tell my mother that I was into something. So you learned. Speaker 1: So who raised you after twelve? Speaker 2: I had a very benevolent uncle [Henry Tanner]. A fantastic man, because he had no children, and so far as I know, he didn't have a wife or, girlfriend, or boyfriend for that matter. But, he always did something for his family. And I had three sisters and we were all taken into the household. And he gave me a stable home and a stable place to live. And he had a sister who would come over and see us once a week to take you to downtown to shop or whatever had to happen. Or, get you in to school. But, I think I had an unusual opportunity, because I was--I had good parents, I had a good uncle and my aunt was a very stable person too. Nobody smoked in my house. I never lived in a house where people smoked. And today, I don't smoke either. Speaker 1: Now what, you are where in your family with the sisters? You're the only boy, but there was four of you? Speaker 2: That's right, I was number two. My oldest sister is still living. The two younger girls died before they made eighteen. At one time TB [tuberculosis] was considered a dreaded disease and it was before they got it controlled or had a way of curing you. And as a result, they didn't get the type of service you can get today. But my uncle did everything he could to try to save them. Speaker 1: Do you have any particular memories of, you know, you know, that you haven't shared like from maybe age twelve on, with your sisters or your uncle or your aunt or in schools, that you'd like to share? Speaker 2: Well, you see, we didn't go to--well, I went to elementary school one year, yeah, eighth grade. And when I came--and my oldest sister was at that time in college already. Speaker 1: Now just stop one second. Were you--when did, when did you come to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: 1931. Speaker 1: But you were, you were still in Knoxville [Tennessee] though when you were twelve right? Right twelve on? Your uncle wasn't here. Speaker 2: No, my uncle lived here. Speaker 1: Oh, he lived here. So you came here to live with him. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And I had a couple of cousins who lived there too, that he was providing for. And then when (chuckle) when my grandmother came here, that kind of crowded us a little bit. And I had a cousin there that always used that as kind of a threat, a whip, as though my uncle was gonna know if I did anything wrong. But my uncle was a master of diplomacy. He never raised his hand. I don't think I ever heard him raise his voice. And he, he went his own way. He had his own room, and he ate alone. You got up and said, "Good morning, Uncle Henry." And when he came in, in the evening you said, "Good evening Uncle Henry." and that was about all. Story_ID: 19611 Speaker 1: How was that going from--you know, even though Knoxville [Tennessee], Knoxville is definitely not Chicago [Illinois]. So how was that whole experience? How did you sort of feel? Speaker 2: Well you see, I thought I was going to God's country when I left Knoxville. This was supposed to be so much better for everybody. That just wasn't so. I mean, I used to walk by a big plate glass window downtown and wonder whether I could go in this place and eat. And that continued till I got to be a lawyer, where there were places that you couldn't eat. And you couldn't do it down there. And they had--but they did have black water fountains for blacks and white water fountains for whites. But you could go into the store. My understanding in Chicago for example, you couldn't try on a hat. Or you couldn't try on a pair of shoes. Now whether that was true in Knoxville or not, I never had a chance to observe. I wasn't told about it. But I was told about it here. Story_ID: 19612 Speaker 1: When you came here, what school were you going to? Speaker 2: I went to Willard Elementary School. They've torn it down now. It was at 49th and St. (unclear). Speaker 1: Didn't Dempsey Travis go to Willard? No, no, no. Speaker 2: I think he went to Dusable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: No, but elementary. Speaker 2: I don't know. I should know because he's a good friend of mine Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he's talked to me and we talked. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I'm not sure of that. Speaker 1: You're not sure. Okay. Speaker 2: He may have gone to Willard. Speaker 1: Okay. So what high school? Speaker 2: [Edward] Tilden Tech [Technical High School]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Didn't he go-- Speaker 2: No he went to Dusable. Speaker 1: Okay, but Someone--but, you know, who went to Tilden Tech was Jacoby Dickens. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know him. I didn't know him. Speaker 1: He's younger. Speaker 2: But Earl Strayhorn and I were the same year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Earl graduated a half a year behind me because I went to summer school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And do you have any memories of those high school years. Anything, you know, I mean--. Speaker 2: Well, I had some excellent professors in some of the things good teachers. I know I had a good teacher in math and chemistry. They were, they were really teachers. You see, I know something about this teaching business, because I was a school teacher myself for a while. And I also had been a judge in juvenile court. I saw some of the discipline problems that they had. And I also was involved in some conflict with some principal or something like that, who didn't run it like I thought he should (chuckle) have run the school. Story_ID: 19613 Speaker 1: What I'm wondering as a youth. 'Cause we as, you know, young people always sometimes have some dreams and aspirations. I mean, what type of child would you sort of describe yourself as? And were there any things that you sort of dreamed about or, you know, fantasized about? Or--. Speaker 2: Well, I wondered what's was gonna happen to me. I'm twelve years old going into a completely new environment. And you'd wonder what would happen to you. But I had a good, stable uncle [Henry Tanner]. And we didn't mo--I lived there in his house, one place till I went out on my own. And it wasn't like moving from one place to another. That you have with so many kids. I guess I have to say that because I experienced it as a judge in juvenile court. I had every opportunity. If I didn't do better, it was my fault. Now I know some people like to hear you say you liked flying and wanted to fly. Well that's true. And this movie that they have about Tuskegee Airmen and having a kid out in a field in an airplane coming in. And he says--he makes some expression about flying, I've forgotten what. But I wanted to fly. I remember when I was in Knoxville [Tennessee], walking with a friend of mine, all the way to the airport. Just to be able to say, I touched an airplane. I never expected to fly one. What was the name of that book? It was a book with (pause). God I'm getting old and can't remember. You would know the name of the book, I'm sure. But this was about--I can't think of the name at the moment. But they--the fella writes the story about the troubles that kids had. And one of the things was a plane was flying overhead and he was looking at that airplane and said, gee, some of these white boys sure can fly. He never had--he had no hope of ever flying. Bigger Thomas was one of the characters in that book ['Native Son']. I forgotten it. It was a long time ago. Speaker 1: So you did have--You had dreams of sort of flying then. Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to fly. I always wanted to fly. But I never expected to fly. Story_ID: 19614 Speaker 1: Can you describe what Chicago [Illinois] was like at that time? You know, what it was like growing up here, or you know, what your life was like here? Speaker 2: Well, I was a Depression baby. Couldn't get a job and I can remember working for forty-two and a half dollars a week at a cleaners after we got out of school. I can remember when I was a freshman in college, I guess I was a freshman, working on the North Side drug store for something like seven dollars a week. And it would have been bad anywhere, I suppose. Although I may have had more connections in Knoxville [Tennessee]. Here I had no connections. But, and people who got jobs, a good job, like working at what was considered a good job, working at the Palmer House or earning on the road. Some friends of mine now talk about the experiences that I didn't have that opportunity. I can remember trying, but not getting very far. 'Cause it was father and son or some other older relative that knew how to get you in. At least that's the way I understood it. Story_ID: 19615 Speaker 1: Were there any life lessons or sayings or things that your uncle [Henry Tanner] taught you that you have, you know, have stuck with you throughout your life, or maybe that you have repeated to your son [John Rogers Jr.]? Or that you know. Were there any of those? Speaker 2: Well my--one thing is you can rely on what my uncle said. If he told you something, he was going to live by it. And I believe that my son would do it. My son says he's gonna be here at eight o'clock, he's gonna be here at eight o'clock. And you don't get that so much among a lot of people. They--eight o'clock means around eight o'clock, eightish or something. But I got that from my uncle I think. And that was before I went into the service. And you could rely on what he said. He was an honest man. He bought and sold property. But during the Depression, when people couldn't afford to pay their rent, he used to carry 'em. And as a result, he didn't lose his property, but he came out of the Depression. At least he wasn't broke. He was able to take care--I never really wanted for anything. I didn't, but I didn't want very much either. But we got what we needed. Story_ID: 19616 Speaker 1: When you finished high school, what was, what did--Did you immediately take a job? Or was that when you were working at the, you know, the, drugstore? Was--I mean what did, what did you do when you finished high school? Speaker 2: Well, I knew I was going to college when I finished high school. I mean nobody had to tell me, "I want you to go," or "You should go." And we didn't have any counselors. I didn't know what a counselor was in high school. But they have them I guess. But I didn't have any, and I planned my own program. And I got approval from the principal to take extra courses so I could get out of that school in three and a half years of high school. Then nobody told me about going to the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]. I knew lots of kids now that when to the University of Illinois. I thought it was just--That was just too far out of my range. So I went to what was then called South Side Junior College [Chicago, Illinois]. South Side Junior College was a, (pause) just what it says. A junior college. And you went there for two years. But at the same time, on the same campus there was Chicago Normal [College, now Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]. You had to take an exam to go to Chicago Normal. But if you passed the exam and got in, when you graduated, you got a certificate. And, of course, you had to maybe do some maneuvering to get in. But once you got out of there, you were teaching school. I was a substitute when I went into the service. But I worked every day. Story_ID: 19617 Speaker 1: How did you like the teaching experience and what were you teaching? But how did you enjoy that experience? Speaker 2: Not very well because, one, they didn't pay anything. I think they paid--we got paid $6.50 a day, I think it was as a sub [substitute teacher], at that time. And I-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Did you say $6.50 a day? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what you got for teaching school as a sub in those days. And you didn't get into a school unless you knew somebody, or just lucky. I can remember laying in bed hoping I get called today. Until finally I got at Douglas House [NOT FOUND]. I was at Douglas when the war started. And I was a male and you had to be a tough male and had--they had classes they called, (pause), I don't know. But it was for the retarded. And they were boys and I could control them. I couldn't teach them very much (chuckle), but I could control them. And the principal liked me. So I worked every day once I got down in Douglas scho--elementary school, until I went into the service. And that was on December 19, 1941. The war started on December 7 and I knew I was going (chuckle). And on the 19th I was on my way. Speaker 1: So now, you know, I want to ask one question. I had heard here in Chicago [Illinois], I don't remember who told me this, that black African American teachers were all substitutes. It was hard for them. They were like--They created a class of permanent substitutes instead of, you know, ever putting them on the roles as permanent. Speaker 2: There were permanent teachers, but there also were a whole lot of subs. Now I don't know what the white teachers were doing. I don't know anything about that. But, there were teachers who were assigned. Now it may have not been so many and--like Willard [Elementary] School was a, to me it was a good grammar school. But most of the teachers there were white. And it was right in the heart of a black neighborhood. And then once when I when to Chicago Normal [College, now Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], it later became Chicago Teacher's College, we took practice teaching. And you--they sent us out to some schools where you observed. They were white schools. Well you can't blame black kids for having a dirty room compared to the white kids who had janitor service and who the streets, I mean the floors were cleaned. If you see lots of junk, paper and a raggedy looking place, you just conform to what's going on. Well, once I went to these schools I resented that. And it's still true today. You go into a white community right today and you'll see them in better services, better schools and certainly they got the better teachers. 'Cause a white teacher in many instances--Sure some were good and some were good then too, but those white teachers, they don't want to come to an underprivileged school when they can go into a better school. Whereas a black teacher couldn't do any different. Now, of course, I understand they've integrated the teachers and to what extent, I really don't know. But I guess you've gotten more blacks in the schools now than white probably. But back in those days, in a black neighborhood, heart of the community, the teachers were black. And only in like small groups, but most of the teachers were white. I had a Jewish teacher in the eighth grade. I only had that one teacher that one year but she was good. And took her--she was interested in the kids. And she prepared you for high school. If you didn't learn it, it was your fault. Story_ID: 19618 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the service. So, you know, 1941 you enlist right? Speaker 2: I did, but I would have been drafted anyway. My number was already up, really. But I wanted to fly and I had learned to fly. I had what you called a private pilot's license before 1941. And I went down to try to volunteer for the service as a pilot. They said they had something for dru--truck drivers or something like that. I told him he could keep it. And I turned around and walked out. I wanted to fly. And then, I was just lucky all the way. I had been lucky all my life I guess. Because when the war [World War II] broke out, they held my number up so that I could go into the airforce direct. A lot of guys didn't get that break. They had to go through the enlisted men and then into the airforce. Well, I went in direct as a--what do you call it? We were cadets at that time. That's half-way an officer and half-way an enlisted man. And we got a little bit more money, a little more respect and, you respected yourself more. Because you associated with people that respected you and you respected them. Speaker 1: Hmm. So tell me what that--were you--were you stationed here? Or where were--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, on December 19th I got on a train (chuckle). I got on a train and went to Tuskegee [Alabama]. And I had lived in the South, so I knew something about it. But, you know, you had to ride behind the curtain. They would serve you in separate section from the rest of the people on the train. You going to fight for your country too. And then once you were in Tuskegee, they had a separate movie house. Well, they had a separate section in the movie house. One side the blacks sat on and whites sat on the other side. But in Chicago [Illinois] I don't think they had the same dividing line like that. But I know, I can remember going to a movie, going to something. I think it was Sunshine, yeah, Sunshine Sammy [Frederick Ernest Morrison] who was a famous dancer at that time, black. He was a tap dancer. I remember going to see him tap-dance with my father. That was in Knoxville [Tennessee] too. But we were setting up in the, what they called the crows nest. And this guy was so good, he looked light. His legs were going in and out. I'm telling you, (chuckle). He was good. But, we sat up there. And my stepmother, she took us to see John Phillips Souza. I remember this today, that, we had an opportunity to see him. But she sat in a separate section, and I resented that to no end. And when I came to Chicago, I don't know about the movies enough, but I didn't get an opportunity to go to the movies that much except in a black community. And I was luck there again, in a sense. 'Cause I was handing out handbills. I didn't get paid, but you could go to the movie every day for free. Any time you wanted to go in the movie, you could walk in and see the movie. So there was some benefit from, passing out the handbill. Story_ID: 19619 Speaker 1: And what we did is if you were going to school where they had the program, you got in a planned program. And I know about a few. Like I think some came from West Virginia, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] I think and I don't remember the others I guess. But there were a few schools there to wit. You met them in the service, that were flying before they came in too. But they didn't fly like we did. We were the only group that I know of where you were not attached to a school. You could join this group no matter what school you were at here in Chicago [Illinois], and Willard Brown and Coffee (ph.); they were the ones that pushed it. Coffee was a mechanic and a pilot. But I mean but highly trained people. Louis Jackson came in. They had brought him here from out of town. But he was young looking. he looked like a kid. I remember sitting in the classroom and asking him, "Was he going to fly too?" (unclear) (laughing) told me, "He was going to be an instructor." But they had--I don't know how he had cleared to fly. But to me he was a highly competent pilot and was conscious about safety. I don't think he would have had one of his boys running into an airplane like this guy Bob Collins did the other day. It might not have been his fault. Somebody could have hit him I think--it may have been that a student pilot hit him from behind. But, I don't think that would have happened so easily with those guys. Speaker 2: Now tell me so when you went--when you joined the service, did you have an option? I just want to get some clarification. Did you have an option to be in Tuskegee Airmen? Or was it that, that was automatic? And what was hap--what happened to that first class there? Speaker 1: Well see, they were gonna--once they decided they were gonna train black pilots, they were all gonna end up at Tuskegee [Alabama] if they were gonna train. I was in the fifth class, but there were other classes ahead of me that made bringing it down to the fifth class. But in the first class, they had five people. And only--let me see, I think they had five and only three of those people finished. Let me see, my mistake. Maybe it was only five of them that finished. Because there was Mac Ross, [Charles H.] BeBow, General [Benjamin O.] Davis. There were a couple, there were two more and--they had five in that class that finished. Then in the next class there may have been three in that class. I'm thinking about the number that finished. Maybe three that finished out of ten. They'd take ten in a class and three of 'em would get through. Like in my class there were ten of us who started out and three of us finished of that ten. But at the same time, we got, some guys that came in and made it up to eight to finish. We graduated with eight of us. But at least five of those in that class came from the class ahead of me. They washed back. For example, a guy had the flu or one boy, we called him Ghost Lawson (ph.). He was, flying with--he had--he was an instructor. Both of them had been instructors over at Tuskegee. They did have black instructors at Tuskegee but not at the base. And the guy was trying to go under a bridge and he got in front. Well, that was the end of him. And this kid who survived ended up in the water and he made it. But they didn't, they didn't hold him responsible. So he was able to come back in the class behind him. And we had--oh we had five guys in my class who had skipped army primary altogether. See, these guys had been instructors over at Tuskegee who were teaching the people (unclear) and primary to fly. But once we were at the primary, we went to the base. Then they were all white instructors. Speaker 2: And how long was the training period? And what was that whole process? Speaker 1: Well, I went in, in December and I finished that August. I finished in August. Like I went in December of '41 [1941]. I finished in August '42 [1942]. Speaker 2: Okay. and then once you were finished, what--was that whole experience, was it what you were, you know, you were looking for? I mean you went with great anticipation. Was it what you would look for? Speaker 1: I wanted to fly. And it was amusing, but I don't know whether that was part of the training program or whether that's just the way people were--got worked up. But the instructors would be sitting in the back seat yelling at you, cursing at you, "Get your big old eyes out of that--" you know, out of something. He--I've forgotten now. You know, that's been sixty years now. But they would be teaching you to do certain maneuvers and things like that. But they didn't do it politely and say, "Would you do this or would you do that." They'd yell at you, curse at you and, but they were teaching you to fly under pressure. I tell you that. Speaker 2: And were you--do you have any memories of that training period? Others that you would like to share? I mean anything else that--you know, I mean a lot has been sort of, you know, recently read and written. you know. Movies made about the Tuskegee Airmen. Are there things that you would agree or disagree with? Or--. Speaker 1: Well, of course, they're documentaries. You know, the one that's got the most publicity, Tuskegee Airmen. That was a documentary. It created a problem for it, but it didn't happen that way. I don't recall anybody ever committing suicide 'cause they were so anxious to fly. They might have been committing suicide because he was flying, (chuckle). It wasn't because he intended to do it. Speaker 2: So what (pause). So you finished your course in, in August. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 19620 Speaker 1: And what happened after that? Speaker 2: When we stayed at train--they didn't know what to do with us. You got black lieutenants who were able to fly, had wings and they weren't about to send us overseas. They didn't want us to be fighting. But all these Negro organizations and, were up in an uproar about not sending us to combat. And my view was, "You want to combat, you combat. (laughing) I'll stay here." I wasn't anxious to go anywhere. I'm wanted to--I had accomplished what I came in the service for. That was to fly. But I wasn't going to say I was scared to fly. I wasn't gonna do that. I was--I haven't got the--I did whatever I had to do. But I had some experiences in there that--well basically some of them were because I was young and didn't care. Another one was because I was black for example. When--I can remember getting on a bus in Montgomery, Alabama to come back to the base, which was at Tuskegee [Alabama]. I was getting here--we used to go into Montgomery and come back on Sunday night in order to get back for reveille the next day. And I can remember getting on a crowded bus, scared to touch anything, and white people around me, and white women in particular. So I would get on the bus and put my hands up so everybody could see my hands. (Chuckle). They couldn't, they couldn't say I was bothering anybody. But we had those kinds of experiences. On the other hand, I think I got a few breaks that I otherwise wouldn't have gotten. Because in some instances they were in doubt as to whether I was black or white, you see. And I think they were--this is just my spin on it. I think they were afraid to call you black if you were white, you see (chuckle). And you got into that. But--I can remember one time there was a fellow from Chicago [Illinois] had his wife down there, and she was white. And they had me over for dinner. I don't know how I got into this mess. But he wanted me to take her to the movie. And I guess he maybe had to report back to the base or something. And I was going to the movie, but taking this white woman. I was scared to death. Scared as you could be. But then I found out when we got there, 'cause I wouldn't have been going to a movie, I'm not going to sit on the black side to see a movie that wasn't that important to me. But, I was going to the movie and nothing, nothing happened. We went and nothing happened at all. I was just scared. Because I knew that was not the thing to do in the South. The other thing is, a black soldier--we used to have to go on marches. And you marched through Tuskegee town. In marching through the town, we weren't permitted to carry a loaded gun, or if a guy was an MP [military personnel] in the city, a black guy, he wasn't permitted to carry a loaded gun. And they did that. it was just complete discrimination because you were black. Speaker 1: So in the--also I think in the movie it was saying that, you know, the soldiers were, the Tuskegee Airmen, there was nothing for them to do. Like they were in a holding pattern. I mean how--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's true. I guess I didn't let you finish the question. Speaker 1: No, but I was just wondering how, what, you finished your program. Were you--I know you said you weren't anxious to sort of go anyplace. But how long a period was it before you got shipped out? Speaker 2: I went over with the original group that was shipped out and it was, I think it was May. I believe. It could have been--I'm almost certain it was May before they shipped us out. But my class was the last class to make up the original 99th, where they had to have enough people to set up a squadron. In all of them, you know, in all the classes ahead of me, all of them couldn't go overseas. Matter of fact, in my group there was three of us that finished out of the original ten, and I was the only one that went overseas. One guy got killed. And another one, he was smarter than I was in maneuvering. He made captain in the States and was working there in Tuskegee. But I'm glad I went. I'm glad I had an opportunity to fly overseas. And out of all the things that I've done in my life, I'm most proud of the fact that I was a flyer and I knew how to shoot a gun. Speaker 1: So--okay, so tell me about--(laughing) I mean tell me about that whole thing. You know, you seem--Mr. Rogers, you're very mild mannered. So (laughing) it's hard to see you as a combat pilot, (laughing). Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: There's a little fire underneath all that calm demeanor. Speaker 2: When I was a kid, I used to be called pretty reckless. I rode a motorcycle, I rode a motorcycle. I had a sports model Ford. I had a Model A Ford that had a canvas top. Girls used to like to ride in it. So I did plenty of things that anybody else would do. I just have gotten a little more experience now. I wouldn't jump out to fight another driver now. I'd rather let him go. You know they have, what do they call it, "motor rage" or something. I wouldn't want to be involved in that. I'd rather let him have it. But I've had guys do things to me that made me want to get out, and I had to use a lot of discipline not to get out. Story_ID: 19621 Speaker 1: But, I don't know where we were. You asked-- Speaker 2: We were, we were talking about you flying as a combat pilot. You said that you, you're really, you know, you're glad you had the experience. And I would like you to talk about what that experience was. Where you were stationed and-- Speaker 1: Well, we were stationed various places. We started out in North Africa. And we first hit combat flying off of Cape Bon. And we would dive-bomb Pantelleria [Italy] which is a little island between Africa and Italy. And we used to, really Sicily, 'cause it's part of Italy. But we used to dive-bomb there. And well, nobody wants to get shot at. But once you're going down--see when you dive-bomb, you're going down. and when you're going down, you're trying to hit what you're going there for. You aren't going there to play. And you get a certain exhilaration I guess out of it. They're shooting at you sure, but you're shooting back, (chuckle). And you can see the tracers. Every fifth bullet is a tracer. And you see those tracers going out there. It would be--sometimes depending on what the target was, it would be so bad it would look like rain coming up. Because when they explode the fifth bullet, it's like a black smoke, and like a table top down there. And you're going down through that stuff. But they couldn't hit you because there was no way in the world a guy was gonna know where I'm gonna be, like they say, if you're flying at 10,000 feet. It's gonna take a bullet to come up there something like ten seconds, I may be off on the timing, but ten seconds. But no way in the world they're gonna know where I'm gonna be when that bullet gets up there. Because you didn't go straight in a straight line like the guys in the bombers. They were scared to death. Well, anybody would be scared. But in the bombers they had to hit--they'd go to the bomb line and from that bomb line to the target they flew in a straight line. They could anticipate where you were gonna be. But with us, you're going down, up, over any kind of way. You just don't keep the same altitude and don't go in a straight line. And what we did was trying to figure out to get to the target that you didn't want to be in a straight line where they would have a good chance to shoot at you. And I don't know. I don't think that there were so many guys shot down in dive-bombing. Even in strafing. Now that was the thing I hated most and strafing was down on the ground. That means at bases they got you going out there to shoot the people who are going in to protect the, our soldiers. They have you going to station a road or something like that, you see. Well, I was told along with others by more experienced pilots who had been there, don't go down the road. Go across the road. So you're there and gone before they got a chance to get their guns on you. So you got some exhilaration out of doing that. Story_ID: 19622 Speaker 1: So when you--when you went to northern Africa, that was your first time really out of the country. probably everyone's first time really out of the country. Speaker 2: It certainly was my first time out. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) and didn't know where we were going. Speaker 1: Right. So how was, how was--what were your feelings about that? Not only are you, you know, it's--what, what age were you at that point? Speaker 2: 1940. Speaker 1: Two, three. Speaker 2: '42 [1942] when we went overseas. Well, no. Speaker 1: '43 [1943]. Speaker 2: '43, you're right. Speaker 1: '43. (simultaneously) Speaker 2: Mid '43. Speaker 1: That's right because we graduated in September and then it was a following month. Speaker 2: right. Around May I (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So how old were you at that point? Speaker 2: That was '43. That would have made me twenty-four. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're twenty-four years old. This is the first time out being out of the country. You're going to a foreign land. I'm just wondering how you felt? Speaker 2: I was a veteran though, compared to some of those younger kids in there. You know, they could come in at twenty-one years old and maybe younger. And I was just the right age. And I, I was more mature than some in some respects. And going out of--going away from home, I expected to go away from home. And I was out on my own anyway. I had left the sanctity of my uncle's [Henry Tanner] home (chuckle) before that. Speaker 1: But I'm saying, what was going on in Africa? Like was it just a--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, it was a surprising thing to me. You know, you would think that you were going into the jungle. Now we landed in Casablanca [Morocco]. Casablanca was a city. I mean it had escalators and stuff like that in the department store. It was a city. When you got to Medina, it's located right along west Casablanca. And, of course, we were going over to see what was going on in the Medina district. Speaker 1: And what did you find in the Medina? Speaker 2: Well, we found what we were looking for, (laughing). Speaker 1: (Laughing). If Laura weren't here would you be telling me? Speaker 2: (Laughing) No, I wouldn't be talking on this subject, talking about what those guys were doing. Speaker 1: (laughing) Okay, okay. Okay. I went to the Medina. I found it a very interesting experience. Speaker 2: But it was a different experience for you and it was different in the time too. The timespan we were there earlier. Well, I'll tell you one thing they were--this was a new experience for the people there too in the sense that they hadn't seen any black soldiers before. Well, not Air Force. They might have seen ground officers or ground members of the Air Force. But there weren't flyers and they hadn't seen any before. I can remember seeing, like where we first landed in Casablanca and of course General--he was Colonel. No was he Colonel? He was Colonel [Benjamin O.] Davis at that time. He made you put on a full uniform in Africa, sun shining bright. But you were dressed up with a full uniform and all going to where they were going to have us spend the night. And he looked like a soldier all the time. I mean always a soldier. And here we are out there in North Africa marching base in this uniform and nobody but ourselves heard us yell out. "Attention!" (laughing). That "Attention!" he was saying. And he had been around enough to know what it meant. So we did have--it was an interesting experience. Speaker 1: Now was Benjamin Davis was he, was he over you or was he in the same class at that point? Speaker 2: No, he was in the first class of black pilots. And there were---he was the first--he finished in March. I'm pretty sure it was March that he finished. He was in the first class. And they knew that he was gonna make it if he didn't get killed. Because, he was a West Pointer. And he was really--he--I think he was the right man in the right place at the right time for him to do what he had to do. And he was older. See he had--they had to make an exception for him to come in. 'Cause I think you couldn't come in over a certain age. I don't know what age it was. 'Cause you couldn't, you couldn't start out over a certain age. And he was already over that age when he came into the Air Force. They sent him over there as a captain to start with. To take charge of the outfit that he was gonna go overseas with. But by the time he was going overseas, he had just about skipped being a major the best I can recall. Because he was a colonel. A light colonel but he was a colonel. And it didn't take him long before he was wearing those eagles. Story_ID: 19623 Speaker 1: Were there any experiences--you had an experience--what period of time were you--you were in--you said you were flying between, well basically between Morocco and Sicily [Italy]. Speaker 2: And that was just--that was the thing--. Speaker 1: For practice. Speaker 2: No. They were getting ready to invade. They were getting ready--see, they wanted to knock out Pantelleria [Italy] so that there wouldn't be anything in between them and Sicily. And they wanted to knock Pantelleria out. They wanted to take Pantelleria. And we participated in that and I think we contributed when they dive-bombed it. But we had a disadvantage. When we first went overseas, the white boys and the Germans--'cause by that time they had just about driven out the Italians, had experience. They were experienced combat pilots. We weren't experienced. We had n--and we didn't have the advantage of having them train us by fitting into a class. You know, you started out cold as a pilot flying, fighting, accepting. The best I can recall, and I'm I think I'm about right. There were guys like [William] Bill Campbell, J. [James] T. Wiley and [Charles B.] Hall. I think there were three. They took them on the first flight just to see what it was like. They went on a flight with them. I think they were dive-bombing, dive-bombing Pantelleria. And they came back. Hadn't had one trip. Well by the time I came home, I had over one hundred combat missions. So--and you got a different attitude about it. We didn't have the veterans to show us what to do. What that makes you a better pilot than me because you flew one mission? (chuckle) You know. And General [Benjamin O.] Davis wasn't one of the first ones to fly. Just--I don't know if it was anybody else. But I think it was just Hall, Wiley--Hall, Wiley I guess it was. I named them a minute ago. But just let it slip my mind. But--Bill Campbell. He was one of them. And they were good pilots. They were--they'd picked the best we had, I guess to send them over there with these white folks. And you take a guy like Bill Campbell. Ain't nobody gonna leave him. I tell you that. Speaker 1: Hmm. So do--you were over there how long flying? You did one hundred combat missions? Speaker 2: Over one hundred. I got credit for what they call sorties. And I had credit for over that on my certificate when I got out. They gave you some discharge papers and I had over one hundred on there. Speaker 1: Okay. But I'm just asking, how long a period were you, were you over overseas? Speaker 2: Well we went over, I think it was April or May when we went over. And we didn't do anything when we first got over there. They just had us training, flying around and enjoying some scenery. And our first--we weren't doing anything. We didn't know if they were going to make us fly patrol or whether we were going to go into combat or what. But we were lucky though. We did fly. And although there was a real threat one time. I just saw that in the movie. They showed that problem. They did even--they didn't know what to do with us. Had us sitting on the shores of Sicily not knowing what they were going to do with us 'cause we got some bad publicity. But it was nothing more than you would expect to think that guys--and I don't think it was justified either. But to think that guys with no experience in combat would be doing the same thing as well as guys that had experience. Be that as it may. There weren't that many enemy planes in the area. The Germans were trying--obviously again this is my interpretation. The Germans were trying to conserve what air power they had. And they didn't want to go up there for nothing. And as a result, they would, they would come in and hit what they were gonna hit and go on. They didn't stay up there to fight anybody. I can remember over Sicily, we're flying patrol at the time it was an invasion. And all of a sudden, here come planes barreling down through our formation. Right down through there. But they didn't stay, they gone. And they had a faster plane than we did too. See we were flying a P40. It was called a Warhawk. We cruised at 200 miles an hour. I don't know what they were cruising at. But they, they were going fast. There I say cruising I guess and we were diving (chuckle). Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: It wasn't that bad, but they, they--you couldn't catch them. If he got a head start on you and he's coming down, he's picked up speed coming down and he pulls out, he couldn't--you couldn't catch him. Speaker 1: . Story_ID: 19624 Speaker 1: Did you have any sort of scary experiences or hair-raising where you felt like you had, you know, you just got out by the skin of your teeth? Or was it-- Speaker 2: Well, I was just lucky, frankly. I got to be a flight leader and I never lost a man as a flight leader. And--but I can remember Elwood [T.] Driver. He got a lot of publicity later after I came back. He and I were right on the tail of a guy. Right on him. And the guy was going for the ground and we had altitude too. So we were going right behind him, two of us. In trying to get to him, I lost concentration on where Driver was. Boy I look down and hit him right center, right under me. Right there I would have--if we had both continued going there would have been a crash right there. So when that happened, I pulled up and we lost sight of that guy. That was the closest I ever came to having a chance to shoot a guy down. We got a probable cause. I mean not probable cause. That's a legal term. We got a probable. Speaker 1: And, tell me what--I'm gonna leave this subject here. But what--how does--how does flying--You know you said, "It's exhilarating." But how does it make you feel? Speaker 2: I liked--I, I wanted to fly and I didn't lose my desire to fly. It's just I didn't desire to be shot at (chuckle). So. Speaker 1: But is there any type of feeling you have when you're in the plane? Speaker 2: Nah. Speaker 1: Period. I mean not now, but then. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No. I don't, I don't--like when they take off, you know that it might not make it to where it's going. Like today, I can remember the first time I got on a commercial plane, after the war. And that thing had so much power it looked like it was going up like that. A big airplane, it looked like it was going up better than a forty-five degree angle. We couldn't hardly do that with a fighter, and the pilot we had. And he got a big airplane Story_ID: 19625 Speaker 1: You know what also Bill Thompson said about you is that is what made you such a good combat pilot was that you were very detailed. And you would ask like, the area you were flying over, you know, how high the trees were. And at first he didn't understand why you were asking all those questions. But he saw that, that's what made you good as a pilot. Speaker 2: No, the thing is they were--these guys right now if they try to give you the directions how to get from here to there, You'll say, "Well, I know it. I understand it." And go. I want to know where I'm supposed to go and how I'm gonna get there when I take off. And that was the only advantage I had. 'Cause I wasn't, I wasn't afraid to ask questions, and I did ask. Story_ID: 19626 Speaker 1: Okay you're back in Chicago [Illinois]. What time--what year is that? Is that 1945 at this point? You said 1944 you came back and the war [World War II] ended. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was 1945 when I got back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See what they did they sent us back. They didn't know what to do with us. First we went to Walterboro. And Walterboro was a prejudiced little town. Very prejudiced Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Where's Walterboro? I'm sorry for stopping you. Speaker 2: South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. So just say when you go back you came back into Walterboro, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Yeah. We were there and matter of fact, a guy by the name of Spann Watson knocked the mayor of the town down. He went to get his car and, I think this guy wanted some service at the same time. And the guy was going to stop to go service this mayor. Anyway, some dispute developed. He knocked him down, hopped in the car and came back to the camp. But they got him out of there. They sent him (laughing) They sent him I think he went to Selfridge Field [Mount Clemens, Michigan] from there. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: He's still living too. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: It wasn't easy. I can remember just walking on the sidewalk. And a guy who was a sheriff there walking up behind me and saying, "Gee! Some of these niggers sure are smart." You know, because I had wings on and I had captain's bars on. But, it wasn't any picnic, that part of it. We couldn't even eat in the Officer's Club. Well, you know about that. That's got all the publicity. Couldn't eat in the Officer's Club with them and stuff. They separated you and when you went into the dining hall, you stayed in separate barracks. Now I can say--remember saying to myself, "Ten thousand feet over the Mediterranean, what the hell I'm doing up here?" You know. But I knew one thing. That if we fought in that war you were gonna be infinitely better off at the end of the war. 'Cause I knew we were gonna win. I just expected to win. And we were better off at the end. As a result to some degree. 'Cause they opened up a lot of things that they didn't have then. And--let me see, I lost my train of thought. Speaker 1: Well why were you saying though--why would you say you were better off? Were you really better off at the end of the war? You hear stories about people, you know, people having high expectations and then being really disappointed when they got back home. Speaker 2: I think that part of it is true. Speaker 1: Okay, so you have to pause so I'm not talking over. 'Cause my voice is not going to be on camera. Speaker 2: Yeah. Hmm. Well, how to put this. When we came back, I'm almost certain it was true at that time. Maybe I can be confusing it. But there was a time when a black person couldn't drive an elevator, couldn't drive a yellow cab. I mean you just--they didn't have those kinds of jobs for 'em. There--I think they had very few clerks in the post office. You need someone else to tell that story but--You couldn't--wasn't no point in you even applying to try to get a license, I mean a job on a commercial liner. They were just unheard of. Some guys went out to the islands though. I got a commerical license. But I knew what I was going to do. I was going to law school. And I got out the service and went directly into law school. Story_ID: 19627 Speaker 1: I mean you had always dreamed of, you know, flying. And then, but where did the law school--when did that whole desire about law school come, you know, come from? Speaker 2: When I finished te--well I went back to do the extra year, they had changed it to [Chicago] Teacher's College [Chicago, Illinois]. And I went back to Chicago Teacher's College for that extra year, with the idea that I was gonna teach school. But things looked a little better when I came back. And I knew that I wanted to do something. I got to improve myself. Teachers didn't make enough money and I didn't want to be a teacher really. So--and I felt like I needed some more education too. So when I got out [of the Air Force], I went dashing over to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] just to get in law school. I didn't know you had to take some kind of SAT [Standard Aptitude Test] or some other kind of exam earlier in that year. And they had already let their quota in of blacks. That's what I--again that's my interpretation. We had five blacks in my class. And that was more than they had, had before, I think. And for some time that was more than what they had afterwards. But they have more now. And I went out there with my uniform on--well I didn't have my uniform on in fact. I went out there and they wouldn't--they turned me down. I got a letter that I wasn't admitted. But I hadn't been told to take an exam. So I put my uniform on and went back out there. And I was still under what they call terminal leave. So I was entitled to wear my uniform. And I had my wings and my ribbons and all that stuff on. And I said, "I just want to know, what I have to do to go to your law school? I didn't apply to but one and that's the one I want to go to, and that's this one." Well the guy tells me something about I could go--I don't want to use it today. But one of the law schools in the city of Chicago was looked down upon, was not considered. When the bastard said that, "You can go to night school down there." I said, "I didn't apply there. This is the only one I applied to." And it just happened that a guy named Wilmer Katz [NOT FOUND]. He had been on vacation or something. And he gave me an opportunity to take an exam. Now I don't know whether it was a SAT or what it was. All I know is I took an exam and it was a lot of kids in there to me. Some black kids. And I took that exam. I don't know what kind of grade I got or anything. But I got a letter saying they would admit me. Speaker 1: Hmm. And this is--is this actually '45 [1945] or '46 [1946]? It's '45--? Speaker 2: It's '45, I'm in law school. I didn't lose any time at all. Speaker 1: Well what--but see how did law come into this? Had there been lawyers in your family or did--I mean, what about the law--that's what I'm trying to understand. Speaker 2: I wanted to get some more education. And at that time, the only thing I could get in a graduate school that I knew of, I didn't know about anything else, was law school. And if I went into medicine or something like that I had to go back to undergraduate school. I didn't want to go back to undergraduate school. I could go right into law school. You see, and did. Speaker 1: Hmm. Um-hmm. Speaker 2: And once I'm there, I'm gonna finish. I'm gonna make it my business to finish. Story_ID: 19628 Speaker 1: So how--tell me about that experience. Who was in your class? How many blacks were there? And what was that whole experience like? Speaker 2: There were five blacks in the class. Speaker 1: Who were they? Speaker 2: There was--if I can think of them I'll give you their names in a minute. One of 'em was Claude Whitaker. Another fella was Daniel Bellamy (ph.), Johnson, Glen John--No not Glen Johnson. No but it was a guy--Arnold Johnson. Arnold Johnson, that's four, I'm missing one right now. That's been almost (chuckle) sixty years ago. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: That would be sixty years ago, '45 [1945]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Oh, nah it would be fifty-five years. Speaker 1: Right, right. So now what was that whole experience like? Speaker 2: Well I thought that going to law school that the professors would be, you know, educated, high class people. They would be too high class to discriminate. But they were white too. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was it like? Could you describe some experiences that you had? Speaker 2: I think and I'm almost 100 percent sure of this. I was the only black that graduated without having flunked at least one course before he got to graduate out of that five. And every one of 'em--see every one of 'em came from a Southern school. And he was valedictorian or salutatorian from his class. And I was just in school and I went to college here. 'Cause I was working. Didn't have to work too hard 'cause you didn't know what exams were when you were in Chicago Normal [College, now the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. You didn't know what your grades were. All you knew is if you were flunking. You got a notice. And since I didn't get any notice that I was flunking, I did what I had to do and didn't worry about it. And I was working too. Speaker 1: So academically did you find law school challenging? Speaker 2: Oh I did the best I could and worked as hard as I could. I taught night school while I was going. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: So it would have given me a little more time if I hadn't had to teach night school. And I used to get up in the morning and go to law school just like going to a job. And be in the library there until I left at night to go to teach night school. But luckily I didn't have to teach but four days a week. Speaker 1: Hmm. Now in that--out of that whole experience, were there--did you--you know, were there thoughts about what you wanted to do afterwards? Did you have any, you know-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I was gonna teach--I mean as a lawyer? I was going to practice law. And see, I had no idea what it was like to be a lawyer, it was a little bit stupid. But I knew I wanted to practice law and I didn't go to law school to get a job. The dean had actually suggested that I come out to see him about the possibility of getting a job and going to Washington. And I was--I guess I was insulting but I didn't intend it. I told him, I didn't go to law school to get a job. And I didn't want one. At that point I didn't want a job. Story_ID: 19629 Speaker 1: You graduate from law school. Now who's at your graduation at that point? Speaker 2: Who was at my graduation? Speaker 1: Um-hmm, of your family. Speaker 2: From law school? Well my wife [Jewel Stradford Lafontant MANkarious] was there. I guess she was there. Let me see. 'Cause I was married at that time. Speaker 1: You got--well see you, you, you bu--You went over that. I'm not even knowing anything else is happening yet. Speaker 2: (Laughing). She knows. Speaker 1: It doesn't matter that she knows! You gotta tell me that part. When did you get married? Speaker 2: I got married in--I got out of the service in '45 [1945] I guess it was. Then it would be '46 [1946]. I got married in 19--I met her on the first day of--the first day of law school. Barrington Parker introduced me to her. And we got married in June, the next June. Speaker 1: Now at that point what was she? Was she in law school at that point? Speaker 2: Yeah. She was a senior. She graduated--she graduated from the University of Chicago law school [Chicago, Illinois]. The only black girl in the whole damn school. And I--and let me see we got, we got married that following June. Speaker 1: Okay, wait. Let me put some things in perspective so I can ask questions appropriately. You, you came back--you're older at this point. You're older than she is right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I'm four years older that she was. Speaker 1: Okay. So you, you came back. You went to law school, but it was her last year of law school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And then you got married a year later. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got--I think I was twenty-nine years old when I got married, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. Ha. So you weren't intimidated, she was a lawyer? Speaker 2: No, why should I be intimidated? Speaker 1: I'm just asking. You know, you were a modern man. Speaker 2: (Laughing). I was flattered though. Speaker 1: Flattered that she would marry you? Or flattered that--. Speaker 2: (Laughing) That she would marry me. Speaker 1: (Laughing hardily). Speaker 2: I had a class, I had a class lady. Speaker 1: (Laughing) That's why I'm asking, okay. (Laughing). So let's try to--. So this is what I'm saying so you--I mean--how did you meet her? You met her in school, but how did you meet her? Did you know much about her family? I just would like to know a little bit more. Speaker 2: No. Barrington Parker, I met him on the first day of law school. He later became a federal judge too. He's dead now. But I met her through him. He just introduced me to her, and it went from there. Story_ID: 19630 Speaker 1: So you finished law school, okay, you had been married then at that point two years right? Speaker 2: Well in those days you could go straight through if you went to summer school. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: So I finished in two years and a quarter, two calendar years and a quarter. And I got married. Well I finished--actually I finished my work in December. The quarter ended in December, but you couldn't graduate until that following spring. 'Cause they didn't have the grades in. Speaker 1: And then what--so what was--so when you graduated you were saying you didn't want a job. You were, really wanted to set up a practice. I'm just wondering what was, what was your life like? You have a wife [Jewel Stradford Lafontant MANkarious]. You know, she--what was she doing? You know, what was--? Speaker 2: I was never broke. From the time I left home before the war [World War II]. I had never been broke, (chuckle). I always had some kind of a way of making some money. I didn't make much and I wasn't in the class of rich ones, but I made a living. Speaker 1: So did you set yourself up in practice? This is what I'm trying to understand. Where did you go from law school? Speaker 2: Well, what I did is I went around trying to get a connection with a practicing lawyer. And I ended up with a lawyer downtown that I was not proud of--but he was gonna let me have my office space for free and then I would work for him. But he had me going to court every day. I didn't have time to do whatever little work I had of my own. So one day, I just said to him, I'll tell you what, I'll just pay rent and take care of my own practice. And that's what I did. Earl Strayhorn was my partner. He was my partner. Speaker 1: So what kind of cases--so what was practice like as a, you know, black lawyer back then? What was, what were kind of-- Speaker 2: Well if I had been a [R. Eugene] Gene Pincham or somebody of that type, it would have been different than the type like myself. I was handicapped by the fact that I had been taught as a kid that fools like their faces often seen in public places. And I was not out looking for a lot of publicity which was stupid. That's what I should have been doing, trying to get as much publicity as I can. And then I had Jewel [Stradford Lafontant MANkarious]. She was supportive too. Speaker 1: So what was your, what was your life like in those early years? Was she practicing at that point too? Speaker 2: Well when we--When I got out, she had a job with legal aid. She got a job with legal aid. And, 'cause she was scuffling around trying to get a job. And I don't know. She worked with--finally though she ended up, she was in the District Attorney's office. And I know she knew how to make connections. That was one thing. She really--if you saw a group of people taking a picture, she'd be in the center, I bet you that much when that picture was out. And she would join--she was a joiner. She was always the officer of something in whatever it was. But she was good at it. Speaker 1: Did the two of you ever think of practicing together, or that was never considered? Speaker 2: It wasn't considered. But if my--if I had known then, what I know now, it might have been different income, outcome. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Were there many black two, two lawyer families, I mean at that time, you know here in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: The only one that I knew of was [Edith] Sampson and [Joseph E.] Joe Clayton. But there may have been somebody else. It may have been somebody else like that too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean that was the only one that I knew about. Speaker 1: Now, when did Johnny [John Rogers Jr.] come along? How long were you married before you had him? Speaker 2: Eleven years. Speaker 1: Oh eleven years, oh! Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you both were--you were a career couple then? Speaker 2: No, it just didn't happen (chuckle). Speaker 1: (Chuckle). Speaker 2: After the first two years, we were trying the best I knew how (chuckle). Story_ID: 19631 Speaker 1: Later in your career, I remember in the Dempsey Travis book, I remember you were mentioned, in a case that was in Cicero [Illinois] where this black family had moved in there--you know, it was the first black family moving into Cicero and I. But I think that was in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: I don't know the year. But see, I was active with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I believed in that, and that gave me some connections anyway. Speaker 1: Okay. Mr. Rogers, what I'm trying to do right now is put things in perspective. I mean, I got the Tuskegee Airmen part. But this is the legal part. You know, and how it was practicing as a lawyer here, you know, in Chicago [Illinois]. I'm a lawyer myself. I came out of school, you know, in 1980. And it was for the--you know a different, in you know a different--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Climate. Speaker 1: Right a different climate. I was able to go to a major law firm, you know, right out of law school and all that. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) They wouldn't have looked at you when I came out. And, of course, from what I hear, and you can correct me, I wouldn't want to be in there anyway. Because they tell me that they wouldn't give you a chance to go to court now. You back there doing, preparing work for somebody else. Speaker 1: So are you happy? Speaker 2: But you made money though. Speaker 1: I made money right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But not as much as no where--You know when I came out my--we were the highest paid of all the law firms in the city and that was $28,500. Speaker 2: Well when I first started as a judge I think we were making thirty--what was it? We were making about--thirty something hundred--$30,000, a little over $30,000 a year when I first started. Speaker 1: So now you--what was--you tell me. I'm just trying to understand the nature of the practice. Was that fulfilling? You know, was it just--was it what you were anticipating? Were you--were there cases that you, you know, you liked, that you would like to share with us? Or I mean any of that. Speaker 2: I can't say that there's anything that I did exciting, but I'm gonna brief a case of--I can't even think of that now. But we opened the doors for, in the Supreme Court for cases where you didn't have to exhaust your administrative remedies in the state court before you could go into the federal court. Now you can. Story_ID: 19632 Speaker 1: Well then let's talk about your work with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and why you considered that organization important. And what was happening at that time when you got involved, and you know, what was happening. Speaker 2: I wasn't the right kind of leader for them. But what happened in those days, I got to be Chairman of the Legal Redress Committee. And if you had a case that you thought it was important enough, you ended up putting your own money into the case, rather than getting paid by the NAACP (chuckle). But it was worth it. It was worth it. Speaker 1: And why was it worth it? Tell me what--why you think NAACP was worth--was important and what area were they really working in? Speaker 2: Well it was primarily based on--the cases we had primarily cases involving discrimination in restaurants and things like that. Speaker 1: And can you describe some of--were there any seminal cases that came out of Chicago [Illinois] during that period? Speaker 2: What kind of cases? Speaker 1: Important cases. Speaker 2: Oh. What was that word you used? Speaker 1: Seminal. Speaker 2: Seminal. I don't know that word. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: But I had a recent operation, rather a year ago and I had--it was serious surgery and it actually does affect your memory. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I'm hoping I'll recover from that. Speaker 1: Right, okay. But were there important cases that came out of that period that you were, you know, that you were involved in? Speaker 2: I wasn't involved in it, but I was in on the briefing of it. It was the case that, broke down the segregation in schools. You know, that was Thurgood Marshall. Thurgood Marshall had called a meeting of, NAACP lawyers and we met in New York and discussed the case. But Thurgood Marshall was the lawyer as far as I'm concerned. Speaker 1: Hmm. And why do you think that he was effective at doing what he, you know, he did? Wait just one second while-- Speaker 2: Well you see the NAACP dealt with the law. What people do about protesting. But they were protesting before then, as a matter of fact. [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] gets credit for opening restaurants by protesting, leading marches and stuff like that. But people were protesting long before that. I remember sitting in a restaurant in Charleston, South Carolina. One other fellow and I walked in a restaurant, sit down in the very middle of the thing. A crowded restaurant. And a waitress came up, put a glass of water on the table. She was gonna serve us. But somebody evidently called her in the back and she came out and said she was sorry she couldn't serve us. Which is a lot of difference between what Martin Luther King ran into. I'm sure he was served in other places though. Speaker 1: So do you, then let me ask you. What is your view of the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: It has to be. It depends on what you call the Civil Rights Movement." Speaker 1: Well what do you describe as Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: I think it was a fight by certain people. Cause it wasn't all Negroes, certain people. It still goes on. It continues to go on. Who were trying to change some of the--well I should say even the morals of the time. To try to bring about a situation where people are considered the same. Nobody asked that you give me anything, just give me the same opportunity. Just live by that slogan, "Justice is blind." And I think we ought to live by that. But--and I resented the fact that I wasn't treated the same as other people. Story_ID: 19633 Speaker 1: Who do you think in the black community, if you look at leaders, who would you say have been, in your view, the most sort of important leaders? Speaker 2: Well I guess I know more about it from the past than I do now, what's going on now (chuckle). But there were people like Walter [Francis] White to me and the guy that followed him. A tall, thin brown skinned guy. I can't think of his name right now. But there were some real leaders that had guts. And Thurgood Marshall probably because of his legal talent probably did more in the beginning of that movement than anybody else, as a single person. He had more cases in the Supreme Court I guess than anybody else. Speaker 1: What about--now would you--what, what impressed you about Walter White? Speaker 2: Well he got a lot of publicity in fighting for civil rights at that time. And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] I think was more effective then, I guess. But it--see but Thurgood Marshall came after that. And I guess Thurgood Marshall probably was to me, the single most important person in civil rights. So far as I'm concerned. I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he had to have guts too. You know we went down to--What's the name of this place? Champaign [Illinois] I guess. Not Champaign. It's a little town on the tip of Illinois, Southern Illinois and we went down there to handle a case. And lo and behold when we got off the train at nighttime, got off the train. They had a squad that followed us all the way to the hotel. And then when we got to the hotel, they, they didn't have any place to let us stay. But apparently they had gotten the message already from somewhere. So they did give us a room. But I'm going to tell you, I was afraid. I was plenty afraid (chuckle). And I was so anxious to get out of there that I left my pajamas (laughing) in the room when I left there. But we survived. Story_ID: 19634 Speaker 1: Jewel [Stradford Lafontant MANkarious] used to work in a lot of that stuff too. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But she worked at it from a different angle. And she played the game of what it meant to her better than anybody else I know. Speaker 2: And, and describe that. What does that mean? Speaker 1: She ended up--she has been on I don't know how many corporate boards. She helped train Johnny [John Rogers Jr.]. What I'm told she did not--I met one or two of them. She would have a guy that the president of some corporation, major corporation and they would be--have him for dinner, but then have Johnny sit next to him and all that. See and so Johnny was not impressed with people who had titles and all that, I don't think. And I don't believe he is now. Speaker 2: Describe your relationship with your son, him growing up and, you know, and the lessons you taught him and-- Speaker 1: Well you have to talk with--tell him to talk with him about what I taught. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) And we're gonna talk to him too. Speaker 1: But we have a good relationship, I think. One of the things was that I've always been for him. And I was not going to let anything come between us. And right to this day I think--matter of fact, he's gonna be by here this afternoon. We're gonna go to the university to a basketball game. Oh, he's always going. You never catch him. He be gone all the time. We have I think an excellent relationship. Speaker 2: I remember--I've known Johnny for a long time. But I remember weren't you the one who taught him about investing in stocks? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Tell me about that whole thing. Because, you know more is known about Jewel [Stradford Lafontant MANkarious] but you're sort of the quiet influence. So that's--but I remember him telling me about that. Speaker 1: Well see we weren't married then. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: But--I was at a dinner, some kind of a dinner. And I was sitting next to somebody. I, I don't even remember whether it was the president or the vice president of some corporation. But there were others on the same level. They were talking about their kids and stuff like that. And talking about kids being aware of what the stock market was all about. And I made a stupid remark about, "You know, blacks really don't understand the stock market. It just like talking about the stock that's covering the field. That's as much as it mean to them." So I was determined that when Johnny came along, that when he got to the point where he was old enough, he as going to know something about the stock market. I got my highest grade in law school in corporations. 'Cause I said, "This is the future of the Negro. I don't understand this." I never did what I would have done (chuckle). But I really think that, that would be the future. That would be where it's at. Put your money together and run a corporation. But I was never able to get with a group that would get off dead center except with [Dempsey] Travis. and I was supportive of Travis. And he was the one doing it and I supported him. I never was a leader in any of that. You see. And Travis has gone a long ways to with it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He's got that same kind of personality of making himself known. I know when Travis would have a--Travis would call a press conference and it wouldn't be anybody there but Travis. But he knew what he was doing. Speaker 2: And what--let's go back to Johnny and the stock. So how did you--did you talk to him about stock? You know, 'cause he said you bought him some stock. I think. Speaker 1: Oh that was just that I bought stock for him for his birthday and for Christmas. I would buy a share of stock in some corporation that paid dividends. Any stock that I bought had to pay dividends so he would see the income from it. And then I'd give him the checks. Then I took him out and opened up a bank account right out here at Independence Bank. I opened, opened up a bank account and he was only twelve years old. It just happened that I knew the president, and so that, he let us open up an account for him at twelve years old. And when he opened up that account, I would give him the checks, that they went into that checking account. And I told him that he can put his money into his checking account and he could write his own checks. And I would give him some money 'cause he didn't get enough dividends so he didn't have--so some money went into it from his allowance. And he was able--I wanted him to be able to buy his own clothes and money for some things that he could spend it from the money he had. He had enough money to spend. Johnny never really wanted for money I don't think. 'Cause what I didn't give him his mother probably gave him. Even, even when I didn't think it was the thing to do, (chuckle) she did. I remember once, Johnny had wrote a check. I had taught him, "You should never write a check that's gonna bounce." If you got to write it it's got to be--Every one of them. You have--we didn't have to have a limit over there. 'Cause I guess he could write something on the account and let it happen so he didn't have to have a limit. I said, "Never get below twenty-five dollars." Well, one time he had a check bounce. And what I did was, "Just give me the check book." That's all. So he couldn't write any more checks. It was getting around pretty close to Christmas. He couldn't write any checks. But I'm sure his mother probably made it up or gave it to him or something. I said, money is still going in. It will be there. But you just can't write a check on it until sometime after Christmas. See you can keep them--punish them for ever. You got to--There's got to be an end. He's got to have an--learning a way to correct his behavior. And so far as I know once he opened that accou--well, he didn't have to pen it, 'cause the account was there. But once he was able to write checks on that account, he never did it again so far as I know. Speaker 2: Now what, what--do you have any--How, how--do you have any memories of you and your son, you know, fun times together or things that you would like to share with us? Speaker 1: Well I don't know what--having fun but I'll tell you this. I kept him on weekends. On Saturday, I'd pick him up on Saturday. He knew what time his daddy was gonna be there and his daddy was gonna be there at that time. I took him to school on Monday morning. And I had to have clothes at the house. I picked him up in the yard with dirty clothes on (chuckle). And he had to go to school with clean clothes. But I had clothes there for him to wear to school. And I used to drive him to school from there. Well at that time, Jewel. During that time rather, Jewel went to Washington [D.C.]. And I think she was gone about three years or so, I believe. But during that time Johnny stayed with me regularly. And I would take him to school and I had to see about doing all this business of having babysitters and stuff like that. But I never had him at the house that I can recall that I wasn't there, in the time that he was there. If I was going out it was after he went to sleep. You know. But, then I'd get--They used to have nurses over there at--what's this hospital? Michael, Michael Reese [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]. They used to have a nurses training school over there and you could get one of the nurses over. They would earn a little extra money by babysitting. I'd get one of them to come over. But I didn't know. I was I guess I wasn't alerted. I'd be almost afraid to have a babysitter now unless I had an (chuckle) awful lot of investigation in that person. But we never had a problem. I used to take him somewhere. We went somewhere. I used to take him on many things. We used to go skiing. I would take him skiing, ice skating. He did the ice skating and the skiing though. I said, "If I break my leg, how are we gonna get you home?" Then, we used to go bowling. We used to go to these little old things where they have rides and things. But I had to--I wasn't gonna have him come to my house and set up like he was in prison over the weekend. So I would take him places. I don't know, I never--you ever hear Johnny say anything about that stuff Laura? Speaker 2: When--the only thing I've heard him say just on the subject is when we were in Las Vegas [Nevada]. And he was taking all those fast rides. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I had dropped down 'cause I didn't want to do it. Speaker 1: I was so glad when he was big enough (laughing) that I didn't have to take him. Speaker 2: But he told me. I don't do it for her because my father would never get on these rides. Speaker 1: Yeah (laughing). Speaker 2: But that's the only thing he said. Speaker 1: I took him on those rides until I felt like he could go without me. Speaker 2: Well they were scaring me at this age. Speaker 1: So now do you--what was--this is a question about you and Johnny, but what--having a son, you know, a lot to a man. My father only had four girls. He always talked about having a son and how he'd put him in ice cold water that would be funny (laughing). Speaker 2: (laughing). Speaker 1: It was that macho thing. You know he did. (laughing). He would say, "I'd take my son and put him in ice cold water. That would be Julius Junior." 'Cause I was the oldest. And I'm named after my father. So. You know these things bring out--never mind. But anyway, I was just wondering, you know, what has been your, you know, hopes and dreams and aspirations for your son? How--was it important the relationship you had and you know, how do you feel about the son you have? Speaker 2: Well, I feel he's been very successful and I think he's honest. and he picked Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] to go to school too. Jewel went with him to visit a couple of schools and I took him to visit a couple of schools and he decided on Princeton. And Johnny was basketball was his--he went to school to play basketball. And when he went to lab school, I was going to every home game. I was there, at every home game. I thought about my ambition for him was for him to get a job so he could take care of himself. But I thought--I never thought about him going into money management. I thought about him going into the insurance business. Because I knew insurance was a good business and if you do it right, you're really serving the public. You're really serving somebody, and it's good money. And I had been exposed to some of that in working with Travis and I knew what was to it. Speaker 1: Are you, it may be advanced for this question, but, are you proud of your son and why? Speaker 2: Well I'm proud of him because he earned his own living. I, I don't have to worry about helping him. Not after he first got out of money--when he first got out of school. When you still having to come up with some money, I said, "How long will this thing go on (laughing)?" I figured when he finished he was through. I once told him, "I'll give you $500 and put it in the bank if you agree that you won't touch that $500 unless it was an emergency." He didn't even want to take it. 'Cause he didn't want to make that commitment. I can remember another time he had a credit card. And I said, "You only use it in emergencies." And he was playing basketball at Princeton. He had to be back at Princeton to practice. And when he was gonna go back to practice, he had overstayed his time up there in New York [New York] and didn't, wasn't gonna be able to get his train. And so he said, "Daddy what would you have done?" And I didn't--couldn't think of anything. He just rented a car and drove back (chuckle). That' what he did. Now, he's a good kid. I'm not happy with his, the way his married life is turning out. But maybe if I had been a better father, maybe I would have helped him better there. I don't know. Story_ID: 19635 Speaker 1: You served on the bench for many, you know-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Twenty years, twenty-one really. Speaker 1: In law. And what--were you in different divisions or were you always in the juvenile? Speaker 2: Always in the juvenile division. Speaker 1: Okay. Can we talk about that? Can we talk about what your experience was and the type of things you saw? And--. Speaker 2: Well juvenile court is simply--it's like any other criminal court in that division, criminal division, like any other court except that the penalties are not the same. For example if you have a kid under--well if he's sixteen years old, you send him to the adult system. Under sixteen you can't try him as an adult, except they changed the law during the time I was there, so that you could try them as an adult if he was fifteen years old with certain types of offenses. Other than that, I don't know. And you gotta do something for them. That was another thing that's awfully important. It doesn't do any good to send a kid to through juvenile--I mean transfer him to an adult system and he ends up going into prison, maybe say for murder. It is a minimum of twenty years and a maximum of sixty years. Well, it's not gonna do him any good when it's for--when he's charged with being a--I can't even think of what I'm telling you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it's where you are charged with an offense. You're the one who committed the offense, but he's with you. Speaker 1: Accomplice. Speaker 2: Yeah. And he is as guilty as if he were the one that pulled the trigger. And can get the same penalty and that doesn't seem exactly right to me. Speaker 1: Did you find--were there--did you become sort of skeptical or cynical after serving on the bench that long? Or did you see more crimes being created and , you know, more, you know new juveniles creating crimes over the twenty year period that you wouldn't see earlier in the times? Speaker 2: Oh, they were committing all of the same offenses. But I think more dope now than ever. At least drugs that's more of it now, than when I first started. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you know, most of the kids that get into difficulties are kids who do not live with two parents, most of them. But that's not always true. You get some dedicated mother and a few of them, or you get some dedicated father. Speaker 1: Did you--did you enter or have any philosophy as a judge in terms of how you would go about sentencing? Were there things--you know different people have, they bring different perspectives to. Speaker 2: The question is whether or not I think we can rehabilitate this kid. And that's all there is to that. And if I got some good probation officers, they'll come up with a good program that will help this kid in the future. And my--that was my desire was to help turn this kid around. And I think that I did turn some around. 'Cause I've had some come up and tell me. I ran into a guy downtown, tell me he got a job or something, you know. So that the--I'm lucky. I don't know how long it will be. But I've never had one that I sentenced or whatever I did that ever came back to try to get even with me or something. Story_ID: 19636 Speaker 1: You've been on this earth eighty-one years. Do you have--you have concerns for the new gen--you know, the future generations? Do you have any advice, for us? You know for others that would follow behind you? Speaker 2: Only thing I think they need to learn to think. And that means you got to go to school and that's why I'm glad I went to law school. If I never practiced law, I would be glad I went to law school. Because you learned how to think. When you read a case, you said, "They must have put it in here for some reason." (Laughing) you got to figure out why they put it in there. And that's the thing that I think most. Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I'm not worried about that part. 'Cause I won't know a thing about what happened. Like when they put me under that anesthesia, I think it was seven or eight hours I was under anesthesia. It's a complete blackout. Mean time, they got your heart out, or cutting something, sewing up something or taking care of something. And I said, "Well, if this is death, you don't know anything about it. It's not so bad." Speaker 1: Well what would you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: To say that I was fair. I was fair and that I was interested in the well-being of the kid that appeared before me. Other than that, I'm, I don't worry too much about it. You know the guy Pat Murphy that works with kids over there in juvenile? He tried to get started a movement to have me and [William Sylvester] Syl White--you know Syl White? Syl used to be the presiding judge over there at one time. To get the building named after the two of us. Nothing came out of it. I didn't expect anything to come of it, but, at any rate. At least somebody thought enough of me to try to do it. And Pat is the guard. Speaker 1: Now you had said--you had said when, when I was first asking the first set of questions. When I asked your favorite vacation--I think it was your favorite vacation or favorite place. I asked favorite time of year and you said, Chicago, [Illinois]. You like Chicago. And I--you have been in Chicago since you were twelve years old. And I would like you to talk about I assume you have a love affair with this city? I don't know. Or it's home to you. Let's put it that way. Speaker 2: I just don't know of any better place. That's all. Speaker 1: Okay. And why is that? Speaker 2: Well I've been to a great number of place--. I've been to every state in the union, as a matter of fact. And I've been to a lot of countries, foreign countries. And even though we have our problems here, I think for me, this is the best place for me. I like walking down the street and seeing somebody I know, walking to the coops and seeing somebody I know, and who often knows me. I like the fact that, that you can get--I means things that have to be settled we've got the courts to settle them in. I like that. But I tell you, this is not necessarily the best place in the world. I don't know that. Because I know that we were in Sweden and there they seemed to be pretty reasonable, let's say. I think Sweden outside of the United States is the best one I've seen. Story_ID: 19637 Speaker 1: What would you say about Mr. [Dempsey] Travis? Speaker 2: You know I'm not gonna say anything negative about him, so what the hell you ask me (laughing) Speaker 1: (Laughing). Well no. No, but you said you've known him for a long time. I was just--. Speaker 2: I knew him when he had a--working in a little grocery--well not grocery, a storefront on 47th street. I knew him before they got (unclear). But he's got a lot on the ball. I tell you...