 Story_ID: 178830 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Stuart Rankin, S-T-U-A-R-T, R-A-N-K-I-N. Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: McLean, M little C L-E-A-N. Speaker 1: And, and do you have any nicknames or anything? Speaker 2: I couldn't--different nicknames from different people who have known me over the years, so not one specific. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now what's your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Springfield, Massachusetts in 1936, 24th of November. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired advertising and marketing executive. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I still do some consulting. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is October the 8th, 2003. Speaker 1: And finally, where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're presently-- Speaker 1: You don't have to give your address, but-- Speaker 2: Okay, we're presently in our apartment on Lake Shore Drive in Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 178831 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you and they only require a short answer. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: That's a hard answer-- I like a lot of different foods. It ranges from Italian to fried chicken, poached eggs. I, I don't really have any one favorite food, peanut butter and jelly sandwich, bologna sandwiches, you know different dishes that my wife [HM Marlene Owens Rankin] fixes that don't have any particular name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I just like food in general. Speaker 1: All right now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: When I was younger probably summertime, but now I've--I enjoy all the seasons about the same. I do prefer spring, summer, fall to winter at this point 'cause I can't do the things--I used to ski a lot and when my son was younger, we did a lot of things in the winter sports that I can't do anymore, at least, not now. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well we used to go to Nassau [Bahamas] a lot, I had a company in Nassau. And we went there on business but it was usually a vacation, and that was one of our favorite places, and the other was Phoenix [Arizona]. My wife parents lived there and we'd go visit them. I had a couple of clients in Phoenix at the time also over a twenty year period. So we went there a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: That's pretty good because I really don't. One that sticks in my mind though, that I didn't appreciate when I was younger, but I've app--begun to appreciate more as I've gotten older. One of my uncle's favorite sayings was, It's very interesting, but it's really not important. And there are so many things that people make important that are really just interesting. Story_ID: 178832 Speaker 1: Well tell me about your family history. I'd like to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family. But first I want you to give us your parents' full names, spell them for us and give us their dates and places of birth. Speaker 2: Well that's gonna be a tough one in a way. My father's name was Alonzo Rankin, and I believe he was born in 1914 in Springfield, Massachusetts. My mother's name was Luella Pettijohn Rankin, P-E-T, P-E-T-T-I-J-O-H-N, Pettijohn. And she was born in Amherst, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you know about your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Well my mother's side of the family was--there were two, basically two sides. There was an Indian [Native American] side and a, a--the black side. The black side, my grandfather's--my great-grandfather was a son of a slave and they migrated from Virginia around the turn of the century, to Amherst [Massachusetts]. He and his--my great-grandfather and his brothers, I think there were three of them all together, wanted to move north and they didn't wanna go to a big city, and they saw Amherst, Massachusetts on the map. And they were from Amherst, Virginia. So they said well let's go to Amherst, Massachusetts, it was real scientific reasons why they went there. They sent one of the younger daughters to Amherst to sort of investigate and because she got a job there as a maid, and she lived there for a year before she went back and told them that it would be a great place for the whole family to settle. So they loaded up a wagon with enough food and provisions for a year. They had salted hams and all, you know, all canned goods and everything that people did in those days where the food--when the food tasted great. And they took off for Amherst and my grand--great-grandfather got a job in a hat factory. And he had a fairly large family. I think he had nine children and my grandfather was one of them, his name was Jasper Pettijohn. And he met my grandmother, whose mother was a, a full-blooded Oneida Indian, and her father was the son of a black free man and an Indian. And that side of the family was called the Moodys, they were the Moodys, and there's still a bunch of 'em living on the planta-- it's not a plantation, that was down South. But living on the reservation in eastern, western Massachusetts, who we haven't really any contact with 'cause they live a different--they live in a different world. But my great-grandmother was quite a character from what I understand, being quite the lady about town. She was a very beautiful Indian woman and that's my great-grandmother. My grandmother basically was raised by her aunt. And she was a very controlled, typical New England woman. She was the housekeeper for the president of Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts]. And her oldest daughter was a housekeeper for the president of Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 178833 Speaker 1: And my parents [Alanzo Rankin and Luella Pettijohn Rankin] got divorced when I was five and my two sisters and I were sent to live with my [maternal] grandmother in Amherst [Massachusetts]. And we lived with her for six years. And during that time is when--between her and my mother, visits us from--we were indoctrinated really with New England ethics and manners and you know, the, the discipline and not always good from the standpoint of no--you know you don't show any emotion. You don't do certain things that were really you needed to do from an emotional, you know, outlet that you needed. But for the most part, it, it was really good for all of us because it helped us once we moved into the real world. The real world was moving from Amherst to Cincinnati [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We, we left at night on a train, had no idea--I was eleven years old and my older sister was thirteen, no she was fourteen. So she was a little more aware of what was going on than I was. But geograph--geographically I knew where Ohio was and Cincinnati, but it didn't mean anything really. So we were in a sleeper and we traveled overnight. And when we left Amherst, we were basically the only black family in Amherst. I mean any black person that you saw was a Pettijohn or related to the Pettijohn's. And when we got to Cincinnati, I got up the next morning and went outside and all our neighbors was black. And it was quite a shock. I mean not to the point where I was upset or afraid or anything like that, but it was just interesting to see all these black people who were not a rel--they weren't relatives. And there was a park across the street. And in Amherst if you walk more than three or four blocks, you, you walked into somebody's farm. And you know so there were horses and cows and things like that. Well I was looking for the farm and I walked about a mile and a half and you know it was just more streets, more streets and then finally I decided I'd better go back home. But anyway it was, it was quite a traumatic experience because we went from a very rural, controlled environment to basically what was a ghetto in Cincinnati. I mean it wasn't the ghetto like ghettos became. People there were still--usually the husband and wife were together. This was in the '40s [1940's], 1947. And most of the men had menial jobs. The women often were domestics in the neighborhood where I grew up. But there were also doctors and lawyers and, and what have you because blacks were segregated to the extent that it didn't matter what you did or how much money you had, you still lived in the same area. Speaker 2: What did they call that side of town or that part? Speaker 1: It was called Walnut Hills [Cincinnati, Ohio]. Walnut Hills at--was sort of a lower middle class, middle class black community. The tough part of the black community was downtown on the West End [Cincinnati, Ohio]. It really wasn't tough by today's standards. It's just that the people were poorer. You know they were, were living in the projects, but they weren't projects like they are today, they became. Speaker 2: What do they call that part of town? Speaker 1: Just the West End. They call it something else now, and it's worse now. I mean it's really tough now, but I don't know, I've forgotten what they call it. I only get--I get back to Cincinnati every so often. Story_ID: 178834 Speaker 1: Now are there any stories about any of your, your ancestors from way back in, in Springfield [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Well on my father's [Alanzo Rankin] side of the family, we really lost contact with, with him after my parents [Alanzo Rankin and Luella Pettijohn Rankin] got divorced and he died at a young age. He was in his mid to late thirties when he died, so--then my grandmother died. And so we didn't keep--we didn't have any contact with my father's side of the family. So I don't really know much about them, the Rankin's. But I do know that my grandmother was Scotch [Scottish] basically. She was--her father was black and of mixed, you know, his parents were white and black. And then he married a, a white woman, and my grandmother was their offspring. Her last name was McLean, maiden name, and that's how I got my middle name. She was a good woman, worked very hard, had a large family. When we did live with them, it was one of those situations that was very typical of the time. Lived in a big house and each sibling had their own room and, you know their family lived in their room. Like my aunt and my two cousins lived in the room next door. My two sisters and my parents and I lived in the, the front room. My grandparents had a room adjacent to the kitchen. And then there were various uncles that lived upstairs who were, who were single. One of whom--there were a set of twins, David and Daniel. And Daniel was retarded at some level. Just the salt of the earth type person. He, he sold papers on the corner of Main and some street in Springfield for years and years and years. And he was a very well-known figure in Springfield as the newsman on this particular corner. I had another uncle who was a maitre d' at the biggest hotel in Springfield, and he had a different experience in that he met all the--it was a place where the president stayed when he came to Springfield and the biggies, all the biggies came. So he was well known as a, a, a black man who was the greeter of celebrities and so his picture was always in the paper. And he and his family lived, you know, quite well. If you have access to the kitchen of a hotel, you're doing pretty good. So he was an interesting character. And then Daniel's brother whose name was David, was an interesting character in that he and a friend of his went to join the [U.S.] Navy at the beginning of World War II [WWII]. And his friend was shuttled to one side, and he was shuttled to another and then he discovered he was in the line with white guys and his friend was in the line with black guys. And he left and went to the Navy and never, they never saw him again. I think he kept in touch with grandmother on some level, but for the most part, he did what they called passed. You know he, he passed for white and lived in California. And I've seen the name Rankin come up on a couple of occasions as a screenwriter, and somebody told me that there were, there was a guy who might have been a relative, who might have been the son of David who became a screenwriter. But I don't--he probably wouldn't know any of his father's history. If that's the truth, I don't, you know it sort of sounds good, but I don't know that it's true at all. Story_ID: 178835 Speaker 1: Oh, another interesting thing about my mother's [Luella Pettijohn Rankin] side, was one of her uncles became a sharpshooter for Springfield Rifle. And he traveled all over the world. He's traveled with Annie Oakley and with other good shots of the time. And he had all kind of medals. We had pictures of him with his guns and he, he was a demonstrator of weaponry for Springfield Rifle. Speaker 2: What was his name? Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of it. I think it was Talbot, T-A-L-B-O--B-O-T, 'cause that was a--it was--his last name was Talbot. Speaker 2: Talbot Rank--his last name was Talbot? Speaker 1: Talbot, yeah, but I don't know what his first name was. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I, I don't--and I'm not sure whether he was--he might have been my grandmother's cousin. I'm not sure, but he was on my mother's side of the family. Story_ID: 178836 Speaker 1: Well tell me about growing up, or what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood, first in Springfield [Massachusetts] and then you know, take us through Cinci [Cincinnati, Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Well mainly in Amherst [Massachusetts] 'cause I was five when I left Springfield. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: That's okay. You know I don't really remember a whole lot about Springfield. I do remember though when I was in about the third grade, I noted, and I can't think of his name now, black psychologist came through and his thing was to get kids' reactions to black dolls and white dolls. And get you to--the key was to get you to say which one do you like the best. Speaker 1: Kenneth Clark [and wife, Mamie Clark]. Speaker 2: It was Kenneth Clark, right. He came through my elementary school when I was three, I mean when I was in the third grade or whatever. And I remember being--taken into the room and it was just him and me and the teacher and, and they had these dolls and said which one do you like the best? And I, you know first of all I wasn't into dolls, and secondly, I couldn't--I didn't, you know, have any reference point. So I, you know I ended up crying. I just started--burst into tears like you know, don't make me say something. I don't know what I'm say--you know, I didn't even know how to verbalize that. But my frustration was that hey, leave me alone, you know, I don't wanna make a decision because I don't feel I have to for one thing. But anyhow, it was Kenneth Clark, and that was something I found out later when I was taking psychology courses I learned about that. Didn't know I had been a subject until I-- Speaker 1: Had, had, had you known, you would have given the right answer to help his experiment along, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No way you could have known then. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 178837 Speaker 1: I made it [Amherst, Massachusetts] into a very idyllic place because there were just a lot--there was a lot of freedom. You were outside most of the time. We lived in a little house my [maternal] grandparents had. It was approximately four and a half rooms. And my grandparents had one bedroom and the other room was like a dormitory where my two sisters and two, two uncles who were teenagers, we lived in the--that's where we slept. We didn't live there, we slept--we kept all our clothes under the bed and actually they were [U.S.] Army cots. The house was heated by potbelly black stoves, which eventually the wood burned out and you were left to--hopefully had--you had acquired a nice warm spot in your cot so you didn't have to move, you know, 'cause it would be cold. We slept with mittens and, and socks on our feet in the winter time. And sometimes hats because it'd be that cold. But we, we survived and we didn't know any better. There was no electricity. We had running water and a, and a closet as my grandmother [Jasper Pettijohn] called it, you know, toilet inside. And so we were fortunate there. Other relatives of ours had outhouses and I used to hate to go visit them because if you had to go to the outhouse, it was a bad experience, you know. But we were lucky to have a, an indoor toilet and we chopped wood for the stoves and my grandmother had a garden and each one of us had responsibility for part of the garden. And mine was horseradishes and carrots. And there were--we'd go pick berries, blueberries, blackberries, what have you. And it was mainly for them to can in the summer time. We, we lived off of what we grew in the, in the summer, in the winter, and we ate very little meat. I was a, I was a vegetarian and didn't know it. And that's mainly--I guess that's one of the reasons I enjoy fried chicken so much because on occasion we would have fried chicken, or she'd have chicken and dumplings. It was almost always chicken. And 'cause she and my aunts could take it and make it, you know, spread it over, you know, for a lot of people. Always very good. And Amherst was a small town at the time, much smaller than it is now, it's still small. But it was rural and my older uncles sort of took me under their wing and let me run with them. And we'd go to the University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] and learned how to ski, ice skate, rode horses all the time. The Calvary had sent all the livestock in the '30s [1930s] to different state universities around the country 'cause the calvary was becoming mechanized, you know tanks were taking the place of, of horses. Horses had been out really a long time but they still had a lot of 'em. So we were able to ride any kind of horse we wanted to for the most part. And it was just a lot of fun. I mean that, that was fun. I didn't realize that there were a lot of problems that were manifesting themselves in terms of just you know, it wasn't, it was happy, happy on one side and on the other side it was--there was not a whole lot of emotional nurturing. My grandmother did the best she could and my older sister probably suffered more than me and my younger sister. But there wasn't anybody to, to turn to, you know more or less. We could always turn to her, but she--and her lessons were always well taken, but they were usually, you know, stiff upper lip, keep your chin up. It's gonna be all right. Because she had gone through a much tougher life than we had with her mother. Story_ID: 178838 Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you earlier but I guess I'll ask you now. Though for what the scene you describe at Amherst [Massachusetts], it seems like impossible that your parents would not meet, but how did they meet? Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Well you, you make, you're making me think now because my mother [Luella Pettijohn Rankin] went to a party in Springfield [Massachusetts], and that's where they met. She and her sisters. She had four sisters and, and four brothers, there were nine people in her family. All the girls were the oldest and the boys started, I guess my grandfather was determined to have a boy and once he got a boy, he had three more. But the girls would go to Amherst to parties, I mean to Springfield to parties, and that's where she met my father [Alanzo Rankin]. But she remarried, my mother remarried in 1944 to a man who I consider my father, his name was Baron Jones. And he was in the [U.S.] Army, [U.S.] Air Force, and he was stationed at Westover field [Westover Air Reserve Base, Chicopee, Massachusetts], which is a big Air Force base in Spring--outside of Springfield. And he was a drummer, played in the USO [United Service Organizations] and she would go to the USO with her girlfriends. 'Cause she worked at Springfield rifle [Springfield Armory]. She assembled the firing mechanism for M1 rifles, which was the staple weapon for American infantry. And--so she would go to Westover field. She met Baron and I remember about 1945 or six [1946], she brought him up to Amherst. We had met him a number of times, and wanted to know if it was okay with us if she brought a--brought us a new father. And we said yeah, you know 'cause we were really excited 'cause that meant we would be reunited with her too. And he was from Cincinnati [Ohio]. That's how we got there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's a long story to get there. And his--he had grown up in, in Cincinnati, so we ended up there in 1947. Speaker 1: What was his last name again? Speaker 2: Jones. Speaker 1: Right Jones, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's still alive. My mother died the day before Thanksgiving in 2002, and my father's [Baron Jones] now in a nursing home in Cincinnati. But he's doing, he's doing all right. He's amazing 'cause they've counted him out a number of times over the past four years and he keeps coming back stronger than before. So he's, he's doing okay. Story_ID: 178839 Speaker 1: Cincinnati [Ohio] was really a, a trial for me and my sisters. I'll tell my story more than I would tell theirs. They came out of it in good shape. You know they're both fine. My oldest sister is seventy now and my younger, my younger sister is sixty-three, and then I have a younger brother who was my fath--Baron's [Jones] son by a previous marriage. He's really my stepbrother, but we don't, but we've never, you know, done that number. And my father [Baron Jones] and mother [Luella Pettijohn Rankin] had a child named Veronica. So Veronica is a half-sister basically. But we all grew up together and storm--weathered many a storm between my father's family and my mother and us, eventually, you know the, the kids from Amherst [Massachusetts] versus my step-brother Sonny and half-sister Veronica, who I, again we had never dealt with that. But just for identification sake, his--my father's mother was a very difficult person and she liked to play people against each other and we were living in her house. Another situation where three or four families living in a big house, each having rooms. And it was a difficult transition from Amherst to Spring--to Cincinnati. I got involved with the wrong group of kids, trying to prove myself. And fortunately, my upbringing you might say, final--you know took over when I saw things were really wrong and that I was getting myself into a bad situation. I would extra--extricate myself like immediately. And I remember there was a 7-Up factory about three stories, three doors down from our house that had been built. Prior to that it had been a raw dump. So it was I mean rat infested and they just--they put lime on, on the garbage and then they'd cover it. It was a poor excuse for a landfill. But eventually they cleaned it up. And after they did, 7-Up built a factory there. I'm getting off the subject a little bit just to set the stage. But 7-Up factory had a big garage and they had a lot of soda sitting out loose. And I was with at least two friends of mine, quote/unquote, and we were sitting on the side of a hill; Cincinnati is very hilly. And said you know we could go down there and steal as much pop as we want. So the first run I went with them and we each got a case of pop and took it. We had so much we were having fights with it. You know we were shaking it up and spraying it on each other and everything. The next time they went and I wasn't with them, they almost got caught. The third time they tried to force me to go by myself and get the pop. And I said, "Something's wrong with this picture." Story_ID: 177948 Speaker 1: All right you were talking about them asking you to go and steal this 7-Up. Speaker 2: Yeah, these two friends of mine, Gerald [ph.] and Sonny [ph.], wanted me to go steal the pop because they didn't wanna take a chance on getting caught. So I said okay. So I went down there, well my house was only three doors up. So I was in--literally in my backyard and I just turned around and waved at them and went home. And after that I didn't really associate with them at all. I found some other friends in the neighborhood. Not that I went and searched them, I just found them. I was pretty much a loner, even though I associated with a lot of people, I, I was really--had my own agenda for what I wanted to do. I didn't always make the right decision on what to do. But you know I was, I, I could be considered a loner. Story_ID: 177949 Speaker 1: Now what, what were your favorite activities when you were coming up? Did you like music or radio or books, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Daddy [stepfather, Baron Jones] was a, a drummer. So we had all kind of music in the house, you know from classical to R & B. He was a jazz drummer. And he was--he didn't go on the road, he was a drummer that would be called up by, you know different groups that were coming to town that needed a drummer. Could be anybody from Count Basie to someone you never heard of before. And I don't know that he ever played for Count Basie, but I know he played for some big named bands at the time. The music in the house was, was great and we you know got a good appreciation for it. And my mother [Luella Pettijohn Rankin] was particularly conscientious about getting us involved in like the art museum programs. Every Saturday we would go to the art museum. We had tickets to the symphony through the school. It only cost fifty cents, but she made sure that we were on the schedule to go to those kind of things. We were active in the church, you know it was to keep us out of trouble. Speaker 1: What church did you attend? Speaker 2: Well the first one was a Methodist church where she took us. And she wasn't religious really, my mother was agnostic. She didn't pass this on to us until later. But she took us to the Methodist church, although we had been going to a Baptist church in, in Amherst [Massachusetts]. And they had a lot of youth programs, so she got us all involved in those youth programs, and ultimately I became a Boy Scout. They had a troop there. And then as I grew a little older, the goal of my friends at the time, which was a much better goal than my previous friends' goals, was to go to church that had the best looking girls. So we went from Catholic church to holy rollers and we ended up at the Episcopal church, which had the best looking girls at that time. And my best friend, still one of my two best friends, Jack Sherman and I became acolytes in the church. And again it was--kept us out of trouble and 'cause a lot of our friends were falling victim to all kind of things, you know all kind of things that poor kids fall victim to. And ironically, my closest friends emerged as, as Jack and another guy named Bob Wilder. And we've all done quite well. Jack's a federal judge, Bob is a vice president at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] in charge of procurement, and I had a successful advertising career. Story_ID: 177950 Speaker 1: You attended elementary school in Amherst [Massachusetts], right. How was, how, how was school for you in Amherst? Speaker 2: It was interesting. Amherst was a very bigoted little town, ironically. I mean it was--you would think it'd be liberal, having Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts] and the University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] there, but it--there were a lot of bigots in Amherst and they showed their face as much as possible. I mean when it--I mean I could go to the candy store, drug store and the guy would call me snowball. You know I could go to the, to the grocery store and the guy--what can I do for you little Pickaninny? Yeah. And so it--but the saving grace was my grandmother [Jasper Pettijohn] was a housekeeper for the president of Amherst College. And my grandfather was the bartender at Barcelotti's [ph.], which was the only bar in Amherst at the time where you could get liquor. And he knew a whole lot of people who were drinkers, you know they'd either drink the bar, or he'd be shipping booze to them at home. So they had a lot of contacts. So whenever there was a problem, we were out of it. The two times I remember being, you know, called--I was never call--I was, you know I was called nigger once. But that was by a, a kid and I took care of that myself. But when I told my grandmother the butcher called me a Pickaninny, she grabbed me by the hand, took me right back uptown, what we called uptown was about a half a mile away. And she confronted him and, "Oh, Mrs. Pettijohn, I didn't say. He must have misunderstood me." You know she said, "He didn't misunderstood you because he doesn't use that word." And she, she got Louie, the store manager, it was Louie's Market [ph.]. And he made the butcher apologize. And the same with the guy that worked in the drug store. She went up and did the same thing. So that sort of thing when it happened, was nipped in the bud. I mean she made sure that I knew that that wasn't acceptable, and that you don't have to take it. They had a strange kind of power, being domestics and working the bar. And my great-grandfather had worked in a hat shop when--in Amherst, Amherst had a big hat shop at the turn of the century. And he had a great reputation. So Pettijohns were highly re--respected in Amherst and they didn't take any, they didn't take any crap from anybody. Iron--I'll tell you an interesting story. One of my uncles, Chesley [ph.], was stationed in the South Pacific during World War II [WWII]. And when he was on New Guinea in what they call mop-up force, that was cleaning up the Japanese who were still on the island and still holding out. And he got shipped from there to a small island where he and a couple of his buddies found an old French chateau that had a bunch of wine in the basement. It had been--the foundation had become like a, a pool of water and they swam in it and they discovered this wine. And they got drunk and stayed up there, they went AWOL [Absent Without Leave]. And one of them had stolen a bunch of medals, you know 'cause they had crates of all kind of stuff on this island. And they had found a crate full of medals, you know everything from Purple Hearts to blah, blah, blah. So the MP's [Military Police] were after 'em and they finally got 'em out of this chateau and took 'em to the clink, you know, stockade. And my uncle was called out after a couple of days. And there was a colonel who was in charge of this island. It was small, it was like six by five miles. And he said to my uncle, "You're Chesley Pettijohn." And my uncle said, "Yeah." And he said, "You're from Amherst, Massachusetts," he said, "yeah." He said, "I'm colonel," whatever his name was, say Hildebrand. He says, "You went to high school with my son, you played football with him at Amherst High School." And Chesley said, "Yeah that's right and, you know, and I didn't know you." You know and he said, "Well I knew you." He says, "I'm giving you a pass on the next boat out of here," and he says, "when you get back to the states," he said, "keep your nose clean or you're gonna be in serious trouble." So he shipped him out, out of the clear blue sky. I mean he never went to court martial or anything. He just got a, a good break because you know, of his connection at Amherst and the reputation of his family. Story_ID: 177951 Speaker 1: -- And when you consider my grandmother [Jasper Pettijohn] was taking care of the president's [of Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] kids and they were crazy about her and an aunt named Helen who helped her, and my Aunt Helen was a--the domestic for a retired admiral who had been a hero in World War II [WWII]. He lived right down the street. And you know how it is. You know those, those folks take to you and make you like family, quote/unquote. But there is a, there is an emotional attachment. And they will go on the line for you to a certain level. Some of 'em will go to bat for you all the way down the line. But they will all go to bat for you at some level. And especially if your relationship is good. And that, you're write, I mean that's a, a strange kind of power. So it's like the slaves who lived in the house versus the ones who lived in the field. You know the ones in the house had a particular privileges and opportunities that was afforded them just because they had close proximity to the master and his family. Story_ID: 177952 Speaker 1: Well how did you like school? Now you, you attended Amherst [Massachusetts] elementary school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you asked me and I, I sort of drifted away. Speaker 1: What elementary school? Yeah, yeah but that's a good story, though, all right. Speaker 2: Well the, the teachers were--they, they looked at us as blacks and we were sort of--that made us different. And it manifested itself in different ways like it--there was a play I remember and the teacher that I had at the time wanted me to be George Washington Carver. And George Washington Carver wasn't really in the script for this play. You know it was really more about George Washington and Abraham Lincoln and key characters in white America's version of our history. And she didn't have a place for me, so she said, well you can be George Washington Carver. Of course I didn't know who he was. And I went home and told my grandmother that the teacher wants me to be George Washington Carver. And evidently this little play and skit was something that had been going on at the school for years, it was sort of a thing that went on. And my grandmother said, "Well they've never had George Washington Carver before, and they're not gonna have him with you being him today," even though he's somebody to be admired and what have you. But it was a, a racial thing. You know she didn't--she wasn't gonna let me be Davey Crockett or what have you. So my grandmother just told her take me out of the play. And so the teacher said well he's got to be in the play. So they made me a small part where I was part of the Congress or something like that. But not--you know, it wasn't a big deal. It's like, you know, fourth grade play. But the teachers had this attitude towards you that you, you didn't get the feeling that you were inferior, but you were definitely different. And they, they dealt with you differently. When they disciplined you, it was different, it was a little more strict for the same thing that another kid would do. My grandmother seemed to come up to the school quite a bit because of problems that I was having at the school. Certainly in Cincinnati [Ohio] when I, when I went to Hoffman [School, Cincinnati, Ohio], my mother [Luella Pettijohn Rankin] was up at school all the time 'cause I was having a lot of problems. You know I was just a, a little renegade. And I was ahead in school when I went to Cincinnati because the schools in Amherst [Massachusetts] were ahead of the schools in Cincinnati. So I was young to be in the sixth grade. So they kept me in sixth grade again. And then they passed me on, no I was a fifth grader I think. Whatever it was, I ended up being held back twice. They wanted to put me in reform school and you know they said I needed to go to a trade school. Somewhere where there was heavier discipline. But my mother talked 'em out of it every time. And one of the teachers, Mrs. Lewis [ph.], I'll never forget her. She was a very fair woman and she took up for me too. And I made it through this tough time, the transition from Massachusetts to Cincinnati, Ohio with the help primarily of my mother and then a friendly teacher in the school in Cincinnati. But I don't remember a whole lot more about school in, in Amherst, other than it was tough. Speaker 1: In Cincinnati, I mean were you--so how, how, how did you do in your studies in school? Did you have a favorite subject or one that you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, history. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: History was my favorite subject, and geography. And I ended up being a history teacher at some, you know, later on. But my grades were up and down. If I was happy and, and, and pretty much comfortable with my environment, my grades were good. If the environment was bad, which it often was, and whether it be my individual social environment, or the home environment. My parents moved when I was sophomore in high school to an apartment that accommodated our family only. But I had lived in this--in a real bad situation with my father's [Baron Jones] mother and his family for about five years. So it was always turmoil. And I really spent a lot of time out of the house. Spent a lot of time with friends and you know, a lot of time--a lot of weekends I would, I would--I'd be at a friend's house. I wouldn't come home at all. And--but I, I made it through. And I, like I said, I give my mother and father credit, but mainly my mother. Story_ID: 177953 Speaker 1: Now Withrow High School [Cincinnati, Ohio], were you involved in--had, had you kind of settled down any by Withrow High School? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By Withrow, when I was a freshman, I was still having problems as a freshman, but my sister Joan, my older sister had gone through Withrow. And she was an honor student. And she was a governor of Girls Buckeye State [Buckeye Girls State], which was a big deal. She was the first governor of Buckeye State for girl--you know it's a girls' thing. Speaker 1: And the first black one too. Speaker 2: First black one. And she was very popular, everybody loved her. And I--she was--she also was a big help to me in the transition through childhood in Cincinnati [Ohio] because she was very attractive and all the boys liked her. And since they were older, a lot of older boys looked out for me because I was Joan Rankin's younger brother. Just like, Hey, leave him alone. You know that's Joan's brother, you know. So--and she went with a couple of guys who were, you know, they were big, you know they were big guys, guys, so they either played football or they were good looking and they were, you know, pillars of their society at, at that time and at that level. But--so it was a big help to me. And I say that to say that when I got to high school and I was a freshman, I, I still was having problems. But the teachers all knew who my sister was, so they'd say, "Aren't you Joan Rankin's brother?" And I said, "Yeah." And they said, "Well she was such a wonderful person, such a great student, you know, you've got to have some potential." So the counselors worked with me and by the time I was a sophomore, I was, I was really straightening out. One of the best things a counselor did for me was get me to take speech classes where--well let's see how can I put it. You, you, you gained a sense of confidence. You know you had to because you were standing in front of twenty people, maybe eighteen people in the class and you had to do an extemporaneous speech for three minutes or what have you. And so I actually had a minor in speech in high school and again when I went to college I took speech and I won some speech contests at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. And it was a great confidence booster for me. Story_ID: 177954 Speaker 1: And I also played football. And Withrow [High School, Cincinnati, Ohio] was a big football school. It was the biggest school in the state. Football and high school football in Ohio is big time. And I was the co-captain of the team and I, you know, played on the city championship team and played all four years. Speaker 2: What position did you play? Speaker 1: I played what they called halfback. You know it's, you know there's all kind of formations, but at that time the formation of choice was the split T. So you had a fullback, halfback and two halfbacks, I played right halfback. And played defensive back. And that helped a lot because I mean I--the prestige is too strong a word, but the notoriety that you got from being on a football team in Cincinnati, you know was very good. I mean you know all my former friends who were junkies and guys who were in trouble, who had quit school and everything. I mean first thing they'd say to me when they'd see me is, "Man, you know, how's the team doing?" you know, or "I'm glad to see you're making it." And you know it was a big deal. So that was a big help. And then I sang in the choir, which I really loved. And I was student council vice--I was the vice president of the student council. And I became very popular with my peers and just because I'm basically friendly. And not very, not pretentious. And a good friend of mine, Ted Carter [ph.], Ted Carter, a good friend of mine who was a tackle on the football team, he was all-state tackle, was very mature for his age and he saw things in me that I didn't see. And he pushed me into things at, at Withrow that I wouldn't have achieved on my own because I never would have gone after them. He, he got me to run for student council. He got me to run for the vice presidency of the senior class, which I won. He got me to join a previously all white group called the Beta Hi-Y, which was a Christian group that was always all white; they'd never had any blacks in it. But again being on the football team and doing all the stuff that you do in high school to be popular, but I wasn't really doing to be popular. Ted sort of pushed me into it, Ted and a couple of other people 'cause they realized I was popular across color lines. And know that I could accomplish some things that maybe some of them couldn't. And there was no jealousy here, they were, they were politicians. They were pushing me because I was the right guy. And I didn't let 'em down. I became vice president of the senior class and by the time I was a senior, my grades had moved into the B, B-plus area. And things were looking good. Story_ID: 177955 Speaker 1: And my sister [Joan Rankin] had gone to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. And she--I had gone up to visit her and she was married by this time. And I'd go up and visit her with my sisters and brother over quite a period of time. So I got to know Ohio State quite well and felt comfortable there. So that's where I ended up going to school. Speaker 2: Did you play football at Ohio State? Speaker 1: No. I didn't play football at Ohio State. I didn't have any desire really to play there. It was too--it wasn't fun. I mean I could--the guys that I knew, they worked too hard. It was-- Speaker 2: Those were the days of [Wayne Woodrow] Woody Hayes. Speaker 1: Yeah, Woody Hayes. Speaker 2: Tough, real tough discipline. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Three yards in a cloud of dust team. Speaker 1: Yeah, Woody was a good guy, though. We got to know what he--after we graduated to a great extent. My wife [HM Marlene Owens Rankin] became homecoming queen, she was the first, first black homecoming queen in 1960 at Ohio State. And we had a lot of contact with Woody because Woody was involved in the whole process of students and the, you know, athletics and stuff. And then after that, we got to know him 'cause we became active with the alumni association. And we're still very close to Ohio State. I'm on the advisory committee for the alumni association, and the president. And Woody was, while he was still alive, was always close to Ohio State. And we, we knew him pretty well. Good guy. But football was a--those guys were in a different league than I was, you know too small. If I really wanted it, I probably could have you know, made the team as a scout, on the scout team or something. But I was really more interested in getting an education, and had a lot of friends on the football team who were All-Americans. [James Lawrence] Jim Marshall, Don[ald] Clark, Leroy Brown, I mean Leroy Carr. There were a bunch of 'em. But Leo Brown, but I didn't have any interest in playing. Speaker 2: Was [Robert Eugene] Bob Ferguson playing? Speaker 1: Yeah, Bobby was--he was two years behind us. And--but we know Bob, yeah, yeah, he was a hell of a football player. I think he's back in Troy, Ohio now. Speaker 2: Right. A lot of backs came out of Troy for some reason. Tommy Vaughn and a bunch of others. Speaker 1: Right. But you know that's an interesting Woody story. Bobby [Ferguson] suffered from manic depression. And he was working on construction in Washington [D.C.] and was having a lot of problems and it came to Woody's attention. And from what I understand, Woody went to Washington and brought him back home and got him the proper care in Troy. Got him a job and that's the kind of person Woody was. He, he, he did a lot of good for a whole of people. But his reputation took a shot from the, you know, media mainly when he had that problem at Clemson [University, Clemson, South Carolina], or with the Clemson kid. But anyway that was--when I left Withrow [High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], I was just interested in getting an education-- Story_ID: 177956 Speaker 1: Now what had you focused on as a career goal? Did you have anything in mind? Speaker 2: Not really. It was just to graduate and my, my brother-in-law, Joan's husband was a lawyer. He was in law school actually when I was a freshman at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. I lived with them for a couple of quarters. And I found out I didn't wanna be a lawyer 'cause I saw what he was going through, you know. You know torts and all the books that he had and I read some of them. You know I said this is boring, you know. So I, I decided not to be a lawyer. But I did always like, you know teaching. And I liked history and geography and I thought I'd, you know, like to teach, so that's what I did. Changed my major to education and spent you know the next three years in that. But it was really with a history major, you know, the history part of it was very heavy, particularly in South and Latin American, Latin and the South American history. Speaker 1: Well who were some of your teachers that kind of standout at Ohio State that you remember? Speaker 2: I can't remember their names. Two--I'll give you two that are just at one end of the pole and the other. The one I liked the most was a guy from Mississippi who was a history teacher, a history professor. I can't think of his name. But he was, you know he was white, from Mississippi. But he was not--you know, didn't fit any of the stereotypes other than his accent. He was very helpful, very--and I took a number of courses from him. And he helped mold where I was going with history. You know he, he said American history is easy to pick up. He said, "Concentrate on European and other parts of the world's history because you, you've already gotten a lot of American history and all you have to do is read some more books and you'll be, you know, to fill it in." So I did and it was very helpful. He was good. On the other side of the coin was an economics instructor who flunked me. And I was part of a, a study team that one guy, there were three man cells studied together for the finals. And they--one guy got an A, the other one got a B-plus and I got an E and I flunked the course. And it really hurt my point average, but I had to have this class to graduate. Well you know I, I thought it was me to a great extent. But I was always--there was a question mark in my mind, you know that's strange. Because basically we wrote the same stuff, you know, to answer the questions. So two years later I had to take the course again, I ended up with the same guy. And this time he gave me a C and again, I gave him pretty much the same thing that he had given this other kid an A and a, and a B-plus. And so I went to see him. And I said, "You know how come I'm getting a C, this is the second time I've taken the course, all my other grades are good, you know." By this time I was making A's and Bs at Ohio State. And he said, "Well I just don't think that you have the intellect to do much more than that." And, and you know what that was about. So I said-- Speaker 1: Certain necessity. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I said okay, you know, as long as I got the C, I'm out of here. Ironically when I went to work at Leo Burnett [Worldwide, Inc.], I became part of a team that went around to speak to M.B.A. [Master Business Administration] programs that were just blossoming, particularly in the Big Ten. Went to Ohio State, went to the faculty club for lunch and the professors were filing in to listen to our seminar and tell 'em where, you know the marketing business was now. And in walks this professor of economics. And he's sitting there intently listening to me as I talked about sales promotion. And you know and I, I kept looking at him and talking to him specifically, you know. And he was smiling and taking notes and everything. And afterward I said, "You don't remember me, do you?" And he said, "No, why should I?" you know. This is maybe ten years later, eight years later at least and he's right, why should he. But I said, "Well I am Stuart Rankin." I said, "You flunked me in economics once and then the next time you gave me a C for the same kind of things." And I said, "I was always puzzled and baffled." And he says, "Well, I don't know why I did that." He said, "But there must have been a sound reason because I just wouldn't do it indiscriminately." And I said "Yeah, everything turned out all right, though didn't it?" And he says, "Yeah, it looks like it." He says--and then he started asking me questions about, you know, different clients that Burnett had and stuff and that was that. But it was another strange experience. Story_ID: 178840 Speaker 1: So any other stories about your [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] experience? Speaker 2: Oh there's so many experiences at Ohio State, I couldn't--I wouldn't know where to begin (laughter). I mean we had--it was the beginning of the civil rights--no it wasn't--well you could say that it was the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Beginning of the sit-in movement, I know that in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Right. Well see we, we were out of there by '61 [1961], so '56 [1956] when we went there, it was hard to find housing. There were only a, a couple of house--a couple of places where you could rent off campus and Jack Sherman, my good buddy, I convinced him to go to Ohio State with me. And so the two of us rented rooms at a, a house owned by a black lady named Mrs. Lucas [ph.]. And this house was notorious in that a lot of black football players lived there, or had lived there over the years when they didn't--couldn't live in the dorm. So Mrs. Lucas was a hard taskmaster, you know, because they had torn her house up on a number of occasions. And we were no better. You know we, we'd have our pillow fights and all that kind of stuff. But we ended up moving from Mrs. Lucas's and better put, she kicked us out. And Jack and I rented a room up on 11th Street [Columbus, Ohio] from a young white couple. And they were very friendly and they had rented to some other black guys who lived upstairs over us who we became friends with. And--but the house was a trap. I mean it was loaded with roaches. I mean the roaches were unbelievable. And at night we'd have to spray Black Flag around our--the base of our beds, you know, to keep from having 'em get into bed with you. And it just got to be unbearable. And after about five weeks and one particular incident, we slipped away in the night. We had talked to Mrs. Lucas in advance and told her what our situation was and she said that's terrible, you can come back. But you have to live in my brother's house next door. And he had died, unfortunately, but he was an older guy. But anyway, the house was empty so she let us live there. But the roaches were terrible. One night, it was a Sunday evening, I had invited my fiance [later, wife HM Marlene Owens Rankin] over for dinner. And Jack and I were gonna cook for her. So we fixed dinner which was usually hamburger and rice. And we were sitting down at the table to eat and she was eating and she looked at the mantelpiece and this--our old apartment, and there was a roach crawling up the wall. She said, "Look, a roach!" And Jack said, "Where?" Even though he knew, you know. He says, "I'll get it." So he went and he got this Black Flag spray, and he sprayed it, and the roach fell down behind the mantel and so did the Black Flag. Roaches poured out of there like you've never seen, it was like a bad movie. They came out of there--were albino roaches, large roaches, little roaches, I mean there were just every kind of roach you could imagine. We literally ran out into, into the street. And that was the night we decided we were getting out of there. And so that, that was a really bad experience, but you know when you're a kid, you laugh it off and it wasn't any big deal. After we moved, I understand they got rid of the roaches, but then they had a rodent, rat problem. And so we had gotten out just in time, you know. Story_ID: 178841 Speaker 1: But [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] was a lot of fun. It was, it was fairly discriminating in terms of socially you didn't really--you had little niches were you had mixed groups of friends. And the, the longer you stayed there, the more integrated your relationships became. When I was a freshman and sophomore, almost all our social contacts were black. But as you stayed in school, you--everybody was growing up and our social group was expanded to you know, all types of people. And it was a very good experience. Good school, good education, lots of fun from an athletic standpoint. It was-Columbus [Ohio] was an interesting town and a lot of kids that were students at Ohio State lived in town. So you'd get to go home with them on Sundays and get good meals and the parents were very friendly and knew you were away from home and they'd look out for you. So overall it was a really good experience. Happy to get out of there, but it was a good experience. Speaker 2: Now did you meet your wife [HM Marlene Owens Rankin] at Ohio State? Speaker 1: Yeah, I met her when I was a third quarter freshman and she was a first quarter freshman. She was seventeen and I was twenty, and we hit it off right away. And we started going together about three weeks after she got there. And of course she was a fox, a fox being a very beautiful girl. And she was very popular and very sought after by a lot of different male students. And she and I started going out and we weren't what you call going together at first, but one thing led to another and we--I was going out with other girls and other guys were coming to see her and she went out with a couple of 'em, and then we decided we'd prefer it that we just be with each other. And you can say we've been together since 1957, been married for forty-two years and went through Ohio State. Her father [Jesse Owens] talked us out of getting married when we were students, which was very smart on his behalf. And he was very influential in steering us in the right direction. And we listened to him and waited until we graduated. Story_ID: 178842 Speaker 1: Now her [Rankin's wife, HM Marlene Owens Rankin] father was, for the record, was Jesse Owens. Speaker 2: Right, her father was Jesse Owens, the track and, you know field athlete. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a great athlete. Speaker 2: [1936 Summer] Olympics [Berlin, Germany]. Speaker 1: And really had to struggle, you know, trying different enterprises and things to, to earn a living after becoming a great hero, right? Speaker 2: Right. He was famous for the Berlin Olympics when [Adolf] Hitler in--the Chancellor of Germany. And- Speaker 1: The year you were born I think it was-- Speaker 2: It was the year I was born, yeah. It was actually in Sept--I think he ran in August or September, so I was--I came along a couple of months later. And he was a hell of a guy. I mean a very good person. And if anybody's interested in finding out about his life, a good book to read is 'Jesse Owens, The Man Who Outran Hitler' [sic, 'Jesse: The Man Who Outran Hitler,' Jesse Owens]. And it really talks about his struggles when he came back from the Olympics. But again, he was young, persevered, became very successful as a public speaker and a consultant. He and I were in business for ten years together after I left Leo Burnett [Worldwide, Inc.], went with him. But he was--he, he was a surrogate father for me. He had the time and the interest to deal with me in a way that my father [Baron Jones] wouldn't because he didn't have the time, nor the, nor the tools, which is not an indictment of him. But he was under such pressure trying to raise his family in a--in his mother's home, which was a negative environment, that it was hard for him to, to do things that a father would do in normal circumstances. But Marlene's father was--he sort of took me under his wing in a lot of ways. And fortunately he talked us into not getting married until we graduated. And I went to the [U.S.] Army, I was in the Reserve Program [ROTC, Reserve Officers' Training Program]. And when I got out, I came to Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 178843 Speaker 1: --I just want to ask you one other thing about that [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] experience in regards to your wife [HM Marlene Owens Rankin]. You all weren't married at the time, but, but as someone who was very close to her at that time, she, she was elected homecoming queen at Ohio State, and there's an incident--I mean it, I mean it created a crisis in--with Ohio State administration, as she explained it I think to us earlier. But what was your take on that? I mean in the--the crisis around who was gonna kiss her at the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well she was very popular and she was the same--she was much like me. I mean very unassuming, very friendly, people liked her, and like her a lot 'cause she's what you see is what you get. And so the girls at the dorm, her dorm who were mostly almost all white, are the ones who put her up for Homecoming Queen. She had to first compete--the girls on her floor put her up to compete with the girls on the other floors. And the floors of the dorm competed against each other until you got a representative from that dorm. You might have twenty-eight or thirty-five or forty girls coming from sororities and dormitories and what--in different groups, who have been through a fairly involved electoral system to become a representative to run for homecoming queen. So most, I guess a lot of people didn't think she'd ever get past the dorm. But not only did she get past the dorm, she became one of the most popular candidates out there. And it was the talk of the campus. And by the--you know this all snowballed to, to the time of the election. And at that time unlike now, where they just appoint homecoming queens I guess 'cause it was too much trouble or they--I don't know what the problems were, but at that time it was by general election. Every student on campus voted, or had the opportunity to vote, for homecoming queen. And there wasn't any king, you know there was a different thing for, for guys. I forget, they called 'em the gold-digger king or something like that. But the homecoming queen was voted on by all the campus. And more people voted in that election than any previous election. And of course all the liberals were out and the Jewish fraternities were big backers of hers, and so it was like, Damn, she's really got a chance. Well she won by a landslide. Story_ID: 178844 Speaker 1: And the homecoming queen [HM Marlene Owens Rankin] was presented to the university [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] at a big dance, the Military Ball. And it was traditional for the chairman of the homecoming queen committee, who was usually a, a big fraternity guy on campus, you know, Sigma Phi or what, what is it--Sigma--what is the big fraternity? Sigma Chi I guess. And the, and--but anyhow this guy's job was to introduce the queen and then give her a kiss. And I mean really kiss her on the mouth. So everybody was talking about man, well this guy, will he kiss a black homecoming queen? I mean this is--this was the talk--it's really trivial. But this guy couldn't wait, you know because he had heard the stories too. So he made a big dramatic thing when he kissed her at the dance. And the place just went wild. And he said he never even--he never had any question in his mind what he was gonna do. But that was the kind atmo--social atmosphere you were in at that time. Would this white guy kiss a black girl in front of all these people. Speaker 2: But there was an--the, the administration had a bigger problem from what I understood, 'cause they were supposed to--someone was supposed to--the President was supposed to kiss her at the fifty yard line, right? I mean traditionally that's what they do. Speaker 1: Yeah, the president was [Novice Gail] Fawcett, and I believe he did give her a kiss on the cheek. And you know that's what they did. And I believe he did give her a kiss on the cheek, yeah. And that was--well the whole thing, I mean nobody expected to have a black homecoming queen so it was a, it was a, it was a problem, it became a problem for some people as soon as it appeared that she had a chance to become--she was on the court, which was made up of about twelve girls. And then they were--the queen was picked for this court. So once she made the court and so many people were so excited about her being there, and so many people who didn't give a damn about the homecoming queen process, decided they were gonna come out and vote for her, came out and they stuffed ballot boxes with votes. You know I'm not talking about they voted multiple times, but they, they stuffed the boxes with people who had never voted before, who voted for her. So yeah it was--it became an issue of whether, you know, how, how are we gonna behave if this black homecoming queen becomes our representative?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I think she said something about the, the administration deciding that they could get her father [Jesse Owens] to kiss her, and that would be just as good as a-- Speaker 1: Maybe you, you're right. I mean he, he did come and he was there to present her with the trophy and stuff. That was at a football game at halftime. And yeah we've got pictures of that and that was when he made a famous quote for--that's famous at Ohio State where he says, "Remember darling that it only happened in America." And man the press just ate that up, you know. And it was in all the newspapers and everything. But yeah you're right. He did come and, and present her with the trophy and gave her a kiss. And you're right, I don't think Fawcett was even on the field. But there were so many things going on where Fawcett was involved, that it wasn't Fawcett's choice, you know. I think it was probably the PR [Public Relations] decided hey, maybe we can get Jesse Owens down here. I, I really don't think it probably had a lot to do with whether the president kissed her or presented her with the trophy or, or not. I think it was a great PR opportunity for the university to get my father-in-law to come down there and make the presentation and made all the papers and AP [Associated Press] Press, UPI [United Press International] and what have you. So worked out real well. She still blushes when somebody says you're an ex-homecoming queen and, and when you think about how long ago it was, in 1960, she says she doesn't wanna hear about when that was, you know. But anyway it was a great experience. Story_ID: 178845 Speaker 1: All right now you graduated from [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] in 1961? Speaker 2: Yeah, in the winter quarter. And I went into the [U.S.] Army for six months. Speaker 1: Okay, where did you go? Speaker 2: I went to Fort Knox, Kentucky for, for my first six weeks. And then--no it was eight weeks. In the [U.S.] Marines they call it Boot Camp, in the Army they call it, damn I can't even remember now. But it's basic training. And from there I went to an artillery unit in Fort, at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. I was a Fire Direction Control Operator. They're the ones who--the forward observer, sends back the coordinates for a target and they send 'em to the Coordinators. We put a fix on the target, we send it to the guns and tell them when to fire. So there are three--it's a triangular thing. You got Forward Observer, the Coordinators and then the guns that actually fire. And I did that for four months. And I came out and I was in the [U.S. Army] Reserves for five years, five and a half years. And what it comes out to when you--guys are always talking about you know he was in for six months as opposed to being drafted. Well draftees are no different. I mean it's two years. You end up serving two years 'cause you go to, to training camp every--you know one weekend out of a month, and then you went for two weeks in the summertime. If you add all that up, it comes out to two years. And actually you learn a lot more about being a soldier over that timeframe because you mature as a person, you're exposed to a lot of different kind of situations, and you--in my particular case, there it was a training unit. So we were really--we trained other soldiers and we would go for two weeks to basic training camps like Fort Knox and Fort Sill and--not Fort Sill, but Fort Riley, Kansas and, then one down here in Missouri where everybody from Chicago [Illinois] went. Anyway, after that I came to Chicago and taught school. Story_ID: 178846 Speaker 1: Okay. So you had a--you graduated [from The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] with a, with a education degree? Speaker 2: Yeah, B.S. in education. Speaker 1: Okay, kind of major in history. Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely a major in history. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where did you teach here [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I started out at [Nathan] Davis Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] on the, on the near West Side. And it was mainly Polish kids and Latino kids, Mexican. And the teacher--I was a day-to-day sub [substitute teacher]. And they put me in a class that was a mix between first and second graders. Cutest little things you ever saw. Soon as the principal left the room after introducing me as the substitute teacher, the room went wild. You had all these little kids just doing whatever they wanted to do, and I couldn't get control of 'em for the life of me. And I tried for a week to teach that class, but I didn't know what the hell I was doing, you know. I mean I wasn't--I was trained as a secondary education, you know, high school. And here I found myself in, in the first and second grade. So I went to the principal after about a week, 'cause those kids were driving me crazy. And I said you know, I gotta teach a higher grade. So I went to--and I started teaching seventh and eighth grade. That lasted about a year, and then I went to Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] and I got a job as a history teacher there. And Hyde Park's [High School] right here in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right, right. It used to--people think of it as being in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] now, but it's--in those days it was definitely Hyde Park. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So how was Hyde Park High School? Was it better, easier to do than, than--I guess it's better than Davis. Speaker 2: Yeah, much. It was, you know I, I really enjoyed teaching. And it was a lot of fun to see kids learn things. And I did a little few things that were a little different, you know. My bibliography for required reading included books that wouldn't normally be on there, like, 'Dracula' [Bram Stoker] and 'Frankenstein' [Mary Shelley]. That made a big hit at the school, you know he's got 'Dracula' on the, you know, we can read 'Dracula' for points and stuff. Well 'Dracula' has a lot of historical significance to the Near East and Eastern Europe. And 'Frankenstein' had some significant social repercussions that were--you had to pull out of it, but were there. And so I was a popular teacher, you know I was young. And not the traditional, stodgy teacher I guess that they were accustomed to. Story_ID: 178847 Speaker 1: Now how, had, had there been any exposure at this point to African American history as such in, in-- Speaker 2: From my standpoint? Speaker 1: In college or just in--yeah. Speaker 2: African American history as it was woven into the general fabric of American history. If you took--like at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] when you took American history classes, and I only took a few. And the ones--the few that I did take were from say the Revolutionary War to the turn of the century, and also there were books available to read, which I did read and I had a good background in African American history from the perspective of the professors that taught this timeframe. And they were good enough to integrate--I mean you learned about Sojourner Truth and you learned about all of--major black--Frederick Douglass and you know the major black players in history and what their, what their position was. You know, and a lot of it spilled off to the Dred Scott decision [Dred Scott v. Sanford, 1857], blacks in the Civil War, you know some of the traditional names you hear. But it was things that you could dig up on your own. But it was pretty much in the fabric of the, of, of the class. So it wasn't like you had to--now they, they separate it and for the life of me I don't know how you teach the history of one group with including the others because so much of it is integrated. I mean that's how your history was born. So from that standpoint, maybe not as detailed as they do it in some ways, but certainly got it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in fact I got in trouble at Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] because we started teaching African American history because it wasn't being taught. The books that we had just sloughed over black involvement in American history. And I worked with a guy named Tim Black [HM Timuel Black] who was a noted--Tim is probably part of The HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: He is, he's on a board, Dr. Timmy Black [HM Dr. Timuel Black], yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Well Tim and I taught together. And with Tim and a couple of other teachers, we developed a black history, a black history segment to American history at Hyde Park. And the principal at the time, a Dr. Laney [ph.], he didn't like the idea but he couldn't get rid of Tim, and he couldn't get rid of the other teachers 'cause they had seniority. I was the junior guy, so he got me transferred out of the school and to try to break this, you know, he didn't want it taught at Hyde Park. But of course-- Speaker 1: Was he a black principal? Speaker 2: No, he was white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a politician. I mean most of the principals at that time especially were--you know he wanted to be a superintendent and--or, or you know district superintendent. And he ended up being a biggie downtown. But yeah Tim, Tim was the guy who started it at Hyde Park. And if there's anybody should get credit for it--being put into the public schools of Chicago [Illinois] from a history standpoint, Tim would be the guy. Story_ID: 178848 Speaker 1: Okay, and at that time Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] had a high reputation for academics. One of the top schools in the city [of Chicago, Illinois] I guess at that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, the kids were really good. Speaker 1: So well when you got kicked out of Hyde Park, you got transferred to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Parker High School [later, Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] for about a semester. And that's when I decided I was, I was tired of the system, not the teaching, not the kids or my fellow teachers. But the system was getting to me. And by this time it's 1963 and the Civil Rights Movement is in full swing. And white corporate America is looking for qualified blacks to come in and work with them because they were under a lot of pressure from the [John F.] Kennedy administration and from the [Lyndon B.] Johnson administration. And I didn't know what I wanted to do; I had no idea. But I ended up going to the Urban League. They had a job bank, what they called a job bank. They had a list, I mean I wish they had it now, but they don't. They had a list of corporations that wanted blacks, I mean from here to Alaska. And if you had the qualifications, which usually was a degree, you could damn near write your own ticket. And they, they gave me an opportunity to go to Johnson Publishing Company. Well Johnson had just called there looking for a couple of sales reps in the Advertising Department. So when they talked to me at the Urban League, the guy who was my counselor there, he just said well I'm sending you down to Johnson's, and you know they're looking for somebody. I thought he was talking about Johnson Wax or Johnson baby food or I don't know. I had never heard of Johnson Publishing Company, although I was aware of Ebony and Jet. Speaker 1: Okay you just didn't pay attention to who it was published by. Speaker 2: No. I mean I didn't know what, what it was. I was just gonna go on this interview, you know. If I liked it, and they wanted me, I'd stay. If I--they didn't, I'd go back and look for something else. So a friend of mine named Bill Garrett [ph.], who was an art teacher at Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois], we, we both went--sent down to Johnson Publishing, which was at 1820 South Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] at the time. It was an old funeral home. So when you walked into the lobby, you really felt like you were in a funeral home. The advertising department was behind a big glass, big picture window-like glass structure where the bodies and the cadavers had at one time, been on display in this funeral home. You know when they would come up on an elevator from the basement. Well anyhow there was a story behind this because the advertising department was like a merry-go-round, people were leaving all the time. And particularly at this time, my predecessors at Ebony were a guy named Marshall (unclear) [ph.], [Ronald] Ron Sampson, [Raymond] Ray League, there was another guy, who had left to go to work for advertising agencies. They had been sales rep for Johnson Publishing, so they were getting exposure to media departments in major agencies. And they were all smart guys. So they, they had been recruited out of Johnson Publishing. So when I got there, you know again, I didn't know where I was going. So I, when I sat and talked, being interviewed, the guy who interviewed me was one of those interviewers who was sort of interviewing himself. He did more talking about himself than he wanted to know about me. So he never really knew what I knew about advertising or the job. And I learned more about the job from listening to him than I, than I knew when I sat down. So I was able to regurgitate a lot of what he said to me back to him, and it made it sound like I knew what I was talking about. But it was based on experiences that he had just talked to me about going to agencies and selling space and what it meant and blah, blah, blah. Well selling space for anybody who's watching and doesn't know, is just literally selling the advertising in a magazine. It's the space that the, that the ad takes up in a magazine. So you become what they call a space salesman or actually a publisher's rep. And I got the job and so did Bill. And it was really fun because the, the guy who was the assistant manager of the, of Ebony advertising department, the first guy's name was LeRoy Jeffries. He was the manager. LeRoy Jeffries was a real character. His assistant was Lincoln Hudson, who was just the opposite from him; laid back, believed in research, you know believed in going in with a nice, strong story statistically as to why you should buy and put your advertising in Ebony and Jet. Learned a lot from him. From Jeffries I learned not to be afraid, you know to, to, to be confident when you go in and make presentations 'cause his whole thing was you gotta go in there and feel, you can't be afraid of anybody. "This white guy is not going to intimidate you," you know. So he was hell and brimstone, fire and brimstone, and Lincoln would give you the stuff that you really needed to sell somebody for. Story_ID: 177957 Speaker 1: Off camera you just told us a story about Johnson Publishing [Company]. There some other stories--see this is a--you all had to go to white run corporations and businesses and persuade them to buy ads in, in Ebony or Jet. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you know, of course history has shown that this was successful; they got plenty of ads. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: It was unheard of at that time. Speaker 1: But you, you were saying you had a high pressure leader that was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was [LeRoy] Jeffries. Speaker 1: Yeah, trying to galvanize everybody to do this. Speaker 2: Right. He, he'd pump you up and, and it worked. I mean from that standpoint obviously. But, but again Lincoln Hudson would give you the, the data and statistics that you needed to convince people that this is what they needed to do. Mr. Johnson [HM John H. Johnson], as he's affectionately known, was very friendly with a guy at Zenith. He was captain somebody. I think he had been a captain in the Air-[U.S.] Marines or the [U.S.] Navy or something like that. And he convinced the captain to put an ad in, in Ebony, so he did. And Zenith was one of the first major corporations to advertise in Ebony. Once that ad appeared, it was helped you know, set the stage for other corporate co--you know companies to do the same thing. They weren't falling off the shelf, now to give Ebony and Jet advertising. But it came slowly, but eventually it did. And when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], King came to Chicago [Illinois] and marched and so forth and so on, that really loosened them up and they started knocking down the doors to put advertising in Ebony and Jet. That was one of the key things that happened. I mean I was there when it, when it went on so I know that as a fact. Plus it was good vehicle. I mean it was an excellent magazine, Jet is an excellent magazine for information that blacks couldn't get from other places. It just wasn't available to 'em. Story_ID: 177958 Speaker 1: --I've always been interested in how--when I--when you look at Ebony or Jet or Sepia or, or any of the magazines, the black magazines in those days, you'd see ads from major white companies that were specifically designed for the black community. There'd be black faces in the ads and-- Speaker 2: Well that didn't come-- Speaker 1: --black people using the product. Speaker 2: Yeah, that didn't come easily either. That came very slowly. Recently there was a mention they were putting some of Tom Burrell [HM Thomas J. Burrell], you know of Burrell Advertising, his advertising in the Library of Congress. And it--and you know we deserve to have a representative there and Tom is the representative, basically. But the guy who was really out there in the forefront of black--putting blacks in advertising was Vince Cullers. Vince Cullers had been around for a long time and people just thought he was crazy. I mean literally, they said, "This man is crazy. You wanna put black people in advertising. What for?" You know, "They, they buy all our products anyway. Why do we need to put blacks in the advertising?" So Vince was really the, the, the guy who put it on the table for the first time, to my knowledge. There might have been--there were a couple of blacks in advertising agencies before Vince. Vince didn't work for any of the major agencies; he started his own company and worked, you know he--it was a bootstrap story. There were some blacks in the advertising industries as far back as the late '40s [1940s] who were very instrumental in working on the general business of the agency. Speaker 1: [HM] LeRoy Winbush was-- Speaker 2: LeRoy Winbush is one of 'em, right. So the advent of using blacks in the creative product was slow to come. Vince was probably one of the first to do it. Zebra Advertising [Zebra Associates] out of New York [New York] was probably the biggest proponent of this integrating advertising and hence the name Zebra. It was made up of blacks and whites and they worked together. In fact, that's where [Raymond] Ray League, who had been my, one of my predecessors at Ebony was, and he was one of the principals of that agency. And they had a lot of backing, it's called UniWorld [Group, Inc.] now. They had a lot of backing from influential folks in New York and they did a lot of integrated advertising. Then there was Frank Mingo. I think Tom came along in the early '70s [1970s]. In fact I gave Tom Burrell business, the first piece of business they had. I was working on Philip Morris [International, Inc.] as an account executive, and they were looking for a black agency. Tom worked with me at Leo Burnett [Worldwide, Inc.] and I knew he was starting an agency. And so I, I gave him the business 'cause he was a friend of mine. And--but there were a number--John Small out of New York [New York]. There were a number of people who were pushing it. That was in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. This, back in '63 [1963] it was un--it was still unheard to put blacks in, in advertising. But it moved very rapidly. In fact my wife [HM Marlene Owens Rankin] and I did some Miller spots, not spots, but the, they were ads as opposed to commercials. In the business ads are print or outdoor advertising. Commercials are radio and television, broadcast advertising. We did some ads, and my wife did some commercials. So it moved pretty quickly. We weren't the only ones; there were a lot of people who were--she didn't like to do it, first of all. And then my job didn't allow me to do it. So we, we left it. But there were a lot of black models who were successful at that time and were picked up by white agencies, particularly in New York. Chicago [Illinois] was a little slow in getting on that bandwagon, but eventually they were there. Story_ID: 177959 Speaker 1: Another funny story about Ebony. I had been there about two months in 1963, and Mr. Johnson [HM John H. Johnson] said he was gonna allow us to travel throughout the Midwest and throughout the country to wherever our clients were. And we had clients from Fond du lac, Wisconsin to New Orleans [Louisiana] and so forth. But my client list was mainly St. Louis [Missouri], Minneapolis [Minnesota], Detroit [Michigan], a lot of small towns in Wisconsin and Michigan, not too many in Illinois, and then of course in Chicago [Illinois]. He said, "Well we're gonna allow you guys to travel for the first time in, you know, quite a while. Mr. Lincoln [Hudson] used to go travel now and then, but now we're gonna let all of you. But I don't want you to go out there and get lost going to the goddamn airport." He says, "I want you to make sure you know where you're going and get your arrangements made in time and blah, blah, blah." And we all laughed, you know. Excited about being able to do this. So lo and behold about three weeks later my first trip was to St. Louis to go to Anheuser-Busch, who later became a client of mine when I owned an advertising agency. But at this time I didn't know anything about Anheuser-Busch, and I didn't know--I'd never been to St. Louis, obviously, and I'd only been on a plane maybe four times, and this was 1963. So I'm driving to the airport, and O'Hare [International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] was not--it was a new, relatively new airport. And I'm going out the Kennedy [John F. Kennedy Expressway, Chicago, Illinois] and you know if you don't stay in the right-hand lane to get to O'Hare, you're on your way to Rockford [Illinois] and the toll booth, you know and Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and what have you. Well lo and behold, I missed the turn and I end up at the toll booth. I can't turn around, I gotta go through it. I get off at the first exit I can get off of. I'm in--now I'm in the northern suburbs of Chicago. I don't know where in the hell I am. And I'm panic stricken 'cause I'm about to lose--miss my plane. I literally have gotten lost on the--going to the airport; just what Mr. Johnson didn't want us to do. I called my secretary. Her name was Rose [ph.]. She says, "You did what? You're where? In Barrington [Illinois]? What are you doing in Barrington? You're supposed to be in St. Louis." I said, "I'm lost." She said, "Heck." She said, "Just find your way home, and I'll tell Mr. [LeRoy] Jeffries you called and checked in, and then we'll set the trip up for next week." So she took care of it, my secretary took care of it. So I went home; I was so embarrassed. And of course I was afraid I was gonna lose my job, of course I didn't tell anybody except my wife [HM Marlene Owens Rankin]. But that was my first experience in traveling to take, you know, to do business on behalf of Johnson Publishing Company. Story_ID: 177960 Speaker 1: I stayed there [Johnson Publishing Company] for about two and a half years and I worked on--one of my clients for Ebony was Green Giant. And I went up to Minnesota and I was able to make a presentation and the guy liked what I had to say. And, and this one particular guy, his name was Stillman [ph.], a VP [vice president], had been trying to sell the idea of advertising to specific targets, and African Americans or blacks were one of them. So he convinced the Chairman of the Board of Green Giant to listen to a presentation. So he asked me to put together a comprehensive presentation on the whole black market, not just Ebony's market, but the whole black market. So I did and I took [James Lawrence] Jim Marshall, a good friend of mine who was playing football for Minnesota Vikings at the time, which was a young franchise. Jim went on to become an All-Pro and he's in the Hall of Fame. Speaker 2: Right, he's, he's also famous that wrong, that wrong-- Speaker 1: Running the wrong way against San Francisco [California], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he became a big, big star. Speaker 1: Yeah, but Jim and I were good buddies at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] from the time we were freshmen. And we were fraternity brothers and so forth. And so he went with me, which made a big splash at Green Giant. Well they liked the presentation and Jim actually participated in it with me, and they were really impressed. So the next time I got a call from the guy down at Leo Burnett [Worldwide, Inc.] to come in to talk, he was offering me a job. And they already had a number of blacks at Burnett. Tom [HM Thomas J. Burrell] was there, but he wasn't the first one there. Tom had come from Wade Advertising [Agency], which was a local advertising agency that had Alka-Seltzer. But they had a, a number of blacks in the research department in particular. And they had a couple in the media department, but they didn't have any account executives. And those were the people who interacted and interfaced with the client. They were the ones who coordinated all the other departments in the agency to, to come to bear on whatever the client's marketing needs were. So the, the account executive has a very--at Burnett, different agencies, they have different job descriptions. But at Burnett it's a very comprehensive experience with the agency and with the client. You literally get to know everything about the client's product from the standpoint of where it's manufactured, what it's manufactured of, how much it cost to do this, you know all the pricing aspects of it and everything. So this was an exciting opportunity for me to go to Burnett. I was, so I was the second black they brought in to be on track to be an account executive. The first one was Don Richards [HM Donald C. Richards], who I think is gonna be interviewed by The HistoryMakers also; he certainly should be. Nothing happened to me unless it happened to the Don. Don had to get a promotion before I could get a promotion. So we became good friends and he helped me get through some of the loopholes and hurdles at Burnett. Ultimately, he and I became sort of the trusted blacks at Leo Burnett after [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] died. Burnett usually had a--let you take part of the day off to go to church or what have, and they didn't do anything about King. So one of the guys in the research department, Herb Coverdale [ph.], put together a letter and all the blacks at Burnett signed it, saying that we were dis--disappointed that there was no recognition of, you know, our outstanding leader and American leader, not just black leader. Well [Leo] Burnett at the time was sort of fighting with some managers in his company, 'cause he was sort of retired. And three guys, they called the triumvirate had taken over and he was sort of pissed at them anyway. So this gave him an opportunity to jump on them. So he jumped all over 'em and wrote a letter to them, to us carboning all his managers, saying that, we were either too shocked or too dumb to respond to this. 'Course he was saying that they were too dumb. So after that, these guys started scrambling. Well the people they turned to were me and Don Richards. And they asked us to put together a program to help recruit more minorities for Leo Burnett. 'Cause at that time there were only twenty, and out of the twenty there were only seven of us who were on the professional track; the rest were clerical or janitorial. And so Don and I did and I ended up in the, in the personnel department for about six, no, about nine to ten months. And we went from about twenty black employees to sixty-four. And the other fif--all the fifty-four were manager types. Well they had a thousand employees, so you know that still wasn't a whole lot of people. But it worked very well. Story_ID: 177961 Speaker 1: You know I left Ebony obviously, and took the job at [Leo] Burnett [Worldwide, Inc.] in '66 [1966] I believe it was. And but if it wasn't for going to Ebony, I never would have ended up in the advertising department. I would not have even have known what an advertising agency was. But from Burnett--at Burnett I learned the rudiments of everything that enabled me to be successful in life from a job standpoint, and an economic standpoint. Because they were really good and they really made sure you learned the business, whereas in New York [New York] they hired blacks a lot of time, and that's where the term, The Spook Who Sat By The Door came from. Where they just had an office, but they didn't do anything. And maybe they traipsed around the country with some higher executives to show that they got a black employee; but they didn't learn anything. Not as much as we did in Chicago [Illinois]. And it wasn't just Burnett. Needham [later, Omnicom], Foote Cone & Belding [later, FCB Global] where [Ronald] Ron Sampson and gone. And, and that's something that helped me to get to Burnett, was when I was selling space for Ebony, whenever I went to an agency where there was a black guy, and it was usually Ron, Ron Sampson who had been a predecessor at Ebony, or Marshawn Alfrand [ph.] who had been a predecessor, he worked for a company called Tatham-Laird & Kudner. And I'd have lunch with them and they'd talk to me about the agency business. They said, "This is where you wanna end up," you know. So they were encouraging. So when the opportunity came, I jumped on it and that was--I worked at Burnett from '66 [1966] to '71 [1971], so it was about five years. I worked on--I worked for about eight or nine months in the sales promotion department. We interfaced with the account executives because we were developing promotions for their client, you know the, the agency team would be a, a cloister of account executives who worked exclusively on Needham, I mean on Nestle, or Philip Morris or United Airlines or Schlitz Beer or Kellogg. I mean Burnett had a blue chip line of clients. Those Account executives would reach out to the Media Department, Sales Promotion, Research or what have you, to get things done for their client. So I got to know a lot of 'em and got to figure out how they interfaced with the creative people, creative department. And then after my short stint in the personnel department, I became an account--assistant account executive on Nestle. And we used to travel back and forth to White Plains [New York]. I worked on Nestea Ice Tea in jars and Nestea Instant Ice Tea, Instant Coffee in jars as opposed to other kinds of brands that they had. Then I left that account and I went to Philip Morris and I was the account executive on Parliament cigarettes where I was totally responsible for all their advertising and interfacing with the agency and, and the client. Story_ID: 177962 Speaker 1: Those, those were good years at [Leo] Burnett [Worldwide, Inc.], but there were problems there too, I mean in terms of they didn't wanna see blacks move forward. And it's interesting in that they had no female professionals there either. You know they were mainly clerical or statisticians. They didn't go very far in the media department. There were no, no female account executives. It was--you know that's interesting that they had black male account executives before they had white female account executives. They had one, one female that was on staff when I was there; she became a--the model for the females. Her name was Donna Smith [ph.]. She graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], beautiful girl. She married another guy; that's how she--I can't remember her maiden name. But she was, I mean Donna was head and shoulders over most of the people that they hired to be account executives. She went on to bigger and better things in San Francisco [California]. But that was an irony, that you know, they would rather deal with black males than with females. And it--there were times--I mean when I went on the Philip Morris business, the guy who was head of the business, his name was--I can't remember his name. It was something like Dean Smith [ph.], he was from the South. And he, he set up my first meeting with him at a, a restaurant in New York called The Club Alabam. Speaker 2: Club Alabam. Speaker 1: Club Alabam, and it was in an English basement, you know, laid out restaurant; they went first class, Burnett went first class all the time. And--but the Club Alabam was a southern joint. And all the paraphernalia was derogatory stuff about blacks. All the paintings on the walls, all the, all the--every--all the carvings that they had, all the statutes, everything was demeaning to blacks. And that's where they chose to meet with me. So after I was introduced and you know, did the nice, decent stuff. I said, "Well you'll have to excuse me now 'cause I've gotta leave." And I left. And my boss the next day said, "Why did you do that?" And I said, "Why do you think? You know I says you knew where I was and you knew where they were taking me." Well from that--we, he and I didn't get along after that because he was a bigot. And the guy who hired me on that account, his boss was not; he was a Jewish guy named Marty Snitzer. He was one of the few Jews, Jewish guys that worked at Burnett. Because they were--most of the hierarchy was--they didn't like Jews any more than they did blacks. And the only reason, you know Burnett was a fairly bigoted place. But you had to fight your way through it, and it probably wasn't any different than a whole lot of corporations and businesses at the time. They felt that we were being forced upon them. And that's why they made us work so hard to some extent, they were trying to prove that we couldn't handle the business. But in every instance, we did. And we became better people for it; it's an irony you know, that they were trying to see us fail and but they were making us better at what we did. So it was an--you know when I was in the personnel department and I was trying to integrate different departments like print production and, and what have you, the creative department which had a few blacks, one was Bernie Washington who was to become my partner at Equinox later, you know twenty years later. They resisted having blacks in their departments. So I usually had to go over their head to get a black person in. And then they'd get in there and they wouldn't give them anything to do in some instances. So depended upon where you were. You know if you were in the print production was a little different than being an account executive. They interfaced with printers and you know the whole print industry. And they, they would let those guys mainly carry stuff. You know they didn't really learn the business. And those departments were run by blue collar types too, you know. So I'm rambling a little bit. Story_ID: 177963 Speaker 1: So I think we're getting to the juncture where you, you, you decide to break away from Leo Burnett [Worldwide, Inc.] and start your own business. Speaker 2: Yeah. I--the guy who was the assistant that I ran into problems with, and I'm not gonna name names, 'cause he's still around. He worked for Marty Snitzer, the guy I talked about. When he and I crossed swords immediately, it was a constant battle with him. Although he liked me at some level, he didn't, he, he disliked me intensely on another level. And he became the boss. Marty got a big promotion and became, you know, part of the top management at Burnett and this guy became the head of the Philip Morris business. And one of the first things he did was tell me he was kicking me off the business. And I said, "Why?" He said, "Because as long as I'm the boss on this business, I don't want you working for me." So I, you know I knew what, what it was. I never had this thought before, but I--there was a big paperweight on his ta--on his desk, you know, big. It was just a handful, but it was like granite or something. He had gotten it from a trip to the Rockies [Rocky Mountains]. And I looked at that thing, boy I wanted to take it and just throw it right at his head. But I, I, you know, got myself under control. We were in the Prudential Building [Chicago, Illinois] looking out over Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois]. I looked out over Grant Park and said to myself well, you know I've dealt with people like him all my life and I didn't do anything crazy, so I wasn't about to do anything crazy. But I could have cussed him out. I just turned around and walked out of his office and I said I'll see you later. And I went into what they call the bullpen and the bullpen is where Account executives stayed until another account picked them up. Well by this time I--he had blackballed me basically and nobody would pick me up, but nobody would fire me either. So I became persona non grata. And this wasn't something that had to do necessarily with race because I had seen guys who were in the bullpen who were persona non grata the whole time I was at Burnett for one reason or another. You know their patron saint kept them there for a while and the guy--one of the guys who was on the Nestle business just before I got on it, had punched his boss out. And he, I mean literally punched him out. And--but he had a good reason for doing it. And I've forgotten what it was; the guy had fondled his wife at a party or something like that. So they wanted to keep it quiet, but they couldn't keep this guy around, so they put him in the bullpen and he was in there for about a year. And finally he, he left because he was blackballed. So I was blackballed, basically. So I could have sat there, I could still be sitting at Burnett in the bullpen, ostensibly. But I, I used it as a time to build a plan for consulting that I took to my father-in-law [Jesse Owens] because I knew what the--a lot of the things that he was doing and the merchandising promotion field fit right into what I would have learned at Leo Burnett. So he and I set up a consulting company called Jesse Owens & Associates. And once we set that up, I left Burnett. But they paid me for like ten months without any problems whatsoever. People come by and speak, "Hey Stu, how ya doing?" Speaker 1: What did you do in the bullpen? I mean what-- Speaker 2: I'd be do--I'd be working on this plan. Speaker 1: On your plan. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah so I was gonna let them pay for, for the plan, which they did. And I still had a lot of friends there and a lot of good contacts over the years were, you know, good people. Everybody wasn't a bigot. But unfortunately the bad guys ruled the roost. And they had a lot of problems internally as a result. Not just racially, but otherwise. They were-- Story_ID: 177964 Speaker 1: So how, how did your business work out (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It went very well. We had a lot of good clients. We had Reader's Digest, Fleischman Distillery, Sears Roebuck [& Company], Walt Disney. We had the company from '72 [1972] to 1980 when he died. And my father-in-law [Jesse Owens] died in March of 1980 and the company, you know that did it. The contacts were really based on--a lot of 'em were based on his relationships with top management people. And when those--we kept the business until those people changed and then the new people would come along and they'd dust you off, you know, so to speak. So the business sort of went down and I closed the doors in '81 [1981] and I took a job selling space again for the New York Times magazine division. New York Times Magazine division consisted of Family Circle, Golf Digest, Tennis magazine, Cruising, which was a yacht magazine, and there was one other household magazine that was really artsy-crafty. You know tell you how to build your own fireplace and that kind of stuff. So I sold space primarily for Family Circle for about six years. It was a great, great experience, beautiful people; they were really nice. Ironically, I got the job to a great extent because I was an Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] graduate and most of the top management in that part of the New York Times division were Ohio State graduates. They key guys were the controller, guy named Dave Allman [ph.], and Bob Radd--Conrad [ph.] who was the advertising manager for the whole division, were Ohio State graduates. So I interviewed with the manager here in Chicago [Illinois]. He said, "You went to Ohio State?" and I said, "Yeah. Yeah," and he says, "You know Jesse Owens, I understand." And I said, "Yeah, he was my father-in-law." He said "Well that's something. You graduated from Ohio State." I said this guy must have gone to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and he's gonna give me a hard time. Well he says, "You're in luck." He said, "You can't miss coming from Ohio State." And so I got the job and worked there for six years and I ended up in their strategic marketing/planning division as well as selling 'cause I was responsible for the mid--for key markets in the Midwest, Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and St. Louis [Missouri] where I made a lot of good contacts with Anheuser-Busch. And I left Family Circle in 1987 'cause in 1986 I ran into Bernie Washington [ph.], the creative I told you about that worked at [Leo] Burnett [Worldwide, Inc.]. And he wanted to start an advertising agency. And so after about three years of going back and forth with Bernie, I decided it was time to do it. Story_ID: 177297 Speaker 1: --I ran into Bernie [Washington]. Bernie and his creative partner, Bernie was a copywriter. And his creative partner was an art director named Bill Daniel. And they worked for Needham, Harper & Steers [later, Omnicom Group], which as in the same building that the New York Times Magazine division was in. And I ran into Bernie all the time and he was always talking about starting an agency to address the African American, i.e., black market, in a different way. More from a creative perspective than from social perspective. And I'll explain that in a little bit. But anyhow Bernie kept after me, kept after me and I had a--another friend who just died recently, Seroy Jackson [ph.]. Seroy Jackson was an operator in the advertising marketing business for years. He had been a rep [representative] for--he was one of the first blacks who repped [represented] television stations and he worked for CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] or one of the big networks. And he had a lot of contacts. Seroy was just--he was a wheeler/dealer. And he helped [HM Thomas J.] Tom Burrell to get some business in, in return his daughter had gotten a job with Tom in the public relations department. And I was saying, "Dag, I wish you had told me 'cause, you know, I'm thinking about starting an agency with a couple of guys." And he said, "Well I can still help you, you know. Just you know, get it together and come back and, and we'll talk." He used to hang out at a place called Highs of Canada [ph.], which was a good restaurant here in Chicago [Illinois]. Seroy went to all the best restaurants in Chicago from the Pump Room to, you know, Cape Cod room, all of 'em. But anyway I went to--I called Bernie and I said, Let's sit down and talk and let's put this thing together. So we put together the agency, but we were still working, you know for somebody else. I'm, I'm working for the New York Times, he's working for Needham. And we needed a pseudonym, so I came up with the name Equinox, which meant new beginning. And for almost a year, we operated out of the mezzanine of at that time the Radisson Hotel. It's now the Hotel Intercontinental. There was a public phone there and we spent our lunches and after work and even before work, putting together a plan for this agency. And we identified twenty companies that we were gonna go after, all blue chip companies. Story_ID: 177298 Speaker 1: And we [Equinox Advertising] had a different strategy. It wasn't just to use black people in advertising, but to use them in such a way and such a creative way that anybody and everybody would enjoy the commercial and understand the commercial. Now that was purported to be what a lot of black agencies were doing, but most black agencies were using pretty much stereotypical social situations, not negative social situations, but typical social situations as you would find black folks in to enhance the advertising. Which was all right and that's, that's what just about everybody was doing. What we did was take a creative situation and inject black people in it. And almost all our commercials were integrated. We always had some white people in it or an Asian or, or what have you. And the situation was set up so that the creative aspects of the commercial were really what made you interested more than the fact that these were black people. And we were very successful. Our first client that we-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Okay I don't know, I don't wanna step on your line, but what, what, what are some, some examples of some of the ads that you created? Speaker 1: Okay. Our first big client was Anheuser-Busch, and we were--did their advertising for a brand called King Cobra, which is a malt liquor. And unfortunately, blacks are a big target for malt liquor 'cause we're some of the heaviest consumers of it. It's purported to have a quality--quantity of alcohol, but it really doesn't, it's all in the mind because it's against the law first of all, to have any more alcohol in it than beer. So--but it has this persona and-- Speaker 2: They all have these names, you know that make it sound like-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the bull. Speaker 2: The bull, King-- Speaker 1: Colt 45. Speaker 2: Right. That, that-- Speaker 1: That's part of the smack--that's part of the advertising, you know. Speaker 2: And they deliver this punch, this, you know. Speaker 1: Right, but that's all perception, it's not real. And as you know perception can be reality to people. And most--we did an awful lot of research for Anheuser-Busch in this area, some focus groups to find out why kids did drink it. And they thought that (unclear) that most of 'em would drink it before they went to a party. Because you wouldn't find it at the party because girls didn't like it. But we found out when we did focus groups with girls, they did the same thing boys did, they drank malt liquor before they went to a party because they thought they were getting a punch out of it. But they weren't getting any more than the beer they drank once they got to the party. We inherited a campaign that utilized [Frederick] Fred Williamson who was a well-known black actor and former football player. Speaker 2: Yeah, by [The] Hammer. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Hammer. And the Hammer was the, the key to a lot of the marketing tactics that were used for--he was the central figure for King Cobra. He was really being sort of weeded out for want of a better term. He was, he was, he was being eased out of that situation when we got the account. But he was still in there strong enough that the, the first campaign we did, we used him. And we shot it in San Francisco [California]. We put him in a bar shooting pool with a myriad of characters. Because it's a waterfront pool room and a waterfront bar. So it was a very integrated situation. His lines were not the traditional lines that they had had, and it was really a good, strong spot. And then the other one was he's approached by a, a white fellow in a limo that has a white driver and he's walking down the street and this guy pulls up and says "Hey, Hammer, what's the game?" You know and, and he looks in the limo and he says "You know what the game is, it's the smoothest game in town. King Cobra Malt Liquor." The guys says "I wanna get some." So you know that's sort of take-off by what it was. But it was done with a little fog underneath the limo and the production values were really good. And that's something that's very important that people don't realize just off the surface. When they look at a commercial, a lot of times their impression, the positive retake impact of the commercial is the--are the production values. How well it shot, where it shot, how the characters are utilized in the--and then all the other things, you know the creative, who the people are, what you're trying to say, all that adds up to a good spot. Story_ID: 177299 Speaker 1: Well we won, we won an award in New York [New York] for best television--I'm trying to think of the name of the awards now, 'cause they stopped doing 'em a few years back. But it was primarily for black agencies. And we competed all the agencies. It'll come to me what it is, but we won best-- Speaker 2: I know what you're talking about too and I can't think-- Speaker 1: Yeah. We won best television with our King Cobra [Premium Malt Liquor] spots and it was like who are these guys and where did they come from? You know, nobody had ever heard, ever heard of us before. The big agencies were Burrell [Communications], Uniworld [Group, Inc.], Mingo-Jones [Advertising] and there were a couple smaller agencies, Vince Cullers had a good agency [Vince Cullers Group] going here in Chicago [Illinois] by that time. And that was our, our first effort in television. Radio was one of our big strengths. Radio is a, is the toughest medium to write good commercials for. And Bernie [Washington] was probably, and still is one of the best copywriters in the world. I mean the boy is--he's good. And he's better than most. I mean he could--when I say better, he's better than most of 'em. Whenever we tied up with the agency of record for one of our clients, which is the big, white agency that controlled most of the money and most of the advertising, our creative work would stand on its own and, and be hailed by the client as good if not better. And they would incorporate our advertising to the general market campaigns, Ameritech [later, AT&T Teleholdings, Inc.] did that a lot. We had Ameritech for a number of years and our commercials were run in their normal rotation along with Tatham-Laird & Kudner's [later, Havas Worldwide] and Tatham-Laird & Kudner worked very closely with us, they were very good about sharing information and what have you, and we had a really good relationship with them and Ameritech. Whereas other clients like KFC, to some extent Anheuser-Busch, but not so much them. But KFC, Allstate was a client of ours. Those were clients whose agencies took a--well first of all [Leo] Burnett [Worldwide] was one of 'em. They took a very hard line with us. They wanted to get us out of there. And when Burnett took over Ameritech, we had to constantly battle with them because they wanted us out of there, and that was just a Burnett tactic. I mean they did that when I was working there with small white agencies, so it didn't have anything to do with race on the surface, anyway. I mean this is something that they would be doing anyway, just happened that we were black. And nine times out of ten we would lose the battle. With KFC, their agency--I can't remember the name of it offhand, but they fought us tooth and nail because our advertising was starting to emerge as the client's favorite. And again, it was very creative stuff and shot very well, excellent talent. And we were like a meteor. You know we--or a comet. We blasted through the sky for about ten years and then it, it started dying out for a lot of reasons. We, we always got into trouble with the major agency. I mean that, that's what's happened to the black advertising business as a whole. Story_ID: 177300 Speaker 1: Has it [black advertising business] gone down as a whole? Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely. I mean a lot of the, you know decent black advertising agencies have gone by the wayside. Carolyn Jones, whose agency [Mingo-Jones Advertising] was on the dem--decent. Tom [HM Thomas J. Burrell] sold his partly to save it, and I'm sure of that. Speaker 1: Did he sell it to someone in his family or-- Speaker 2: No, no. He sold it to a French marketing company that wanted a foothold in this area for some of his clients I guess. I don't know the details on it, but I know he sold-- Speaker 1: [Vince] Cullers [Group] is closed too? Speaker 2: Cullers is closed. Barbara Proctor [Proctor & Gardner Advertising]. Speaker 1: Barbara Proctor, she was-- Speaker 2: Barbara Proctor had a very successful-- Speaker 1: She had the top ad agency at one time. Speaker 2: At one time she did. And her agency went out of business. John Small in New York [New York] went out of business. Mingo-Jones [Advertising] is, is really on the decline. There are a couple of others I can't remember who went out of business. But a lot of it had to do with the changing market. The big agencies started to put in departments of blacks who would deal specifically with the black needs of a client. They did that to circumvent the black agencies. So they'd either give 'em a new name and give 'em a little bit of independence, but they always were a house agency. And this worked out fine for clients who in some cases weren't particular about having a black agency for one reason or another. It just meant that it cut down on their stable of agencies so they didn't have to be bothered with some more people with a different kind of, of budget system set up or what have you. And/or it was just plain out I don't wanna deal with black folks; I'd rather deal with 'em through my white agency. I say that because one guy at, at Full--I mean at Anheuser-Busch, he put it in a letter. I saved it, but I think I lost it, unfortunately. He basically said, We don't wanna make you rich, you know we're not, we're not here to make you rich. And he underlined you. So I got the message there. So we were constantly embattled by clients who were bigots or agencies who wanted our money would could always find a champion to put out there to fight against us. The good people who worked for us on Allstate, Reebok, Ameritech [later, AT&T Teleholdings, Inc.], KFC, Anheuser-Busch, they always lost. Story_ID: 177301 Speaker 1: The people who stood up and fought for us [Equinox Advertising] always lost. At Reebok it was a woman who just didn't wanna deal with us at all. But there were strong enough element there who knew our work was excellent for basketball shoes; we had the whole basketball segment of Reebok for a while. She maneuvered it so we had to deal with [TBWA] Chiat\Day, which was their agency of record. Chiat\Day was a very creative agency in New York, big time reputation. We met with Jay Chiat and he loved our work, loved us. He said, "Hey, I wanna buy you." Well at this time we were high rolling. I mean we were doing the best that we had done; we had all these blue ticket, blue chip clients and we didn't wanna be sold. Although I did 'cause I could see the handwriting on the wall. You know we--the more we fought, the more trouble we got into. And then when you take the same problems that small agency has, you know in terms of turning work around and things like that, and you know procrastination sometimes getting things done. All these things started to eat at our structure. And then eventually my partners and I disagreed, we agreed to disagree and I left in 1996 after ten years. But we fought tooth and nail with clients and their agencies all the time. But there were--the good people were the ones who brought us in and they fought to the point where they just got tired. And then they'd compromise. And then the compromise would be compromised, and then we'd find ourselves out in the cold, you know, over a lot less than we should have been getting. Reebok, they wanted us to do the work and then give it to Chiat\Day and let Chiat\Day produce it and then they'd get credit for it. We said, You gotta be crazy, you know, it's not worth the money. Even though it was good money, you know. It was more money than we had ever, ever expected to, to earn 'cause at one time we had twenty employees and we were doing close to fourteen million dollars in billing and we were lean and mean, you know we were making a lot of money. We spent a lot of money too. Had great offices. I didn't think it was necessary. It was, it was another weakening of the triumvirate me, Bill [Daniels] and Bernie [Washington]. They wanted to keep high, you know, profile, very expensive. We were down at 980 North Michigan over Spiaggia on the, we were on the eleventh floor. My office looked over the Oak Street Beach [Chicago, Illinois] and the Drake Hotel, I mean it was gorgeous, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah that's, that was a big, yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but at the same time we didn't need it. It was just money being drained by Arthur Rubloff that wasn't really doing us any good. I mean our clients didn't care where we were; they rarely visited us, you know. Almost all of our interaction with them was at their location, wherever it was. Story_ID: 177302 Speaker 1: So you meet a lot of good people and a lot of bad people. It's, you know, unfortunate that the bad people seem to win out most of the time. And, and then the whole [advertising] agency business has changed too, to be fair. I mean you know these agencies are just mega-agencies now. You know, they're doing billions of dollars. When I was at [Leo] Burnett [Worldwide, Inc.], we reached 100 million dollars and that was supposed to be big time. You know it was at that time. But now these agencies are so big, you know it's unbelievable. And they just swallow up everything, they're like an amoeba you know. And the whole structure of the client relationship has changed too. Instead of 15 percent and 17.5 percent, or 17.35 or whatever it is, of the budget. That's what agencies used to get. So if a--if the client said, I've got a million, a billion, or a hundred million dollars for advertising, the agency would get somewhere between 15 percent and 17.35 percent of that hundred million. That's almost 20 million dollars, you know and you put other things in like expenses and stuff, it comes close to that for most companies. And the clients got tired of paying agencies all this exorbitant fees, so they started cutting the fees back and putting most agencies on retainers. Well the retainers aren't bad, you know, 12 million dollars a month or you know, 18 million dollars a month depending upon how big the budget is. And when you're talking about a billion dollar budget, you know, they weren't gonna give up 17 percent of that, but we'll give you 12 million a month. You know you've got overhead, you got three thousand employees and what have you. We can see that. So those, those aren't exaggerations either, there's not fact in terms of--I don't know who got that and who's getting it, but I know that those relationships were changing so agencies were looking at all kind of ways to make more money. And you gotta to say that a lot of its greed because they were making big time dollars and the clients were paying all your expenses. You stayed in the best hotels, flew first class, went to great resorts and stuff for meetings and played golf at all the expensive clubs and, and everything. So agencies were really being taken care of well and the clients got a little tired of it. So that aspect of the business impacted on smaller agencies across the board too. And black agencies were part of it. Story_ID: 177303 Speaker 1: Now, you've been a consultant since the closing of your own business [Equinox Advertising]. You were, you were a partner in that business for ten years, right. And you've been a consultant ever since. And, and up until retirement just recently, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I really, I sort of retired in 1996. I left the--I got bought out by Bernie [Washington] and Bill [Daniels] and they changed the name of the agency so Equinox ceased to exist and I really wasn't doing much of anything for about year. So I played golf and just didn't do much of anything. Didn't want to, and I got a call from a couple of friends who knew I wasn't doing anything and asked me to come and consult different, smaller, local businesses. And the first case was a hospital, Holy Cross Hospital [Chicago, Illinois], which is on the West Side in Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And they had a changing consumer base and they didn't know how to address it from a marketing standpoint, so they asked me to come in. It was a mixture of Latinos and blacks and Asians, and they wanted to reach out to them in a way that they would understand. So I put together a marketing plan for the, worked for them for about three years. In the meantime my former media director, a guy named David Tracey [ph.], who is--had formerly been the Director of Tatham-Laird & Kudner [later, Havas Worldwide] and David's white, and he had big time agency jobs. He had left them to go be with a sick wife who finally died and he had sort of gotten out of the mainstream of advertising. And he was doing work for us, he was teaching at Gettysburg in Pennsylvania, but he'd do all our media stuff via computer. And finally he came back home. I said why don't you just come on and work for us full time 'cause he's a real bright guy and you know, help in strategic planning and things like that. Well when I left Equinox, he was considered my ally and the--my two former partners fired him eventually or they pushed him out. And I mean that's typical of, of the business. It's not like they were doing something bad, that happened all the time. They wanted to put their own people in place. And because I had hired about everybody who worked at Equinox 'cause I ran the business part of, of the company. And he came to work with me as a partner in a company called McClean Scott Marketing. It's just the two of us and we did work for that hospital. We've worked--we work for a bank, Illinois Service Federal, which is the oldest black financial institution in Chicago, started in 1934. We do work for Draper and Kramer, a real estate company here. Chicago Sun Times, Advanced Bank, which is a suburban bank primarily. And we, we've done little things here and there, but those have been our primary clients. So I'm still retired, basically. I mean I work maybe a day and a half a week. Story_ID: 177304 Speaker 1: Was, was there a, a particular ad that you're the most proud of I guess that you produced or had a hand in [at Equinox Advertising]? Speaker 2: I was always very proud of our television commercials. I mean we did spots for Anheuser-Busch, Ameritech [later, AT&T Teleholdings, Inc.], Allstate, KFC, not Bigsby & Kruthers, but the Illinois State Lottery was one of our clients, and we did project work for them. But all our-- Speaker 1: You did the TV ads for-- Speaker 2: We did it for the instant games. Speaker 1: With the lotto balls running. Speaker 2: No, no those weren't ours. We did it with the instant games. We had one with Santa Claus at Christmas time and then we had one that, that sort of was a take-off on daytime soaps. And they were all general market ads, commercials. If you'd seen 'em, you wouldn't have known they came from a black agency. And that was, that was when [HM] Desiree Rogers was the head of the lottery in Illinois. And she had a reach--outreach program to use black suppliers and vendors and we were one of 'em, fortunately. But I'd say, you know our ad, our, our television was dynamite. And whenever we competed with the major agencies, we won hands down. I mean there were people there who said hey, this is where we need to be, this is where we need to go, but there'd be someone else who would say this might be where we need to go, but this is the way we're gonna get there and it ain't gonna be with them. So they'd take some watered down version of what we were doing and go with, you know, their major agency or the sell that the agency had set up. So I was just proud of our taking a different approach. It's unfortunate that our agency will never really be that well known in the history of African American advertising because we did things that nobody else did. And we had successes at a level that nobody else did. And that's, you know I'm not brag--I'm not being egotistical or saying things out of--we, we were told enough and we won enough awards, CEBA [Creative Excellence in Business Award] awards. That was it, CEBA. We won television for at least three different clients at the CEBA Awards where we competed with all Burrell's [Communications], McDonald and Coca-Cola stuff, all the Mingo's [Mingo-Jones Advertising], Miller and other people's stuff. We won it--we won for Reebok, we won for Allstate and we won for Anheuser-Busch and we won for Ameritech. Story_ID: 177305 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: If you wanna read the--if you ever read Governor [Otto] Kerner, The Kerner Report [Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] that was written back in the '60s [1960s] as to what was gonna happen to society if the government and the leadership of the country didn't take a positive approach to black people and the poor people of this country, we were gonna end up with a, a very split society on economic lines. And that we were gonna end up with some cultural groups that would invent their own way of living and that it would be a very negative way of living, and it would impact in a negative way on the basic fabric of our society and how, you know, the old, the old picket fence and the house and the car, you know the American dream, it, it goes counter-culture to the American dream. And you can see that happening. Unfortunately with black folks especially. You know and with the drug culture and then our inventing new forms of music that don't do anything but reinforce negative behavior. No self-esteem, no self-respect, that really bothers me. And I guess every generation sees something that bothers them and they wonder if they'll ever overcome it. Well I'm at that stage. I just wonder will we overcome all the negative forces that are going on in our society generally, but particularly black folks. You know I mean we got some really tough social problems that are gonna be hard to overcome, that are being reinforced ironically, from a lot of the money makers in the United States. You know the whole rap, hip hop thing has become a big money maker for white companies so they don't deter that type of behavior, even though they're spreading more in their community than it is ours. But they're making this kind of behavior acceptable by financing it. And they're financing it because they're making so much money off of it. But it's very, very negative and very detrimental to our kids. I mean any time--I saw Michael Irvin who's an ex-football player defending Terrell Owens, who was a, another football player when Terrell Owens had cussed out the coaches on the sideline on television. And Michael Irvin was saying that that was okay because he was right. I said that's absolutely ridiculous. That's like cussing out your parents because they didn't give you the--enough support to, to become a millionaire or what have you, you know. And here's a guy who is a millionaire and he's cussing out the coaches. But they try to make that kind of behavior the right kind of behave--that that's the right behavior and it's not, it's the wrong behavior. And right and wrong will never change. And you can't make wrong right no matter who you are. But that's what seems to be creeping into our society and people are thinking that wrongdoing is okay. You know whether it be bullying somebody down the street in an SUV [sport utility vehicle] or not giving an older person a seat on the bus, or disrespecting you know, your friends or family because you think the world owes you a living. Story_ID: 177568 Speaker 1: Sir at, at this juncture, what would you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: It's hard to, hard to say. I know from talking to people that I've had contact with through, throughout my life at some level or another, that I had a positive impact on a number of individuals who I'm proud to say made you know, as, as good people. Whether it be people I grew up with or people I taught, people I mentored when I was in the advertising business. I guess that would be a legacy if, you know, whatever value you could place on that. It's been to be a positive role mod--role model and because once you are thrust into certain level of--whether it be fame or recognition or rep--you know good reputation, you become--or reputation period; whether it's good or bad. You become a role model whether you wanna be one or not. And I, I think I've been a good role model for most of the people I've been associated with. And you know in the advertising business, I helped a lot of young people get started and they've been successful, and I've been there to advise them when they were in, you know, tough straits. So I, I would say that and plus I think being a successful family man is my biggest legacy. Was just having a great family, have a great son, great wife [HM Marlene Owens Rankin], great in-laws and relatives. And you know just the extended family has all been good, positive people. Got a great daughter-in-law and a great grandson named Myles. His mother's Sarah and I guess they wouldn't be there if it wasn't for me at some level. But I, I think mainly it's the partnership that my wife and I have formed over the years has been a very positive relationship and it's impacted on other people in a very positive way, and our son especially. Story_ID: 177569 Speaker 1: Now is there anything that, that you would do differently you think, if you had, had it to do over again? Speaker 2: There's always things that you would do differently. There's not too much that you could have done differently in a lot of cases. But if you had seen what was coming, you would have done something differently. So you, you go into certain situations and you just don't know, you know you're naive. And the situation has to hit you over the head so that you learn from it. So it's hard to get away from those kind of things. I, I would think in just general lifestyle terms, the ability to handle, handle money. I didn't learn that until later in life. I mean I was like late thirties, early forties before I really learned how to manage money. The, the importance of insurance and the right kind of insurance. The importance of preparing for your older age because I'm--my peer group now, I can see people struggling from one level to another. I can see people who are very comfortable because they either took care of themselves, or somebody--they were in a situation that took care of them. So those kind of things I probably would have done differently. Maybe been a better student when I was in high school. But I was a good enough student to get through and I learned a--enough. You know I--there's very little you take from those places. You know and, and, and definitively say boy, knowing what year [Abraham] Lincoln freed the slaves or Lincoln was shot or whatever, really made a difference in my day. That's, that's not the case. But it, it opened your mind to learn. And I think that's the main thing that maybe it took me a little longer to open my mind to learning, but once I did, I, I embraced it and that's, that's about it. Story_ID: 177570 Speaker 1: Okay and now my last question is slightly different from legacy. It's how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That's where my uncle comes in again, you know. 'Cause he's a--he always said in 100 years, nobody's gonna remember you. But that's not really true because I remember my great-grandfather and he came along in the 1800s, and I still remember him and I pass that onto my son. I think that that's important. It's--I wanna be remembered by my family more than anybody else. If some--if nobody else remembers me, that, that's no big deal. But I would like to be remembered in the family to the extent that I can be a positive force on my nephews and their kids and their kids, you know as Uncle Stuart was somebody who was a role model force in terms of how to live and what to do and how to be a good person, how to take care of your family. So that's like--that's how I'd like to be remembered...