 Story_ID: 412062 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Jamala Rogers, J-A-M-A-L-A, R-O-G-E-R-S. Speaker 1: Okay, now is Jamala your given name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So actually-- Speaker 1: Is there a story about how you're-- Speaker 2: It's, it, well actually it is. I kept my, the name that my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] gave me, as sort of the middle name, so actually it's Jamala Terry Rogers and Jamala was given to me during a wedding ceremony where, African ceremony where, combined with the wedding ceremony, was a name change for both me and my partner [Percy Green II]. So, that name was given to us, both of our names, were given to us based on doing a Zodiac chart and looking at the kind of qualities that, that were inherent in, in the stars but also just being a part of the black liberation movement and what kinds of qualities were going to be needed for that struggle. And so, for the (unclear) who you just met, was the person who gave us those names. So, Jamala means graceful. Speaker 1: Okay, is it Kiswahili? Speaker 2: Kiswahili. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. And about what year was it that you-- Speaker 2: Oh, that was 1972. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and since then it's been legalized. Speaker 1: Okay, and Terry's spelled with a Y or-- Speaker 2: T-E-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is October the 11th, 1950 and I was actually born in Kansas City, Kansas. Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I guess I would say that I'm a activist organizer, consultant and part of it is just because my background and training is around youth development and education and there's a seamless, you know, arena that goes from children and political organizing because if you really are trying to create a better world for children, then you have to create a better world for children. And so that means looking at the criminal justice system, it means looking at healthcare, it means looking at the school system. So, all of those issues I'm involved in in some kind of way but the passion and the driving force is children. Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you, are, or are you still, in the biographical information they had, I had, it says you are like the youth director for the City of St. Louis [Missouri] or-- Speaker 2: Not any longer. I, I did that for almost a decade-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that office was closed down by the current mayor [Francis Slay], I believe it was 2004. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you were appointed by, was it Freeman Bosley [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is October 16th, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the Rowan Community Center, located on the West End, in St. Louis, Missouri, 1401 Rowan Avenue. Story_ID: 412063 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They're kind of like a warm-up, I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: So the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No (laughter). I mean, I don't eat red meat but pretty, pretty much anything I will eat, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue and second to that is purple. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall is the favorite time of the year and it may have something to do with me being born that time of the year, but I think it's a very beautiful transition from summer to winter in terms of the foliage and, you know, just, it's just so, a time for me that's really more so than spring, really a time of renewal. I think a lot of it does have to do with my birthday. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Vacation, what vacation? What's that (laughter)? Speaker 1: Do, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, I can't think of any one--any, any particular one. The, part of the slogan for the Organization for Black Struggle [St. Louis, Missouri] is forward still, and so a lot of times I'll say that, you know, at the end of something, you know, when, particularly when it's not going good, it's like, okay, forward still is like, you know, whatever, we're going to move on. And so, a lot of times I'll say, forward still and I'll even write it at the end of an e-mail or a letter. Story_ID: 412064 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Bennett Massey, Sr.] side but I'll ask about your mother's side first. Ca- can you give us your mother's full name and spell it? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lollie Odom Brashears and that's spelled L-O-L-L-I-E, Odom is O-D-O-M, and Brashears is B-R-A-S-H-E-A-R-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is October 11th, 1931. Speaker 1: So it's the same as your, yours (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was her birthday gift. Speaker 1: Same birthday, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and she was born in Newton, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, N-E-W-T-O-N? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: We did a genealogy maybe, probably ten, fifteen years ago and I think we went pretty much back to the late 1800s. All the genealogy, in terms of the tree, I don't recall it but I, it was very interesting to go back 'cause we physically went back to talk with people but my two older sisters did a lot of the leg work in terms of going to the archives and pulling down birth and death certificates and that kind of thing but it was very interesting. We went there with a number of us, including my mother's sister-- Speaker 1: To Georgia? Speaker 2: To Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and we ultimately went back to the plantation where my aunt was raised. Speaker 1: Do you, was it, is there a name for it or-- Speaker 2: At the time, it was called Pineland Plantation [Newton, Georgia], P-I-N-E-L-A-N-D, and now, I think, it's Pineland Industries [sic.]. So we actually got a chance to go on the property. Speaker 1: Okay, now, were your ancestors slaves on that property? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and, and, you know I can remember one particular road that we were going down and my auntie said like, "Stop," you know, "this is the place," there was a tree here and there was the house here and it all started to come back to her. So she remembered fairly vividly, particular places around there that she had remembered. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a sharecropper there? I mean, were they doing share-- Speaker 2: She was just a child at that point because at, at-- Speaker 1: Were her people like sharecroppers on that plantation-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'cause that's after slavery, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: If she's your aunt, right? Speaker 2: But, but I think, and it's a little foggy, but, yeah, they worked on that, on that plantation, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and as far as she knows, the family had always been on that plantation? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, until they moved to Newton and then they went on to live in Thomasville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Where they make the furniture (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah-- Speaker 1: That is, that's really, that's where they-- Speaker 2: --among other things. Speaker 1: --Thomasville, yeah. Thomasville. Okay, all right. Are there any stories that come from those days? Any stories about the end of slavery or about, your, your great-great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Not, not a whole lot and I think just because, and this is one of the things that I realized going through that journey was that, of course records were not kept very well and that's both by, you know, families and by the government 'cause one of the things that struck me was that, whoever was in the house at the time, when the census people came, they were in that house. And so, so there may be somebody that was shown as living there and we're like, well who was that and my mother said, "I don't know" 'cause people would come through and just kind of stay for a few days and then they would move on. And so some people, we're like, we don't even know who they are but they were counted as a family at that particular time. Story_ID: 412065 Speaker 1: But also, I know my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] lived under very, you know, extreme poverty and so taking pictures and that kind of thing, like we don't have any pictures of my maternal grandmother, none, and I recall some years ago my mother saying, "I don't remember how my mother looks," and to me, I said, "How is that possible?" And she said, "Well, there's no pictures," and I got to thinking, well, it really is the photos that sort of help re-enforce what's in your memory. Like I have a memory of my grandmother and it's very vague. There's no details of her face and it's the same thing with my mother. There's a, there's a memory 'cause she left home at sixteen but no pictures exist of my mother, my grandmother, and so that, to me then says, we need to pay attention to photographs and history and start trying to document this stuff for those who come after us. So, I'm almost obsessive now about photographs and taking pictures of people and events and making sure that people have copies of it. And actually, in the movement [black liberation movement], I don't think we've done a very good job, particularly for grassroots organizations of preserving our history so that it can be shared. And so, so I'm sort of the historian for the, for the movement here in terms of making sure groups who don't have folks to take pictures, there's picture taking and that it's, it's preserved either on still photographs, digital or, you know, DVDs. Story_ID: 412066 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Lollie Odom Brashears], now did she grow up in Newton [Georgia]? Speaker 2: She actually grew, probably just spent a short time there, I think, maybe till she was five or six and then they moved to Thomasville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, so did she grow up in Thomasville? Speaker 2: Pretty much, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, were they, were they doing agricultural work or what did they do? Speaker 2: My grandmother did domestic work, basically, you know, ironing for white people, rich white people and so that's what I remember, you know, of her, that that's basically what she did. I don't think she worked the land. She did have a house and, and land, but there was, I mean, she probably did some farming just for the family but as far as what earned the, her living was, you know, ironing and doing those kind of jobs. Speaker 1: Okay, so, did your mother have any stories of growing up in Thomasville? Did she talk about what it was like? Speaker 2: Yeah, she talks about it a lot. Again, she talks about the, the poverty. She had a number of brothers and sisters, most of whom were old- much older than she was. And so, I think what she really remembers is the time spent with her younger brother who had Down syndrome and so she, you know, took care of him while her mother worked. And there's like about ten years difference between her and my aunt and they're the only two girls. In fact, they're the only two survivors of the siblings. So, we, we kind of hear stories about that. My--apparently my grandmother was pretty strict and so she couldn't go a lot of places and some of that was also based on finances that she couldn't go places. So if it was free, maybe, but, and I think that kind of environment really kind of is what pushed her to get married at a young age 'cause she got married at sixteen and then moved to Kansas City, Missouri. Story_ID: 412067 Speaker 1: Now did she meet somebody from Kansas City [Missouri] or did they- Speaker 2: No, my father [Bennett Massey, Sr.] is from Thomasville, Georgia and the interesting thing about that, and I, you know, it was years later that I said, how did you all end up in Kansas City and she said, my father, after he got out of the service, got a G.I. loan [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and for some reason he wanted to be a plumber and there were two schools in the country that allowed blacks to attend and one of them was in Kansas City, I think the other one was in Dallas, Texas, of all places and so that's what took him to Kansas City. Speaker 1: Okay, so he had a G.I. Bill money to go to plumbing school? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: I'm not quite sure. I know my, my father was, was very handsome and probably very charming and I think that once he got out of the service he kind of wooed my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] and I think she probably was swept off her feet and looking for a way out from the life that she was living. And so, she took a hit, hook, line and sinker. Story_ID: 412068 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's full name is Bennett Woodard Massey, B-E-N-N-E-T-T, W-O-O-D-A-R-D, Massey, M-A-S-S-E-Y and he was a Sr. [Bennett Massey, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth was October 1st, 1923 and he was born in Thomasville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what do you know about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I don't know, but I know we had a relationship with, with the grandparents and aunts on that side and particularly since my maternal grandmother died when I was ten, that, that was the relationship. Now the interesting thing about, about my paternal grandmother is once my parents divorced, I guess when I was about twelve, she pretty much ceased relationships with us until later on in life and at that point I was not really ready to reconcile that because I just felt like at a time when she was really needed, she chose to, to sever those ties. Speaker 1: Was she living in Kansas City [Missouri], too? She was in Thomasville? Speaker 2: No, she was in, at that point, she was living in West Palm Beach, Florida with a couple of my other aunts. So, that was a part of me that sort of never forgave her for that. That side of the family did have family reunions that I chose not to attend but my other sisters [Loretta Massey, Cheryl Massey McRae and Vanessa Massey] did. So there was some, you know, relationships built on that side of the family over a period of time but my other family, my mother's [Lollie Odom Brashears] side of the family, most of them were really, really poor and I know the time that we had tried to get a family reunion, it just was not possible. People would just, didn't have those kind of funds to, to travel anywhere. They were basically struggling to make ends meet and at a certain point, my uncles all were in bad health and couldn't travel. So, all of them are dead at this point except for my aunt who just turned eighty-six this year. Story_ID: 412069 Speaker 1: Did your father [Bennett Massey, Sr.] talk about growing up in Thomasville [Georgia]? What, what it was like for him? Speaker 2: Not a whole lot and I think some of it is, was painful because, at an early age, my grandmother, this is another unforgiving piece of, of, of our history. My grandmother gave up him and my aunt and they were raised by her sister in Thomasville. So, I think for him, it was a kind of childhood that he didn't talk a lot about. Speaker 1: Okay, so for a time, they weren't, they weren't with her and they-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then she reclaimed them later? Speaker 2: She, pretty much they were grown. I mean, my-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so they were raised by someone else, basically? Speaker 2: Um-hm, they were raised by my aunt, my Aunt Sadie [Sadie Gibson], and my aunt went on to college to become a teacher as my aunt, great aunt was and so, and then my father left home to go to the [U.S.] Army and then went on to Kansas City [Missouri] to, to go to plumbing school. Speaker 1: Okay, now, your great Aunt Sadie was a teacher? Speaker 2: Um-hm, right. Speaker 1: And where did she go to school? Speaker 2: I don't know, that's a good question, probably somewhere in Georgia. I don't think she went very far. I believe it was at a university in Georgia. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a, that's a question that, I had the same kind of question in my family. I've done all this history and I didn't know where my grandfather went to school at, I eventually have to find out but, but that's the kind of thing that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, it seems like I asked and it was at some kind of, at that point, a lot of them were at the A&M [agricultural and mechanical] and A&G [sic.], the agriculture and whatever-- Speaker 1: Industrial schools and such, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I need to find that out. I know my, my Aunt Leola [Leola Massey Gainey] would know that 'cause my, my Aunt Sadie is now dead. Speaker 1: Does she have, I would suspect because nobody talked, talked about the name of this, probably some industrial school, an A&M school that kind of thing and did she have like a normal degree, what they call a normal degree, a teacher's degree? Speaker 2: I know what you're saying and I don't know. I just know that she taught school for years in Thomasville and was well-known and well-respected and-- Speaker 1: So, what school did she teach at? Is there a name for that? Speaker 2: She might have taught at Douglass [Douglass High School, Thomasville, Georgia]. Now Douglass is the, the high school my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] went to and it was the only high school for black students. So she may have taught there until desegregation. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, named for Frederick Douglass? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 412070 Speaker 1: All right so your mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] went to the, went to school too, I mean your aunt [Rogers' paternal great aunt, Sadie Gibson] went to school to become a teacher as well? Speaker 2: Um-hm, right. Speaker 1: Did, did she go to the same school? Speaker 2: I don't think so because at that point she was in Florida, they were in Florida. No, they were in Georgia but I don't think she went to that school. I'm not sure but I can find that out too. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so your father's [Bennett Massey, Sr.] side, they had more, they were more educated, I guess you would say-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --but didn't have the advantage of being raised by their mother? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay. So, now did, so your father went directly into World War II [WWII], I guess. Speaker 2: Two, Two. I think he was more in the Korean War and I don't know that he, I don't think he saw active duty but he, he certainly was enlisted at that point and-- Speaker 1: So he didn't go over overseas or-- Speaker 2: No, unh-uh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, but he was there long enough to, to get an honorable discharge and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Right. Speaker 1: --and G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]? Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 412071 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their inclinations and such, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Hands down my mom [Lollie Odom Brashears] (laughter) and probably because we were born on the same day but we have a really special connection and a lot of times, you know, I'm, we're very much in tune to one another so we know what's going on even before we speak, it's--and there was a point in the late '60s [1960s], maybe early '70s [1970s] where, I don't know if you remember Brother Ogun [ph.], he was like some kind of African priest in Chicago [Illinois] and I asked him what was the significance of me being born on my mother's birthday and, and this is somebody whose credentials I had no knowledge of how he decided to come to being a priest but he said, it's like a delayed twin and I always remembered that and, and many ways it's kind of like that. There have been times when we bought stuff, the same thing, and we didn't know each other had bought that and just the way we think. I just think there's a generational piece that helps to influence the differences but I am a lot like her. Speaker 1: That's an interesting answer for that. I never thought about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it keeps coming back when, whenever we do stuff or I'm kind of like in tune to her feelings and I'm like, delayed twin, okay. Speaker 1: I never met Brother Ogun. I, I, no, that's funny. I actually seem like I should know him. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember, yes. Specifically he had a bald head and he always wore a white robe and I happened to be in Chicago for something, probably at the Communiversity and I asked him about that and that's what he told me and I'm like, okay, that's pretty, that's a pretty profound answer, I can go with that, yeah. Story_ID: 412072 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I have, I have a lot of memories as a child. (Laughter) I don't know what the earliest would be. I think one of the earliest memories I have is when my brother [Bennett Massey, Jr.] was about to be born and I remember my mother's [Lollie Odom Brashears] water breaking. Now I had to be pre- probably about three and I remember the distress and I remember seeing water and people kind of running around and for a while I didn't know what all that meant and then later on when I got older I asked my mother what, what was happening and she said, my water broke during my pregnancy with your brother and he was the last child, so, so I re- that part I remember and I thought it was just really kind of interesting that I was that young and that was pretty vivid in my, in my mind but then there was also ones of, you know, going to school and playing and Christmases and that kind of stuff, so, I have a whole bunch. Speaker 1: Okay, well, we'll try to get in the, most of them here (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)(Laughter). Story_ID: 412073 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do y- do you have? Speaker 2: I have three sisters [Loretta Massey, Cheryl Massey McRae and Vanessa Massey] and I had one brother [Bennett Massey, Jr.]. My brother just died this summer. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, you know, now you were born here in Kansas City [Kansas], I mean, I mean, not here in Kansas City [Missouri] but in Kansas City. Now what was your neighborhood called in Kansas City? What was that, or what was Kansas City, you know, set up like? Speaker 2: Well, initially, we lived very close to the 18th and Vine [Kansas City, Missouri] area. We lived on 24th [Street] and Highland [Avenue] and so that, that area now is a historic area but for us it was just like home but-- Speaker 1: Where everybody's heard of 12th Street and Vine, with the crazy little women (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 12th and Vine. (Laughter) They also heard of 18th and Vine, yeah. Yeah, so that's now a historic district but, you know, the black baseball museum [Negro Leagues Baseball Museum, Kansas City, Missouri] and, and a lot of the clubs that, that were there. Speaker 1: So that's just a traditional black community from back-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did it have a certain name or did people call it-- Speaker 2: I don't remember a certain name but I'm sure it did just because the neighborhoods were identified that way but we stayed there until I was going into sixth grade. I remember going to kindergarten at Wendell Phillips School [Wendell Phillips Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri] and then we moved and we moved into an area that was experiencing white flight. So, we-- Speaker 1: What, what was that area called? Speaker 2: I don't know that area either. You know when you're growing up, it's just home, it's just the neighborhood and so, so-- Speaker 1: Was it on, what side of Kansas City? Speaker 2: It was, we lived a block from Central High School [Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri]. So, and Central High School and Central Junior High [Central Junior High School, Kansas City, Missouri] were a complex that were connected by a football field and we lived right down the street from the junior high and then a couple of blocks over from the high school. Speaker 1: Oh, I guess Central High School was near the center part of the city, I guess, just by the name of it, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and so the home was purchased from a white family and there were, at that point, maybe still a few white families on that block but in a matter of, it seemed like to me, a very short time, (laughter) it was all black, so, so, yeah, those, those were our neighborhood buddies growing up. Story_ID: 412074 Speaker 1: You were on 18th and Vine [St. Louis, Missouri] until you were about six I guess, you said (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you grew up the rest of the time over near Central High School [Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Near Central High School. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I remember lots of playing, lots of laughter 'cause we didn't have video and barely had TV. So, a lot of our time was spent outdoors, even in the wintertime. So, you know, bikes and laughter and, you know, hanging out at different people's backyards or porches and for me there was also, not just the playing time, but I was an avid reader so I would curl up with a book and read a book. And so I just think, you know, the things that I remember or, a lot of playing going on (laughter) and a lot of, I think I had a pretty happy childhood. And then, you know, school was a big part of our lives. At one point, my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] decided that our education wasn't what it should be at the school that we were going and even though Brown versus Ray--Brown versus Wade--Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] had been in place for a while, the schools were slow to desegregate and so one of the schools that she wanted us to go to was an integrated school. We had been going to segregated schools and, but it meant that we had to walk a nice little taste 'cause they didn't have buses. So we walked, I know it was over a mile every day to go to Milton Moore School [Milton Moore Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri]. Story_ID: 412104 Speaker 1: You liked to read when you were coming up, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What, what were your favorite books? Speaker 2: I would read just about anything. I remember one Christmas I had requested books and, you know, it's five kids and the struggling parents so, you know, you didn't get a whole lot. You know, you got a choice of one or two things and so I remember I got two books and my sisters, they thought I would had gotten like, you know, I, I didn't have a Christmas 'cause I got books. So, but they were 'Heidi' [Johanna Spyri] and they were 'Florence Nightingale' [ph.] and so I pretty much read them that day, you know, completed them that day but I, I read, you know, magazine articles, went to the library and got stuff. I really think I liked to read about people. So-- Speaker 1: The biographies? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, and later on it occurred to me that, that probably was the way that I learned history better, not by looking at, you know, facts and trying to regurgitate them but what things happened in a person's lives that connected with external history and that helps me to remember, put some context to it rather than just oh, there was a march in 1963 but who were the makers and players that came to, to make that march happen and that's, to me, is the more interesting piece of it, not just the event itself. Story_ID: 412105 Speaker 1: Did you get all the news, I mean, you know, Kansas City [Missouri] had a, must've have had a black newspa- paper, right? Speaker 2: We had the Kansas City Call [The Call] which is still operating. It's one of the oldest black newspapers in, in the Midwest. I also remember, not necessarily a black owned, but black urban radio station, KPRS [KPRS Radio, Kansas City, Missouri], we grew up on that. Speaker 1: Now was that on from, when did they start, did they start broadcasting-- Speaker 2: In the morning and then in the evening when the sun starts going down, so did, so did KPRS. So-- Speaker 1: You know, a lot of, a lot of city- cities had that kind of arrangements with the station but did, did they start broadcasting when you were a teenager or before? Speaker 2: No, I remember, maybe it's because I got more interested in the radio. I remember it when I was probably fifth and sixth grade. Speaker 1: So did they have like a, did they play like R&B? Speaker 2: R&B, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, did they have like, in those days like public affairs shows where-- Speaker 2: There were a few of those (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) stations were compelled to have them by the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] but did they have black talk shows on that? Speaker 2: I don't remember any talk. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really didn't. It was pretty much all music and all Sunday it was gospel. You know the routine (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so, now was, was, you say you didn't watch that much television growing up, huh? Speaker 2: Well not a whole lot. I think we, we had a television, a black and white television at our old house and I remember the television at the new house. So there, there, we, we watched television but because television to me wasn't all that interesting, there were only certain things that I watched. I mean, obviously, on Saturday mornings, we, we watched cartoons like most other kids growing up but in between there, I can remember like family watching certain things like, ooh, what was the name of that, 'Mission: Impossible,' stuff like that, you know, sort of a gathering of the family to watch that but mainly for the kids, it was like cartoons on Saturday and then you wanted to stay outside and play as, for as long as you could, so. Story_ID: 412106 Speaker 1: When did your parents s- split up? I mean, how old were you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was about twelve. I think I was just going into middle school, junior high school and it, it had been pretty rocky towards the end but overall I think probably not a healthy marriage. I mean, obviously, with my father [Bennett Massey, Sr.] having the kind of childhood he had, he has some issues and never got worked out and, and with my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] being very, very young, when she came to Kansas City [Missouri] with no support system at all, we, she knew nobody, nobody. And so, she was a young mother and almost every year she was having a baby and that was, that was problematic for her. So I just think that, you know, she, it was, it was probably not a marriage that was based on mutual respect and the understanding of where these two people wanted to do with their lives 'cause I don't think my father really knew kind of where--what he wanted to do. Speaker 1: Now did he become a plumber? Speaker 2: Yeah, he did become a plumber, unfortunately never was able to join the plumbers union [Plumbers Local Union No. 8] so he never made the kind of wages that a white plumber made and just, you know, thinking about that, one of the interesting things that, to me, was at a certain point when I was, I might have been in college [Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri] then, and I stayed with my father during that point, he was getting calls from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. And so based on my activities on campus, I assumed that they were about me but he said they were about getting into the union. I'm like, okay, why did they pick all these years to now start talking to you about being in the union when they've been excluding black folks for years, so, that was just an interesting kind of development he said, "Nah, it's nothing, they just wanted, asking me questions about, you know, the union." I said, "Okay." But, so he, he was a very hard worker and-- Speaker 1: What did he, did you see him a lot after your parents split up? Speaker 2: We all went to the same church [St. Paul Presbyterian Church, Kansas City, Missouri] so, so, yeah, but then, you know, at seventeen, I left to go to school and I saw less of him but, but we continued to, to see each other after, after, after they split up and in some cases, some of that was orchestrated by my mother because sometimes my father was not paying child support so then she would say, okay, you all get yourself together and walk on over there and tell him you're there for dinner. And so we did that a few times, much to his chagrin and the chagrin of his new wife, but, so he got the message but at, that was, I think, a piece that never got resolved either and I know that part of the reason he withheld child support was not necessarily directed at us but really just trying to make my mother's life miserable. So, he knew that, you know, her being a nurturing, caring mother that that was going to, you know, put her under a lot of stress, and it did, it definitely did, but, you know, I remember, as a plumber, and this was, we were grown, that he got picked up in a white neighborhood because he had just went to, to, I think, pick up a check for work so he was not in his truck, he was in a car, and he was stopped by the police and there was an outstanding warrant on him for not, lack of child support and this was like a fifteen year old, twenty year old warrant. And so he actually had to call my mother to, (laughter) to tell them that that was old but it, it was just interesting how this stuff plays out. She never could get any relief from the courts or, when he was not paying and then after we're all grown and, and then they wanna like, try to enforce it, so, that was just interesting. Story_ID: 412107 Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Church was a big part of growing up. We, we attended a black Presbyterian church and my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] and father [Bennett Massey, Sr.] were real active in helping to put it together 'cause initially it met somewhere in a little storefront and then they were part of the group that kind of helped it to grow and bought a building and that kind of thing, so-- Speaker 1: Well, that's interesting. There aren't that many black Presbyterians out here but what, but, so they had like a background in, as Presbyterians in Georgia before they-- Speaker 2: No. I don't think my mother had a background in anything, religious-wise. I mean, she may have went to church with friends or whatever but I don't think she had an affiliation and I don't remember my father, really, having an affiliation. So, the Presbyterians worked, you know, worked out for them. And so, it really became a social, as I'm sure most families. So we grew up with not just kids in the church but these were also kids from the neighborhood and so some of them became lifelong friends for us. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's like a neighborhood church that kind of developed? Speaker 2: It was a neighborhood church. Speaker 1: But it's a Presbyterian church. That just seems so odd (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Presbyterian and it stayed the only all-black Presbyterian church for many, many years. Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of it? Speaker 2: St. Paul Presbyterian Church [Kansas City, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we had a lot of, you know, fond memories there of, you know, bible school and Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, Easter egg hunts. It was a very caring and nurturing community and, and so when I go back, sometimes I go to church with my mother. Story_ID: 412108 Speaker 1: So were you a Girl Scout? Speaker 2: Oh definitely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a Girl Scout, full regalia, all my badges 'cause I'm (laughter), you know, into accomplishments and achievements so I had, I had all my little badges and stuff and, and plus it was fun. I mean, you know, my, one of the Girl Scout leaders was a church member and a Sunday school teacher [at St. Paul Presbyterian Church, Kansas City, Missouri] but she was also a teacher in the same--in the Kansas City Public Schools so she just had a way with, with kids. And so, her daughter was a part of the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] so all of us would kind of hang out at the house. So, it really was an extension of the church piece and so it was, again, a social networking piece but, you know, a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did you go to camp? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, went to camp. Speaker 1: Go every year or just-- Speaker 2: I think we went every year for a while until we probably got too big for our breeches and then that seemed like passe stuff and now it's time to, you know, find out about boys and parties and buying records and that kind of thing, so, but it definitely was a fun part of my life. Story_ID: 412109 Speaker 1: Was your family like keenly aware of the Civil Rights Movement? Did they follow, you know, the activities of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and in the media and, did you talk about it at home? Speaker 2: I don't think there was, there wasn't a whole lot of talking about it. I mean, my father [Bennett Massey, Sr.] was away most of the time and worked long hours and then when he came home, it was basically eat and go to bed for the next round. At a certain point, my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] went to work. She went to nurses training school to become a practical nurse and so then she was away. So, so whatever information that was being filtered in was, was not necessarily through them, although, obviously, they were experiencing racism and understanding, you know, civil rights on a different kind of level but they weren't like involved or, or, you know, anything like that but we did get our lessons about race relations based on whatever was happening in their lives. So, for example, my mother, when she came out of nursing school, worked for a Catholic church and some of the nuns were truly racist. And so we, you know we had to hear about those kinds of experiences and, you know, what to-- Speaker 1: Can you remember a story about the nuns? Speaker 2: I can't remember any specific ones but I know that definitely for me it stripped away the sort of mystique and devotion of folks who wore the habit 'cause at that point, all of them wore like the long--and there always was this sort of immediate respect no matter what they had done or not done and I started to look at them in quite a different way. I'm like, well, you know, you don't necessarily deserve all of this until I figure out what you've done. And so, I, from then on, my view about the Catholic church was, was shaped by my mother's working at that hospital. Story_ID: 412110 Speaker 1: Now di- did you ever go to a civil rights meeting or hear anybody speak at any of the-- Speaker 2: You know, early on, I tagged along with my sisters [Loretta Massey, Cheryl Massey McRae and Vanessa Massey] to go to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you know, the junior division, but I think already before then, I had a fairly keen sense of justice and what's fair and what's right and, and often would advocate in that way, even as a young child, you know, that's not right-- Speaker 1: Did you ever get in trouble for, for taking, I mean, for being too right about something? Speaker 2: Yeah, and do you know one of the things, particularly in my house was I would resort to writing poetry. So I would put my viewpoints in writing, put them on the bulletin board for people to read. Speaker 1: In the house? Speaker 2: In the house. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so that's sort of how I dealt with, with injustice and, you know, one of the things that I think, for me is, well, you've got five kids and they're all pretty much the same age and something happens in the house, like something gets broke, you know, there's not a whole lot of time to do investigations. So it was like everybody got punished, you know, unless somebody came forward to rat on somebody else, and to me that was just so unfair. And so, those are the kinds of things that I'm like, uh-uh, you know, somebody better step up to the plate and admit they're wrong and, of course, when nobody did, we all got it, we all got it. Story_ID: 412111 Speaker 1: Now did your parents [Lollie Odom Brashears and Bennett Massey, Sr.] practice the, children should be seen and not heard philosophy or did they, did they encourage you to discuss things? Speaker 2: I think it was a mixed bag. I think I probably was not going to be a child that was going to be just seen and not heard because I was pretty vocal and in a lot of ways it was encouraged, but for my other sisters [Loretta Massey, Cheryl Massey McRae and Vanessa Massey] and, and my brother [Bennett Massey, Jr.], it, it seemed like, when I look back that they probably were, until we reached teenage years when everybody got a little feisty and mouthy, that pretty much they followed the script, yeah, so it was like, you know, but, but particularly in church [St. Paul Presbyterian Church, Kansas City, Missouri], all of us, you know, you had to be quiet, no talking and if we did, then we knew, we all were going to get a whooping after church for whatever, for whatever somebody else did but there was not, I mean, we, we talked a lot about getting whoopings but, you know, once we looked back on, we didn't get a whole lot of whoopings and I think probably because we weren't just terribly bad children but also my mother tried to use alternative ways of, of dealing with us and I think that probably came from her childhood where she really, you know, my [maternal] grandmother didn't spare the rod, I mean, you know, they, they really got what you would call a whooping. So, so I don't think she wanted that for her kids. I don't think she thought that that was always necessary, so, a lot of times we, we got talked to or we got punished in other ways-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which I'm glad for that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you see your mother like actually changing the culture that she was brought up in-- Speaker 2: Absolutely-- Speaker 1: --for the betterment of the-- Speaker 2: --absolutely. I think there were a lot of things that drove my mother to, to do things differently. I mean, that, the corporal punishment piece was the piece but also she felt really strongly about all her children having the same father and I think maybe that, that was the thing that kept her with my father probably longer than she needed to have been but my uncles and aunts pretty much had different fathers. And so, she was like, I don't want that for my kids, I want them all to know who their father is and I want them to have the same last names. So, so for her, that piece of it was one thing that she made a vow very early on in her life to do that and so-- Speaker 1: So those are two things that she changed, you know, based upon reflection of her own experiences that-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. And then, you know, I think she understood that some of that was not exactly within the realm of my mother's power because, you know, a lot of these were liaisons with white men. And so, for example, my mother's biracial. She knew who her father was, he was one of the white folks in town. So, so, you know, those, those kinds of things I don't, I think it played on her in terms of really wanting to have a relationship with a father and I don't think any of them, of her siblings, had a relationship with their father. So, she didn't want that for us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then you have to, there's tradeoffs because then if you stay with somebody that, that's not treating you well and you're still like under that sort of obsessive thing, well, you know, got to make this marriage work, got to stay with the kids' father, then I, I don't think it's, in the long run, healthy. I really think that probably after the first five or six, the years of marriage, it was pretty clear what, it wasn't going to get any better but I think at that point, she definitely had no skills. Remember she was sixteen when she came [to Kansas City, Missouri] and no real support system so she was kind of trapped. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now did she make a conscious decision not to be in a position to be, to put herself in a vulnerable position with white men as well? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely and (laughter) maybe it has to do with my father but my father's a real chocolate colored, kind of like me, and she was very attracted to that but I don't, I think the main thing though, for her, is just really being in a relationship that was going to be solid for the kids and having, having a real life. I think the life of poverty also impacted her so she really worked hard for us to have a few things that, that was not necessarily basic things but to really make us have an enjoyable childhood. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so I think she was definitely successful at doing that. Story_ID: 412112 Speaker 1: Are there any parti- particular teachers or, or mentors along the way that influenced you? Speaker 2: Definitely. I mean, it seems like most of the teachers that influenced me were, were women and the two in high school [Central High School; Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri], actually, were my English teachers in, you know, eventually I went on to get a degree in English and education. So, one of them was Theodora Burnett and I think with Ms. Burnett I really saw her as a grandmother figure and not having a grandmother and hearing people talk about, you know, their grandmas, I wanted a grandma and I wanted cousins and we didn't have those in, in Kansas City [Missouri]. So she was, she was, she had gray mingley hair and she wore it tied in a little bun and she was just, I mean, she spared no words if you were doing wrong, and she just seemed like the ideal grandmother so I just took to her and my two other sisters, older than me, had already had her so I already knew what I was getting into and that, everything that she had to memorize, I already knew it before I got there. So, so we, we really hit it off. And then I had a teacher, Gloria Terrell and not only was she an English teacher but she did acting. So, there were times when I went to her performances and it, it was, it was truly inspiring. Speaker 1: T-E-R-O? Speaker 2: T-E-R-R-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Oh, Terrell, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. So, did Kansas City have a, a black theater company or was that, was it, was she white? I don't know? Speaker 2: Oh, no, these were both African American teachers, uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And there was another teacher in my freshman year, she wasn't English, she was a homemaking teacher and I really, really liked her too. She, she taught me a lesson that was painful to learn because I kind of knew that I was one of her favorites and so I didn't work as hard and so when my report card came out, I had a C and that was, you know, I didn't like Cs but, so that let me know that she was not going to cater to me and that her expectations was that I should be an exceptional student. So after that I did what I was supposed to do to make the kind of grades that I thought I should be making but she used to take me to different things like home shows and stuff like that, things that, that teachers aren't allowed to do anymore, you know, 'cause, nowadays, you can't even take a student in your car for liability issues but we, we went a lot of places with our teachers. So, I remember having fairly, fairly fun times during school. I was, I was pretty studious and, but I also liked to have fun, so, I remember her. I remember good times. Speaker 1: I was asking earlier, there was, was there a black theater group in town, I guess, with-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Ms. Terrell being involved? Speaker 2: She--is a black theater group and interestingly enough, one of the members of our church [St. Paul Presbyterian Church, Kansas City, Missouri] was a part of that. I don't remember, it was some kind of something players [Black Contemporary Players] but, yeah. Speaker 1: Was it, I know there was one in Chicago [Illinois], Richard B. Harrison Players, he seemed to be real popular for some reason and then you remember who, was it named after somebody? Speaker 2: I can't remember. I just remember players and was just always glad to go to something that she did and I remember in one of her classes, we used the whole dramatic thing around a Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] piece and we acted it out and took it around to the other classes and I played one of the witches and I think I did it very well. Speaker 1: Now, in, in 'Macbeth' [William Shakespeare], is that it? Speaker 2: In 'Macbeth.' So, so some of that rubbed off on me although I never did go into the stage. I figured like teaching is part of being on stage for real, you know. So, yeah, she, she was definitely an influence. Story_ID: 412113 Speaker 1: Now, wh- when you were in high school, were you in- involved in student government and clubs and that sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, I was, actually I, I was, in my senior year, I was president of the student council. Speaker 1: Now what was the racial makeup at Central [Central High School; Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri] when you were there? Speaker 2: Ninety-nine and nine-tenths percent African American (laughter). I think the only white person was the foreign exchange student. So even in, in the '60s [1960s], it was segregated. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right, so you were, you were even president of the student council? Speaker 2: I was president of the student council, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was fairly involved in lots of activities. Wow, I can't even think of all of them but I, I was always just that kind of a person just involved with a lot of different stuff. Speaker 1: Were you a cheerleader or anything or marching-- Speaker 2: I was not a cheerleader, I was a booster which was like kind of like the pep club and I guess in my senior year, I was basketball queen, just, just involved in all kind of stuff, you know, yeah. I was a part of the Honor Society [National Honor Society] and just, you know, attended baseball--basketball games and football games and just, just really involved in the student life. Story_ID: 412114 Speaker 1: So wh- when you were a senior [at Central High School; Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri] then, wh- did you know you were going to college? Did you know where, did you know where and-- Speaker 2: I didn't exactly know where. I knew that I wanted to be a teacher and, of course, one of the things that, that I didn't have the advantage of is having somebody in my family, before me, to kind of say, here's what you need to do. And the, at that time, the counselor took a view that she needed to help the really, really smart kids and it just so happens the ones that she helped were really, really light-skinned and all of this is still going on in the '60s [1960s]. And so, it was almost like, yeah, you have the grades but you probably won't go very far. I mean, I didn't get that in those words so I kind of figured I'm going to be on my own on this one and I sent out some applications and, you know, what? I can't even remember if I got accepted anywhere but what happened, my stepfather [Virgil Brashears, Jr.], my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] married when I was in high school, I think it was, I might have been a junior, and that was a tumultuous time because my stepfather was a career [U.S.] Air Force person. So, I need not tell you what kind of vibe that he brought to the house (laughter). Story_ID: 412086 Speaker 1: So you got a new stepfather and, well, what did he bring to you that, home? Speaker 2: He didn't have children and no- not to say that you have to have them to understand them but you're coming into a house with there's now teenagers. And so, his view of kids was definitely, should be seen and not heard and by then, I think I was the oldest child in the house. So pretty much I was, you know, running the household 'cause my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] was still working full-time and, and I just had a lot of, you know, independence and leeway. My mother trusted me with making certain decisions for my younger brother [Bennett Massey, Jr.]and sister. And so, here comes somebody that's saying, time out for all of that, you know, you don't know this, you don't know that and it was just a lot of tension in the house and, of course, me being out, everybody else sort of kowtowing but me being the outspoken person, I had something to say and that was just, that used to just drive him crazy that I had the audacity. And so he came out as a lieutenant colonel so it was almost like, you have the audacity to sit up here and question the lieutenant colonel. So we, we had our, our spasm. I think the only thing that really sort of tempered my behavior was that I knew how my mother was feeling between all of this going on. At the time, I had a boyfriend and, you know, we were together before this man came and so we were going, you know, so there was a lot of intervention about dating and, I mean, he just had some very antiquated ideas about raising children. I mean, he didn't believe in Halloween, he didn't believe kids need to be out, you know, doing anything but in the house doing whatever, homework. And, and so that, that was really the source of a lot of tension and then, of course, views on the government. I mean, him having served the government for a long time and me sort of now experiencing what the government actually means for black people there was this head butting 'cause remember I'm still in high school [Central High School; Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri] and sort of coming to this awakening, this is the '60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s] and, and reading a lot about what's going on, seeing some of that on the television. And so there was that kind of head butting going on. I remember the, the night that I went to my senior dance was the night that Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was killed and i- it's so vivid because we stayed out all night and we were hearing it on the news as we were coming home and as I came into the house, my stepfather got up to greet me and it's like, "Where have you been?" I'm like, "I've been to the senior dance," and it was always kind of understood that it was going to be an all night party. So, he picks up the telephone to call the police and his thing was, "This is Lieutenant Colonel Virgil Brashears [Virgil Brashears, Jr.] and William McKinney just brought my daughter in at six a.m." And so I'm thinking that the person on the other end probably thought this is a nutcase calling and just sort of went along with it and my mother said, "Virgil, come on back to bed." And I said, "Yeah, you better tell him to go on back to bed 'cause I'm ready to go to bed 'cause we'd been out all night partying and I don't even understand what this is all about." So, that is the way that it started. I don't say that's the way it started off because I really was kind of happy that my mother found somebody but, you know, over the years, I don't know that I can say that I started to understand him better but, I, I did start to understand him better and I did start to take the gloves off a little bit and eventually, you know, we sort of became long lost friends. Story_ID: 412087 Speaker 1: He [Rogers' stepfather, Virgil Brashears, Jr.] died maybe about five years ago and, you know, some of me looks back and says that pro- probably should have done a lot more in terms of finding out more about him and the way that he was brought up but he actually was a Tuskegee Airman so I got a chance to hear about some of those stories and, and just recently my mother [Lollie Odom Brashears] attended a ceremony in Kansas City [Missouri] for the Tuskegee Airmen who received the Congressional Medal of Honor for those who couldn't go to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] to receive it and, you know, it made me think about a lot of the sacrifice that he had made but I just think that he, a part of him had very few social skills and once he became a civilian, he really was out of his element and it was just hard for him to make friends or understand, you know, human behavior and I would say that probably because he went into the service right after high school, that that shaped the way that he thought and he probably has some inclinations towards some of this anyway but it, it was just difficult for him. And so pretty much he had no friends but us, you know, at the end of his life and I just, there was a part of me that just thinks that's kind of sad that he could never figure out what he needed to do to, to reach out to people. Speaker 2: Where was he from? Speaker 1: He was from Kansas City, um-hm, and I think he really, really loved my mother and just recently I read a letter (crying), I read a letter that he had wrote to my mother just before they got married where he talked about his love for her and I had never seen that letter before and it was really, really touching but I also knew that even before then, when he decided to marry my mother, he wanted to buy an airplane because he was a pilot and, you know, he came out a lieutenant colonel so he actually had the money to do that and he made a choice between marrying a woman that had five kids and giving up a dream and I didn't find that out until, like, years later and it really started to help me appreciate that maybe beneath that exterior that was really cold and kind of unyielding that there was, thank you, somebody there that had a heart. So his, his letter was really short and sweet to my mother and, and I think he just had unconditional love for her. He didn't know how to deal with us but, you know, he wanted to create a life for her that was better than what she had before and when he died, he made sure that she was well taken care of. And so, I, I really have to love him for that. Story_ID: 412088 Speaker 1: Now when you were a senior in high school [Central High School; Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri], this is 1968, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died too, that, that spring, right? Just before Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] in April? Do you remember what you were doing then and, and the-- Speaker 2: Oh, definitely. I remember when Dr. King died and I was student council president so I'm thinking we need to do something 'cause the folks were very angry, there's a lot of tension, we had a white principal and, and so I went to him and I said, we need to have an assembly so that, you know, people can kind of have an outlet for dealing with some of these issues of anger and, and outrage and I--for him, I think he figured that he was going to lose control if something like that happened so he didn't approve the assembly and, which really only made it worse because then there was a student walkout and probably three other schools did walk outs as well and, and that really was the beginning of the Kansas City [Missouri] rebellions because it was right before that, that, you know, all hell broke loose and the National Guard came in and, you know, there were several people killed. The drugstore where I worked at the fountain, soda fountain, was leveled to the ground. So these were things that, you know, really burned an indelible mark in my head and particularly I remember, of course, we were not far away from the epicenter of all of this happening where, you know, people were, you know, throwing cocktails and that kind of thing so my mom [Lollie Odom Brashears] said, "Do not go down there." Now, you know, somebody like me, I'm going down there and I remember the whole tear gas was still in the air and it was burning my eyes but I remember seeing a tank come down at that time, Indiana [Avenue], and it just, it was just so surreal I'm like, you know, these people are here to kill us and that, that was a pivotal time for me in terms of, I guess, how I was going to spend my life because if this is a government that's supposed to be of the people, by the people, for the people and they're sending folks in here to kill, then none of us are really safe. And so, so that's the image that stays with me a lot, that tank coming down the street, you know, teargas welling up in my eyes and, and then looking at the place that I worked at, it was gone, it was a parking lot, it was completely leveled and this was like a whole s-, you know, store, drugstore. Story_ID: 412089 Speaker 1: So, you know, a- after that point, you know, we went on shortly tha- thereafter to graduate and one of the things that happened was that, you know, money started coming into the urban centers to kind of quell the unrest and there was a college scout that came to Kansas City [Missouri] who was from a Presbyterian-related school. And so, I mean, it must have been some kind of divine intervention because at this point, because my stepfather [Virgil Brashears, Jr.] said, "I, I can pay for you to go to school," and I'm like, "I do not want you paying for anything," and just that sort of obstinate piece 'cause it just felt like if that was done then, then it wouldn't always, I'd be reminded of that, you know, I paid for you to go to school, blah, blah, blah, blah, something like, if I have to stay and work, you know, I'm, I'm going to do it myself. So, in comes the scout who offered a full ride, you know, academic scholarship and that's how I went to college. Speaker 2: So, where, where did you go? Speaker 1: I went to Tarkio College [Tarkio, Missouri] and it's a small liberal arts Presbyterian college. Speaker 2: How, how do you spell that? Speaker 1: T-A-R-K-I-O, and ask me where it is. Speaker 2: Where is it? Speaker 1: Tarkio, Missouri (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, Tarkio, Missouri, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of times when I say, you know, Tarkio, they say, Tokyo [Japan], you went to school in Tokyo? No, Tarkio. Speaker 2: That's the first time I've heard of that one, really. I mean, Tarkio College, okay. It's a Presbyterian school? Speaker 1: It's a Presbyterian school, liberal arts, in the northwest corner of the state. We were like ten, maybe ten, twenty miles from the Iowa border so it's way north. Speaker 2: Is that what they call the Ozarks here, or something or-- Speaker 1: Well, no, the Ozarks is in the middle of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the middle, okay. Speaker 1: --of Missouri, but, this is way, way, way in the northwest corner and--. Story_ID: 412090 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --before we get you to college [Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri]. I just want to know, it's 1968, your life has been punctuated by like black liberation movement, in a cultural Black Arts Movement and other things, did, did you become aware of any of that in high school [Central High School; Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri] or where, were you consciously aware of any of that then? Speaker 2: I think that I was consciously aware of it from the standpoint of just kind of seeing and reading, you know, things that were going on, seeing stuff on the TV. Speaker 1: I mean, in '68 [1968], were people wearing their hair natural in, in the city? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean, women, were the girls in high school doing that? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. No, not a whole lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact I remember I still had straight hair in my senior year and I didn't go natural until I went to college but there were a few people 'cause, you know, this is the Midwest and things aren't as accelerated as, as the coasts are but, you know, eventually, you know, it, it kind of took on. So, there were, there were different groups trying to do things. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] eventually, you know, the Black Panther Party formed in Kansas City [Missouri]. There may have been a couple of other groups. Speaker 1: Now, that's while you were in high school when they were, they were-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah. And I remember at a certain point coming back from school and I used to buy the, when I came back to work during the summer, I used to always buy the Black Panther newspaper so I was aware, nationally, kind of what was going on with them. And at a certain point, I was really trying to see where to, sort of, put my roots down as far as an organization so I was looking at the Nation of Islam, I was looking at the Black Panther Party and I remember, by the time that I went to check out the Black Panther Party, they were already under siege by the government and I can recall and I kind of teased the O'Neals about this who were the originators, some of the founding members of the Kansas City chapter of the Black Panther Party but I remember going to their office and in the front of the window, because it was like a storefront like, sandbags all the way up, you know, and then the-- Speaker 1: They had sandbags in front of the office? Speaker 2: Sandbags on the inside up because it was plate glass and I remember knocking on the door and somebody like talking through the door but I didn't get in and it was so much paranoia about who people were and who they weren't and so really that, that was, you know, the door didn't open and so I ended up not even going that direction (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so this is before college or after college? Speaker 2: This was during college. Speaker 1: During college, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, this is like the time that I came home, probably during the summer. Speaker 1: So, the O'Neals, that's Pete O'Neal-- Speaker 2: Pete O'Neal. Speaker 1: --and I can't think of his wife's [Charlotte O'Neal] name now. Speaker 2: Oh, and I should know it. I was on-- Speaker 1: But they're in Kansas City and there's been a special on public television about him. A friend of mine-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're in Tanzania. Speaker 1: --was in Tanzania a little while ago and saw him. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, they're still-- Speaker 1: They have a cultural center and, and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. I was on a panel with her a couple of years ago, yeah. Speaker 1: Arusha [Tanzania], I guess, I think, yeah. Speaker 2: What's her name? Speaker 1: I think it's Arusha, Tanzania, that's where they're-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so, so that didn't happen just because of that scenario. It probably, if I had went in I would have joined and been there 'cause I'm already an avid reader of the paper and I agree with the ten point program, I'm there and they, the paranoia was too great by that time to trust anybody that, that they hadn't already known before so, so that, that was the end of that phase but, you know, in school, in college. Story_ID: 412091 Speaker 1: How many students are at Tarkio [Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri]? And how many black students of that population (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, before I came, there were probably about twelve black students out of, I would say, probably three hundred and when I came, it was sixty of us and they really, I mean, it was a cultural wasteland for us. I mean, so by the end of the first semester, a lot of the black kids just couldn't hang. I mean, we were actually, literally, in the middle of cornfields, I mean, the campus itself. When I looked out my window, I could see cornfields for days and days and days. The town was about one square block. There was no black people in the town, no black people close to the town and so really to survive in that kind of an atmosphere, you really had to dig deep and come up with your own sort of grounded cultural piece (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there attempts to make you feel more at home or to, I mean-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think they knew what, quite what to do. I mean, you know, you sort of bring all these folks on campus and there was, there was no sort of transitioning for us and so basically the folks who knew that they had to hang it out, you know, because they had no other choices, you know, we just sort of banded together and, of course, the black student association was definitely a refuge for, for some of us who were more active. Speaker 1: Were there any black teachers on campus? Speaker 2: Not initially. I mean, that was obviously one of our demands is to, to get, you know, African American history and some kind of cultural something but, you know, it was, it was rough and I think that, you know, for me, by my second year, first of all, not knowing anybody personally who went to college, I didn't quite know what to expect but I'm thinking, hm, this is not what I thought it was going to be just in terms of the challenge. I mean, I just thought it was going to be a little bit more challenging. So I was kind of disillusioned by the second year but being the first of the siblings to go to school, there was a lot of pressure on me to, to finish and to do well and folks in my church [St. Paul Presbyterian Church, Kansas City, Missouri] and, you know, so I had a community that I had to be accountable to. And so, I said, well the only way to really do this right is to get the hell out of here really quick. So, I went to summer school in, during the summer, when I was in Kansas City [Missouri], so I actually got out of there in three years and went on to do my student teaching and then pretty much left St. Louis [Missouri] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so you-- Story_ID: 412092 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You pursued a degree in education? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, were there any, any teachers there that showed an interest in you or that you admired, or--? Speaker 2: At the college [Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri]? I can't think of any, you know, and a lot of times, I was fighting for grades and stuff like that, you know. Speaker 1: Did you have to fight a lot in school for, for those kind of, for fair treatment? Speaker 2: I think so because these were people that weren't used to sort of this influx of, of black kids and, you know, some of them were from the South, some of them were, quite a few of them were from the South, and from the Midwest. And so, so I think it was just horrible for everybody all the way around. Now, by the second year--of course the first year I definitely signed up to be a part of the black student organization but by the second year, we wanted to be more revolutionary so we added revolu- Black Student Association for Revolutionary Action [ph.]. So we were trying to distinguish ourselves from, you know, every, every other group and saying, you know, we, revolutionaries, and so we're going to do things different. So we did end up taking over the administration building, you know, looking at the folks at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and some of the other places that we were hearing about and we eventually did get a African American history teacher and we also got-- Speaker 1: Was it, I mean, was it someone that, did it work out? Was it, I mean, was the, 'cause often people ask for these things and, and sometimes what's available is not what was idealized and-- Speaker 2: How, how did you guess? And so, the person that we got had a lot of issues, including alcoholism. So, we would, some of us in the, in the black student association were doing a little bit of enabling in terms of helping prepare lesson plans and that kind of thing and I think he only was able to stay a year but we also got a, a person that was sort of assistant dean of students who stayed for a while. And then, I think, maybe by my junior year they were looking at, no, it was the sophomore year when we took over the, the campus and they quite, didn't quite know what to do with that situation. Speaker 1: Now was that easy to do? Take over a building? Speaker 2: Fairly, 'cause I don't think that they were completely, you know, prepared for it and so, and of course this is a Presbyterian-related school and so it-- Speaker 1: So they were very, were they really surprised that you all-- Speaker 2: They were surprised but, you know, they, they acquiesced fairly quickly but-- Speaker 1: So, the, the demands were for a black history course or, or courses or, what? Speaker 2: Well, we wanted a black history, black studies department, you know, there were sixty students there, you know, so, we wanted the full thing but we did get the, the black history teacher and I think we wanted more money for the black student association office and we got all of that, yeah. We pretty much got, you know, aside for the fact that we didn't get a department and it was almost like, well, we'll start with this and sort of build. Speaker 1: So, so did you get a budget to bring speakers to campus? Speaker 2: Um-hm, we got a budget. Speaker 1: And who did you bring? Speaker 2: I don't think we brought any big names 'cause we didn't have that kind of money and like I said, by, by my third year, I was pretty much out of there but, you know, we had money to do travel and we did some things with the other black student associations and some of the small colleges around there. We had a student network and we had a Black History Month program that, that was funded by that money. So, you know, we, we had a little bit of money that grew even after I left for a while until pretty much the leadership of the black student organization started to wane and then as a result of that, so did the money 'cause if you're not there and sort of advocating and fighting and-- Speaker 1: A new, a new crop arose that did not have the same-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --fervor, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I can remember, you know, talking with some folks who said, you know, this is, you know, what we're getting now. I'm like, what, you know, and, and so it was just like it was downhill. Story_ID: 412093 Speaker 1: And, eventually the college had to shut down because they defaulted on a number of student loans 'cause they had somebody who, who began to think that the scheme of going out and getting people to come, no matter what, you know, their, their abilities were, and then all these loans started defaulting and put the, the college in bankruptcy and ironically they reopened up as a boot camp by the state to, I think, you know, rented some of the properties and-- Speaker 2: The campus, one of these youth boot camps-- Speaker 1: --um-hm. Speaker 2: --for youth offenders? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so that was, that was really kind of different that that was the legacy of the, of the college, to-- Speaker 2: How old was Tarkio [Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri]? Was that very old? Speaker 1: Oh, it was old. It was, it started back in the 1800s. Speaker 2: And who was Tarkio? I mean, what's the, is there a story about who was the school named for? Speaker 1: It was named after the town and I'm not quite sure if it was a person or not but--named, Tarkio--but, but yeah, it's, it's, it was an interesting place, I'll tell you. Story_ID: 412094 Speaker 1: I mean, for somebody in, no different from the rest of the, most of the black kids that were coming, to be put in a totally white environment [at Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri] that, that was really lessons for, for life and, you know, you come out of an all-black setting, you went to an all-black school, you went, you know, all-black neighborhood, you go to all-black church and then all of a sudden it's just a sea of whiteness and so, you know, we, we survived and many, many of us in the BSA [black student association] actually graduated and went on to, to do other things. So, but that was, that was definitely a, where, where lessons were learned in terms of being on my own for the first time, making decisions, you know, trying to do the academic thing, but also doing the black student thing. So, it was definitely a full life and then that was when I got in tune with the Communiversity 'cause one of the members of the black student association was from Chicago [Illinois]. And so, either Thanksgiving or Christmas, spring break or whatever, we would hop on the train and go to Chicago to go to the Communiversity. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that's how I met Doc- Andy Thompson [Anderson Thompson]. I don't remember Conrad [HistoryMaker Conrad Walter Worrill] at that point but Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright] and some of the older ones, got a chance to go to their classes. And so, that was quite an experience. Story_ID: 411886 Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But the Communiversity, just let me say, it was, was almost, I mean, I remember the hustle and bustle of classes changing just like it was a university for real and people coming (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why, was that Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois]? Just for the record here. Northeastern Illinois University of Chicago's Center for Inner City Studies [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], seven story camp- building, campus, apart from the rest of Northeastern, which is on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] but that's where it, the informal class--well, I don't know if you'd call it informal but the community classes on Saturdays were held and those were called Communiversity, right? Speaker 2: The Communiversity, and I don't know if any such concept existed anywhere else, but it seemed like the fact that you had tenured professors who were giving up their Saturdays to, to teach in a way that allowed other folks who wouldn't ordinarily have that university experience to come and get pretty much the same thing that you were teaching. I mean, I learned a lot and, you know, and, and it really kind of helped shape the way that I looked at stuff now. I know that some of that stuff was just a little bit extreme. I mean, when I think about some of the stuff that Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright] talked about in terms of black psychology. I mean, I understood it and then also understood that some of it you need to go to the extreme in order to, to come, move back to the, to the center to be more, more balanced and more grounded but-- Speaker 1: For instance, what, what would Bobby Wright say that you thought was extreme? Speaker 2: Well I remember one of the things that he said as a parenting technique is to, to give your child a white doll that stunk (laughter). So, every time your child would pick up this doll, it would be a bad experience and they would self-consciously always remember that they, that it was the smell that was very, you know, distasteful, dis- you know, disdainful and that that would help shape their views about dealing with white people. So, now, you know, in retrospect, that, that, that's a little bit extreme, I mean, because you want to give people some other tools. You want to give them some tools of discrimination because, you know, you're going to have some disdainful encounters with black people. And so, how do you give them the tools to, to make those kinds of decisions and create the kind of relationships that are going to be healthy for them. So, but, you know, I, you know, I was all eager and went, "Yeah, that's what I'm going to do" as a kid. Then give them that white doll that's going to stink and, you know, so, but I remember that was one of the things that he had, had advocated. Speaker 1: I never heard that before. Dr. Bobby Wright, he was a psychiatrist, Ph.D.-- Speaker 2: Psychologist, yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, and a, psychologist or psychiatrist? Speaker 2: I thought he was a psychologist. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, maybe he was, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know, the center of--started the center once he died over there for mental health. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was at Garfield Park Mental Health Center [Garfield Park Comprehensive Community Mental Health Center, Inc.], now it's the Bobby Wright mental health center [Bobby E. Wright Comprehensive Behavioral Health Center, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, I learned a lot about, you know, human behavior and psychology from him, yeah, that I added on, obviously, out, you know, as I, I grew and, and developed but, some of those things I kind of smile about, yeah, but I do remember him. I remember [HistoryMaker] Harold Pates, Andy Thompson [Anderson Thompson], yeah, I, I had a lot of respect for them (background noise). I can't remember if there were any women involved 'cause I always remember the brothers but I don't remember any sisters that were involved in Communiversity. Speaker 1: I, the women I know were there is, I'm trying to think of a woman who was a teacher there or I don't, I mean, of course I wasn't there but just in the stories-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I cannot remember any women who were teachers there. I know the black theatre groups are run by women. [HistoryMaker] Val Gray Ward and Abena Joan Brown [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown] and, you had, Sarzai Savanu [ph.], was a, and Ife [ph.] and others were member--would go, I think, but they were like with, I think they were with (unclear) then and they--that's before Sarzai got the All-African People's Revolutionary Party and all that but I don't, I don't know. I don't-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. I just remember all males and maybe because my consciousness wasn't, you know, open to, to that at that point but it seemed like it was, is pretty much dominated by males. Speaker 1: Okay, but they were from all different kinds of, different perspectives and different groups and organizations around the city, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So that was always a treat to be able, first of all, to go to Chicago [Illinois] the big city, coming from, from Kansas City [Missouri] and just being with people who shared similar outlooks and goals and, you know, really trying to take that information back to the campus and make our, our black student organization stronger and more effective. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 411887 Speaker 1: Now this is a question here that, I'm going to ask. This is, why do you think in those days it was the question of, of trusting white people and not trusting white people, that's why there was a, you know, was dealt with in a way, you know, with the doll and other things, I mean, why would, what was, what was it about black life and culture at that juncture where that was a, 'cause people will say, well why would they feel that way about white people? Speaker 2: Well I think, you know, when you looked at the system of oppression and you looked at the fact that we weren't that far out from, you know, the legal discrimination, I mean, '64 [1964] was like the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965]. I mean, this stuff was just brand new and some of it still hadn't gone in effect and there was a lot of resistance to it that you, as a young person, you start to see and feel it yourself. And so, it's, it's reinforced that, you know, that's the enemy, that's who you need to learn how to fight and everything else, you know, is, doesn't really count, focus on bringing down white folks. So, for a long time, my thing was like, you know, the plan was that there eventually is going to be a race war and black folks were going to be victorious and then we'd have a black, black nation and that, you know, white people were the enemy and that they were going to always, you know, be racist and they were going to always be the perpetrators of exploitation and oppression and so that's, that's how they would have to be dealt with. So I think that was the mood at the time and even-- Speaker 1: So it wasn't like an odd, you wouldn't be an oddball in 1969 or '70 [1970] if you felt that way? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: If you distrusted white people you-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --disliked them as a group (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And some of it is, you know, fill the void because if you didn't have any relationships with white people, then, then that was what was sort of poured in that void. Now probably if I had had some relationships and they were fairly good, then I would say, wait a minute, you know, I know a white person that did this, that and the other but I, that wasn't a reference point for me 'cause I'm in an all segregated life and so, so it took going through some other kinds of, you know, growing and learning and actually having relationships with, you know, progressive and radical white people that you say, okay, and then having some really negative ones with, you know, quote, revolutionary nationalists and, you know, okay, so this, this paradigm is not a workable paradigm, it's not realistic so what, what do you need to do if you really want to struggle against the system of oppression? Who are your allies going to be and not necessarily what they're going to look like but who will they be. And so, I think that, for me, took, took some years of just getting a little bit more sophisticated about how, how you fight this kind of battle for the long run. Story_ID: 411888 Speaker 1: So, you go to the Communiversity meetings in Chicago [Illinois] and now when you, w- when you graduated from Tario [sic. Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri], did you immediately go in the student teaching and become a teacher or-- Speaker 2: I did my student teaching and I was fortunate and I planned it this way to not have to student teach at one of the little rural, you know, schools 'cause I, I just knew that that wasn't going to work for me, that's not where I was going to be working. So, I found a program called, it was called CUTE. Now I'm trying to think what the acronym stands for. I think it was something, Community Urban Teacher Education [ph.] and it allowed me to go to an urban community to do my student teaching. Speaker 1: So, so, where did you go? Speaker 2: I went back to my old high school. I went to my old high school. Speaker 1: Central High School [Central Academy of Excellence], Kansas City [Missouri]? Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. So, I did my student teaching there under Mr. Howell [ph.] who was the English teacher and had been a very, I remembered him when I was going to high school and he was a very sharp dresser. He was always like very immaculate and it seemed like everything had to be just like so so. I mean, just when you looked at him, you just knew that he was order, he was, you know, and, by the time I got a chance to teach with Mr. Howell, that all had, was a thing of the past because he ended up being drafted into Vietnam [Vietnam War] and had had several breakdowns, nervous breakdowns. And so, you know, he no longer would, you know, have the ties or something, he was a little bit more casual, more, more open but I got a chance to student teach with him and get to know him better. And, you know, I had a wonderful time with, with the young people in the classes because I was very active in high school. I wanted them to be very active so I helped with the year book. Speaker 1: You weren't that far away from high school. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Just three years away. Speaker 2: No, and of course I came there with, you know, with my African stuff on so I was just a different kind of, you know, persona, a different kind of image that they hadn't seen before. I'm talking about the kids and the teachers (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now is-- Story_ID: 411889 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a, a period of time, I mean, how did, prior to the late '60s [1960s], if you called somebody an African American, an African, you had a fight and they'd be mad at you, you called them black, there'd be a fight. There's a, w- when did you start actually learning something about Africa as such? I mean, where would you-- Speaker 2: I would say I was in, in college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was in college. Speaker 1: Can you remember a first time or that you heard anything about it or-- Speaker 2: No, I can't-- Speaker 1: --first time you wore anything African or-- Speaker 2: --nah, I can't but I remember after that freshman year it was totally solidified. So, 'cause initially, I stopped pressing my hair but I didn't have an Afro, I just stopped pressing it. And then by, I think, probably after that first year, I did, I did the Afro. And then, you know, during that period of time, we were, you know, dealing with, you know, love Africa, Mother Africa, you know, that's our homeland. And so, you know, started wearing African clothes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, because I think it's--yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But by the time I graduated, I was actually wearing African clothes every day not like for event purposes but that was a part of who I was and who I wanted to be. So when I'm photographed, you know, there's a picture in the yearbook when I was working with the kids on the yearbook staff, that I'm in full-like, you know African clothes and I'm in the center of the picture and everybody else is sort of on this, going down the steps and so I'm at the top with this big old 'fro and these African clothes. So it, it, you know, I'm sure I shook up some people there at the high school [Central High School; Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri]. Speaker 1: So, were there any other teachers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wondering like, who is this person? Or what is she about or what's she teaching those kids and is she teaching them that black stuff and, you know, but, you know, I, I would, I had like special relationships with the kids in terms of doing things for them that they obviously had an interest in but had nobody to cultivate it so like there were a couple of students in there that were really into poetry so they would write stuff and let me look at it and critique it and stuff and I remember one child, I don't know how I got into this, but I ended up teaching her how to drive (makes sound). So I, you know, I had personal relationships with them outside of the classroom but we definitely did a lot of, you know, traditional things but trying to add like some, some flavor of who you are and what you need to be about and that kind of thing, so. Speaker 1: But, but who, I guess I'm trying to figure out like who, who did you learn any of this from? You know, you're coming from, you go to Tarkio College [Tarkio, Missouri], who on campus was talking about wearing African clothes or naturals or how did you all get it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, one of the brothers, well, two, two or three people that I recall 'cause some of these folks were coming from bigger cities. I mean, so they were already, definitely into it like from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], a couple of people from Chicago [Illinois], folks from St. Louis [Missouri], so they were a little bit more advanced, just in terms of, you know, already doing this stuff, the communities doing it and one of the brothers that would actually take us back to the Communiversity, you know, that was a part of what they was doing so all of that was being sort of dealt with by peers and so, you know, and then we would like try to find out more of what was going on, get, you know, news articles. I mean, we didn't have the Internet then, obviously, but, you know, just trying to stay in communication, reading black newspapers and kind of seeing how other people were doing things. So it really was like just a learning thing say like, what does it mean to be black right now? Okay. Ooh, they're wearing that, you know. The black light, we need some fluorescent lights, you know, so you know, you just try to just mimic, you know, what it means to be a conscious black person and all of us we would go to different places, everybody was doing the same thing, listening to Coltrane [John Coltrane] and, and black light, you know, at the parties. So, so I think it was just really just trying to figure out what identity, what we really wanted to, to be and, and having the influence of peers 'cause I really don't recall, other than like the Communiversity, getting that kind of identity nurturing from anybody and certainly I didn't get it in Kansas City [Kansas], you know. So, I, I think it was really peer based and then, you know, whatever folks were learning in their cities and talking about what was going on, sort of just brought that into the fold. Story_ID: 411890 Speaker 1: Do you remember what happened to the O'Neals [Pete O'Neal and Charlotte O'Neal] here in Kansas City [Missouri], I mean, in Kansas City when-- Speaker 2: Well they went into exile and they ended up in Tanzania and I know-- Speaker 1: Well, I know, but what actually happened in Kansas City where they, they, 'cause they had to leave, had to get up out of there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But I don't know what, what, was that in the news when you were teaching, doing student teaching (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't recall that being in the news. I probably was at school [Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri] and then after student teaching, I came to St. Louis [Missouri] but I know something went down but, you know, all of the chapters were under, you know, huge, intense repression and so-- Speaker 1: I was just wondering if anybody had a, you know-- Speaker 2: I don't think there was a shoot-out or anything. I just think that, you know-- Speaker 1: Or if you knew anybody in Kansas City that discussed it, I mean, since this was a local issue? Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Now, I do know that, you know, Emanuel Cleaver, who is, was the mayor [of Kansas City, Missouri], is related to Pete O'Neal and tried over a period of time to, to get him to come back or to make it possible for him to come back without facing charges and I don't even know what kind of charges he faces but, you know, most of that stuff is, you know, fairly trumped up stuff but, but they seemed like they've carved out, you know, a life in Tanzania and-- Speaker 1: Okay, I, I just wondered if there was a, you know, stories floating around in those days about what happened to them or what, you know, and people were talking about. Speaker 2: 'Cause I don't think I stayed long enough to, to, to figure out that part or find out about that part and then at that point, most of my peer friends were those folks who went to college with me and then, you know, those relationships continued and so I, didn't have very much going on in Kansas City other than family. Story_ID: 411891 Speaker 1: So y- you taught, you finished student teaching and then did you go, go fulltime into the school, school district (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well here, here's what happened. I had received an assignment. I went to interview and I received an assignment to work at a high school in Kansas City [Missouri] and not only was I traveling to Chicago [Illinois] but I was also coming to St. Louis [Missouri] because at that point my, my partner [Percy Green II] was from St. Louis so it seemed like there was a lot going on in St. Louis when we come, we'd be, you know, go to Black Artists Group, BAG, there was just, it seemed like a lot going on. And so, so after I got that assignment, he's like, "You need to come to St. Louis," you know, and, and we're going to, you know, work, build this, the Congress of Afrikan People and we'd already had some discussions with some folks about it. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were going with a guy who was in-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --Congress of Afrikan People? He was already in it? Speaker 2: No, he wasn't at that point 'cause we had-- Speaker 1: He was talking about getting in it. Speaker 2: --he, he was from St. Louis and he went to school at Tarkio [Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri]. And so, so when we would come back and forth we would talk with people and, and that's what we wanted to do. So I kind of had to make a choice of what I wanted to do, student teaching and be in a, what I felt like probably would be a culturally deficient community at that point or come to St. Louis, maybe try to get a job and definitely be in a vibrant and culturally exciting community, and so I chose to come to, to-- Speaker 1: Okay, so your opinion in those days, now I'm not from either place and don't know what's going on in those days but, but St. Louis is more vibrant in those days than Kansas City, you're saying? Speaker 2: I, I, I thought so then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, and it was definitely. I mean, St.--Kansas City was just a little bit slow about sort of getting into stuff. I mean, so probably the, we might have been the last chapter of the Black Panther Party, you know, 'cause everybody else had one and it was going on and it just seemed we were always a day late, a dollar short. So, coming to St. Louis where all the happenings were, there was a, I guess they had a community of people doing different things. My partner was in an African dance, an African drumming dance ensemble. So it just, it just seemed like there was lots of things going on politically and culturally. Speaker 1: What was the name of the ensemble? Speaker 2: Omowale Dance and Drama Ensemble [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. It's good to get these names 'cause people, you know, you just say, give a general thing they'll actually remember (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And actually, the Black Artists Group, which was called, it's short for BAG, has, you know, enjoyed a resurgence so there were people who were in the old BAG have brought it to life again in the last year. So they're doing events, you know, periodically as BAGs, Black Artists Group, but they were definitely one of the forerunners of, you know, the whole music scene here and really introducing and ushering in like different types of, you know, black art, whether it be African dance, jazz, you know, theater, it was like a whole gen- all the genres were under Black Artists Group. Story_ID: 411892 Speaker 1: So it was, it was to me an exciting time and so when we came here, a group of us did start the St. Louis [Missouri] chapter of the Congress of Afrikan People and the thing that, that I did because I was still really, you know, had a passion for teaching and being with kids is part of the Congress of Afrikan People was the African preschool. So, some of us who were teachers were trained African preschool methodology and at that point I was actually working at a daycare here. And so at a certain point, I'm saying like we're going to start our own school. And so at a certain point we said, okay, we're ready to start the school and before that could happen, the Congress of Afrikan People made a decision not to do the independent schools but to work inside the public schools. Speaker 2: Okay, now, before we go further, what is Con- what was Congress of Afrikan People? And, and how did you all first hear about it? Speaker 1: The Congress of Afrikan People was an organization of primarily people of, of African descent based here in America that, so it was a cultural and political organization. So, there was a whole notion of embracing kawaida, which had been developed by Dr. Maulana Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] and kawaida basically means, tradition and reason. So, what we wanted to do was to take the pieces of African culture that were relevant to the conditions here in, in this country and to build on it. So, obviously, all of it couldn't be transferred and, you know, obviously we live in a capitalist society so there were some things that you, you know, weren't going to work but the whole point is to, to go back and get those traditions that were meaningful and helpful and, and nurturing for our families and for our survival and to adopt those and then to apply them. So there was a whole doctrine of, of kawaida and there were ranks inside the Congress of Afrikan People based on, you know, your accomplishments and your service to the organization and to the community. And so, the main headquarters was in Newark, New Jersey and so we went there periodically to get, you know, training and, and then to come back and, and-- Speaker 2: Okay, so, for the record now, Dr. Karenga didn't start the Congress of Afrikan People did he? Speaker 1: No, that was actually the, the, there were a couple of, a number of people who started it 'cause it started in Atlanta [Georgia], the founding conference, but Amiri Baraka was the head leader and stayed that way for many years until we moved to the left and then a different kind of structure but he was the imamu. Speaker 2: Okay, that's, that'd be from like 1970 to '74 [1974], I guess? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, so Congress of Afrikan People effectively ends as such as by name in 1974? Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right. I just wanted to make sure we, people knew, you know, what the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, so for, from '72 [1972], when we started the chapter here to '74 [1974], it was only two, two years but they, they, they, in retrospect, they were really impactful years because it seemed like I was in the Congress of Afrikan People for a long time, just in terms of the kind of activities that we're involved in, the conferences that we helped to organize and, and attend as a Congress of Afrikan People and then, you know, travel to Newark, New Jersey which was always a treat for us 'cause first of all, it's this, you know, huge place that had lots of different entities, you know, including the school, including social organizations, including a restaurant, including daycare, so it was pretty organized. And so, so going there and getting inspired and then coming back, you know, you always wanted to see what else you could do here locally. Story_ID: 411893 Speaker 1: But it was two years and then we, we began to move to the left and adopt a Marxist-Leninist ideology and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now how did that happen? And, and now clearly when I look around here, it looks more like 1972 to '74 [1974], to me, you know, in this, the building we're in right now, we see habari gani on the wall, you're dressed in African attire, I mean, it's a, it seems like, you know, there's a battery of drums to the left of me, you know, I mean, so, so what happened in '74 [1974] to make this shift to, when you, by meaning to the left, you mean, to the, and what, yeah, what do you mean by that anyway? Speaker 1: Well, I- I mean that we began to look at other ideologies to, to look at how the struggle here was going to be waged and I think part of that happened because people in the, in the Congress of Afrikan People on a, on a national level were actually looking at international struggles and, and began to look at what, what are some of the, the things that the black liberation movement is doing or the African liberation movements were, were doing and embracing and how we were going to make our struggle more effective. And so, I think, you know, the move to Marxism-Leninism for the Congress of Afrikan People seemed to be a logical kind of move. If you're really sort of looking at the world in its totality and looking at, you know, how other people were carrying out their struggles and which ones seemed to be effective and also really just seeing what else did we need to be doing in this country and, it, it, on the one hand, it opened up a lot of different, it opened up our minds to a number of other, you know, historical figures and, and issues but I think one of the things that obviously it did was to, to put a, a lid on the folks who didn't want to go that direction. I mean, obviously, when some people came in the Congress of Afrikan People, it was going to be, for them, a revolutionary nationalist organization forever and I think it probably was a political error to not leave that intact and start something new but to, to take the organization in that way. And that's still something, I think, we're, we're looking at and sometimes when some of us from the Africa- Congress of Afrikan People come together, we, we talk about sort of writing up the history so that people can learn from it but-- Speaker 2: So, how, how many chapters were there of Congress of Afrikan People that you, that you think are-- Speaker 1: Jesus, it seemed like it was about twenty, you know, some, in almost every urban city. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know all of them. Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York], probably six or seven (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Atlanta [Georgia], D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you know, the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], Detroit [Michigan], St. Louis [Missouri], Houston, Texas, so they're, they, they were all over. Speaker 2: They are student chapters and, on college campuses. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah. So, when you, you know, when you have a mass organization like that, that's not necessarily cadre organization, then, you know, I don't, I don't know that we looked necessarily at the impact that it was going to have so some people didn't make the move to the left and they, they left the organization, so. Story_ID: 412095 Speaker 1: Now were you present when, when CAP [Congress of Afrikan People] split? Or, or, when CAP ended and, or, or I don't know how you want to say it but, it turned, it made its turn in '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was still a part of it and, and for me, like I said, as you start to study other kinds of works, whether it be the works of Julius Nyerere or, or, you know, look at the struggles of Angola because we were, at that point, part of the African Liberation Support Committee and, you know, just trying to understand the world better and, and these folks had used Marxism and Leninism. It's not as an end all, be all, but a way to sort of look at their own struggles and some of those experiences and so we made the shift. Now, because I was not in leadership, I don't know how the shift occurred. I don't know whether it was like a vote and people said, you know, yes, and other people voted with their feet or whether, I'm not, I'm not quite sure about that but I know that eventually, you know, we changed our name. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a meeting at Hirsch High School [Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School] in '74 [1974] in Chicago [Illinois] where, I don't know all the details, but I know that Institute for Positive Education [sic. Institute of Positive Education, Chicago, Illinois], Shule [Uhuru Sasa Shule] up in New York [New York], Jitu Weusi' group, the east, east, [HistoryMaker] Kalamu ya Salaam, Ahidiana [Ahidiana Work Study Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] and some other organizations actually left Congress of Afrikan People very much disturbed that Baraka [Amiri Baraka] was pursuing a Marxist-Leninist ideology and really what they, they're sort of like throwing away the African part, the kawaida part and I don't know, is that your, when you got involved, at that juncture, did you, did you see that as, what was going on or-- Speaker 2: I, I don't know if it was that defining and, and the thing about the Congress of Afrikan People, I mean, although there was a central, obviously, a centralized place where decisions were made, the chapters looked different, you know, based on who was in leadership. So, you know, when we get together, some things had happened in other chapters didn't, didn't happen in other chapter 'cause, I mean, truly, we were true believers as, as the saying goes, true believers in, in really young, sort of, you know, eyes wide open, wanting to really, you know, make a difference in our community. And so, and then I think there was a lot of respect and trust in Amiri Baraka and Amina Baraka that we trusted that, that they were leading us in the right way and it seemed like it was expanding our horizons and not restricting them. So, I don't know that folks just dumped everything about Africa and everything about African culture 'cause I don't, I don't see how you could. Speaker 1: But did the St. Louis [Missouri] chapter continue as a kawaida kind of group? I mean, I don't see it could be a kawaida-- Speaker 2: We didn't, I mean, we were no longer practicing kawaida but obviously the pieces about tradition and reason, I mean, just based on being in an African American experience and some of that already was, you know, imprinted on our lives anyway. So, I mean, this used to be a hekalu for the Congress of Afrikan People so it changed to a center but, you know, we still did a lot of the same kinds of things. We had an African, we used to do something on Sunday, freedom, freedom sessions, we did freedom sessions. And so, so those, you know, kept on for a while 'cause there was a community forum about issues. That was, those don't change. So I think, for us, we stopped wearing the African, but we didn't wear African clothes every day. Sometimes it was a uniform because there were certain things that we wore as part of the tradition and reason but, you know, we, we still always had like Africa, you know, at our backs. And so, for us, it wasn't a lot like, you know, you just discount everything that you've done, learned and, and experienced and I think, for us, it may have been easier for us to then kind of come back to, you know, these are our roots, here's what we do and, and here's, you know, the kind of world perspective we want other people to have about what it means to be an African in this country. And so, that, that to me was always at the heart of what I was trying to figure out, you know. How do you be in this country and be who you are, get some respect for that, get some, some, some protection of that and still be able to, to fight the good fight. And so, so whatever tools there are at our disposal, you know, whatever readings and, and study that's going to help us do that, that's, that's kind of what we did. So we had like studies and political education but we were always still involved in pretty much the same issues that we were involved in as a, as a, quote, Congress of Afrikan People. Police brutality, education, I mean, it really didn't change for us, you know. Story_ID: 412096 Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I know that for some people it was a, it was a radical change and like I said-- Speaker 1: There was a lot of-- Speaker 2: --it played out differently in different-- Speaker 1: --I know there's a, yeah, big argument that cooked for years and, when the Pan-African Cong- Sixth Pan-African Congress [Dar es Salaam, Tanzania] was held, I remember, you know, competing articles by Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] and Baraka [Amiri Baraka] and John Henrik Clarke and Sekou [Ahmed Sekou Toure] and Baraka and different, a lot of, Abdul Alkalimat. I don't know if he was in, I don't know if he was ever involved in Congress of Afrikan People but he was, he was a Marxist-- Speaker 2: He was not in the Congress of Afrikan People but he certainly was an aide-- Speaker 1: He was a Marxist in, in-- Speaker 2: He was a Marxist Speaker 1: Straight up Marxist. Speaker 2: --and I think you know he, from what I can understand as part of the African Liberation Support Committee, you know, he had some pretty compelling arguments that, that prevailed and, while those things were going on and, I think that really kind of helped to, to make the decision about, you know, where to go as a Congress of Afrikan People. How do we grow? How do we, you know, really address, you know, the issues here in America? Story_ID: 412097 Speaker 1: So, I, you know, some people, I think, interpret it like anything, any doctrine, you know, interpret it a certain way and, and it played out, you know, locally and I think in some ways it was, you know, harmful to people and people's relationships 'cause some of these folks had known each other for a while, had lived together. The interesting thing about this place, you know, we were, communal living was a part of the sort of tradition and reason. We lived in communal, you know, communities in Africa so those were sort of artificially set up but here in St. Louis [Missouri], we did have a communal living situation where several families lived, in fact in this building, and we continued to do that for, for many years, you know, because it worked for us, we liked each other, we, the children that were, you know, part of the, the, the marriages, were all very much taken care of by everybody. And so, you know, I think we were one of the few chapters that, you know, didn't dissolve that. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, in Chicago [Illinois] they had something they called Ipe House [ph.] or something like that, where it was like on, on Ellis [Avenue], where there's an apartment building on Ellis and so many members lived there that, you know. Speaker 1: And some people were kind of glad that, that ended because it, it, it, (laughter) you know, it just didn't work for some people but for us it did. I mean, we really tried to make it work here and, and so it served the purpose beyond the Congress of Afrikan People and so, we kept it for a long time. Story_ID: 412098 Speaker 1: So did that, when, when the end of Congress, Congress of Afrikan People came, then what was the organization called going forward, or did it stay Congress of Afrikan People, I wonder? I mean, after '74 [1974], did it actually change names or did it stay? Speaker 2: That's what I'm trying to think. Speaker 1: I can't remember either, really. It seemed like it must have or something 'cause it wouldn't, everybody talked about it in the past. Speaker 2: I want to say the Revolutionary Communist League. Speaker 1: Is that what it became? Speaker 2: RCL. Speaker 1: I mean the Baraka [Amiri Baraka] faction became-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I mean, where the-- Speaker 2: And then like it was RCL Marxist-Leninist and then later on we added another M, Marxism-Leninism and Maoism. So, I think, I'm pretty sure it was Revolutionary Communist League. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then in '79 [1979], we merged with the League for Revolutionary Struggle [sic. League of Revolutionary Struggle], which was a Marxist-Leninist organization. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, yeah, so, so Congress of Afrikan People did actually end in '74 [1974] as such-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --'cause the African nationalist part of it didn't continue as Congress of Afrikan People? They didn't do that. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: It never really formed an organization after that? Speaker 2: No, no, and I, I would suspect that most people who wanted to continue the name were discouraged from doing that because the, the evolution is (background noise) that this was-- Speaker 1: God-- Speaker 2: --the organization. Story_ID: 412099 Speaker 1: So Congress of Afrikan People [CAP] actually ends but now, now how did, now, becoming part of the Revolutionary Communist Marxist-Leninist League [Revolutionary Communist League] and then the other group had morphed into the, now did this, how did that change what you were doing? Speaker 2: Well, I think we, we, the thing that I remember most is the studying of the classics and so, you know, sort of dealt, diving into that feet first and trying to understand, you know, all of the writings of Lenin [Vladimir Lenin] and Mao [Mao Zedong] and, and, and all of that but, so there was systematic study groups set up for that but, like I said, most of the work, the community work, you know, pretty much was the same and, for example, under the Congress of Afrikan People, we had a social organization component which was the women's component and under that we did a lot of different kind of women's things. Well, that continued but it was different in that it was more the looking at the study of, you know, sexism and patriarchy and really understanding that because in the Congress of Afrikan People, we did have a, the women's section and eventually went on to help found the Black Women's United Front. So, those were sort of the beginnings of like looking at how sexism and patriarchy affect not just our lives but the movement and-- Speaker 1: And now one of the issues, I know, that the people in Chicago [Illinois] had and, with Amiri Baraka, was the treatment of women. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They were, they did not like, they thought that he was very sexist. I don't think that they used that description then but I think it said an extremely sexist in terms of what, you know, how women were treated in, in CAP and that was one of the issues, I think, with, that some of the dissatisfaction he expressed to Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] about how women, the position of women in Chicago, they would go to certain events, they wouldn't wear all the stuff they were supposed to have on, they didn't genu-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. Rolling now. Speaker 1: Do you remember where we were (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I was asking you about the, the issue of women in the organization and I know it's one of the contentions that Chicago had with Amiri Baraka way back when and that's what they say, that they didn't, they didn't like the way his approach to treating women. He thought that he was very, you know, sexist, ba- basically. And so, as the organization split off, you see the, you're saying that the organization started dealing with those issues, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And, and again, for us, because we were sort of removed from the center, we didn't get to see that kind of behavior. For us, you know, Amiri was like, you know, a great poet, playwright and obviously an activist and player in the Newark [New Jersey] scene. And so, I know some of that struggle was going down even in the, in the Congress of Afrikan People about, you know, not just his behavior but other people's behavior too because the way that the organization was set up, you know, lent itself to that, you know, and of course you had to look in retrospect when you have like these hierarchy who's going to be at the top of the food chain. And so-- Speaker 2: That one of the issues I know and it was in those days, was the whole issue of discipline and order. The Nation of Islam always is respected because of the order they bring to things even though they may be doing something that's really not what everybody agrees with, people in the black community, where a lot of stuff is out of order, respect order. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: And Congress of Afrikan People also had a very rigid order in the beginning and some of that, you know, I think, emphasize maybe the sexist nature of some of the thinking going on 'cause women had to stand up when a man came in the room, they had to do certain things that, you know, that, did the organization continue to be that highly structured after the split or did it-- Speaker 1: No, I think it became a lot more horizontal and, and some of the struggles that obviously prevailed, I think, helped to change that because when you start to look at how other structures are actually, facilitate everybody's growth and development and, you know, for me, one of the things that I noticed early on in the Congress of Afrikan People was that there were a lot of smart, talented, skillful women and, you know, and definitely role models for me so I didn't necessarily see sort of the repressive thing 'cause when I, when I went up to Newark, I saw, you know, women, you know, taking on leadership roles and doing a lot of different stuff. And so, so some of that, you know, St. Louis [Missouri] was removed from, in terms of, you know, the inner corps. I mean, there was rumors and rumblings but you never could figure out if that was just part of folks just trying to attack Amiri. Story_ID: 412100 Speaker 1: We know there's a lot of criticism in the movement [black liberation movement] about moving to the left and, you know, going with the white folks kind of thing and it, it seemed like a contradiction to a number of folks from the out--outside but, as I said, for us, we, we thought it was a natural kind of part of the evolution of us in terms of our own political development. Speaker 2: Now on that note, going to white folks, was there an influx of white people into the organization here and, and-- Speaker 1: No, no but it's just like you taking on white ideology and so, so then that meant that obviously you were going to be acting white or, you know, I'm not quite sure what people thought would happen but, but no, even the, under the Congress [Congress of Afrikan People], I mean, under the Revolutionary Communist League, it still stayed fairly, fairly black. Speaker 2: So you didn't have any white allies necessarily sitting around the table with you, trying to-- Speaker 1: I mean, we always had white allies. I mean, ev- even the Black Panther Party had that but I just think that, you know, under the Congress of Afrikan People it was clear by the name who the membership would be. It wasn't as clear under the Revolutionary Communist League so there, there were some, some white people that joined but predominantly it was African American. Speaker 2: Now that's interesting. How did they, how were they treated and how did they, I mean, how did that play out? Speaker 1: From what I understand where there, where people joined, it was, it worked out. Speaker 2: I mean, did it happen here? Speaker 1: No, unh-uh and maybe it's because we were so, so, so pro-black that folks just didn't know just by changing the name with that, what that really meant but, no, we didn't, we didn't have white people join 'til actually after we became, we merged with the League for Revolutionary Struggle [sic. League of Revolutionary Struggle]. Speaker 2: Okay, and that's later, that's like in the '80s [1980s] or something? Speaker 1: Actually '79 [1979], '80 [1980]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I think the merger. We started merger talks in '79 [1979]. I think we might have officially merged in '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: So that, did that create a real bond of, and a working relationship? Speaker 1: With who? Speaker 2: With the white people that got, that were in, that you, that the group joined up with. I mean, did, was there a real working relationship, real bond around issues and things? Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh, yeah. I mean, 'cause we were all, you know, committed to the same, you know, core principles and vision about, you know, bringing socialism to, to the U.S. And so, so again, it, it meant like not who the people are but what they believe and what their principles are so, so it kind of helped you get past all of the other barriers of what people have to be and have to look like, physically look like. So, I mean, when we were Congress of Afrikan People, you know, anybody black that was, they was okay and if you had African clothing on and naturals, you were really okay but I think we know, you know, from experience that that is a pretty thin veneer and really doesn't mean very much 'cause some of the most reactionary folks are wearing dreadlocks, you know, these days. So, you know, so you really, I think it kind of opens your eyes that, you know, you need to be looking at things other than how people physically look and then you can really get to who your allies are and some of the times they come in the form of different nationalities, different genders, you know. And so, you know, you really start to judge it based on who's going to be with me in this fight, not what they look like. Story_ID: 412101 Speaker 1: So for you personally now, now, now are you working for the school? Ar- are you teaching or you (simultnaoeus)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh, no. Speaker 1: --you're working for the organization or how are you making a living? Speaker 2: I, you know, I do independent kinds of things and, you know, I work part-time for the Black Radical Congress as their national organizer. Speaker 1: No, I mean in '79 [1979], at that juncture, what were you doing for a living? Speaker 2: Oh, in '79 [1979], that's a good question. I think I was, '79 [1979], '79 [1979], I believe I was doing substitute teaching and working for the organization. Speaker 1: Okay. Did the organization, did it have the ability to pay, a set-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: Not very much but, you know, I was a low maintenance person. Speaker 1: Okay, and so, we're in the same building that we're in right now is where the organization was headquartered? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and so, so what was the program of the organization then and what role did you play in it? Speaker 2: And this was as the Revolutionary Communist League or the League for Revolutionary Struggle [sic. League of Revolutionary Struggle]? Speaker 1: Well the first one first and then the next one, next. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I can still say that, you know, the, the issues that were burning in the community were the ones that we were involved in. So, we were doing prison support work, you know, involved in, you know, some high profile cases like the Missouri Nine which was a, brothers at the Missouri State Penitentiary [Jefferson City, Missouri] that got set up for murder of a guard. We worked on issues like that, police brutality, 'cause under the Congress of Afrikan People, we had a campaign called, Stop Killer Cops and so, you know, that, you know, the whole struggle against police brutality continued. Like I said, there was always an interest in the education and so we were involved in, you know, different educational reform. So all of that really was pretty steadfast throughout, you know, having community forums to get information out to the community about different issues. So, it went from the freedom session to something else to now it's pamoja session. So, always having a way to, to interact with people and bring them in and have those kinds of discussions. So, the program piece was pretty much the same throughout, it was just, you know, how we looked at ultimately the long term goal and for, for us, in 1980, was also the beginning of the Organization for Black Struggle [St. Louis, Missouri] which now is mainly the group that operates out of this building along with the youth council. Story_ID: 412102 Speaker 1: Now how is Organization for Black Struggle [St. Louis, Missouri] different from the, what was it in '79 [1979], in '80 [1980], the, was it the Revolutionary Communist League or-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's, it's completely different 'cause it's a mass-based organization. There ma- there's a couple of us who are, you know, Socialist or Socialist leaning but basically it's, it's a mass-based organization from, you know, students to, you know, professionals, but it's basically working class organization. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the, are the same people in it, that are in, they were in the Revolutionary Communist League or-- Speaker 2: No, the only, the only two that probably are remaining is myself and Brother Kalimu Endesha and we both played leading roles in the Congress of Afrikan People and so, you know, I think part of coming out of the Congress of Afrikan People and still seeing that there was a need to have a primarily black organization even though you are a Socialist, you know, or a Communist, was still, was still a valid demand. And so, that, I think that's one of the reasons that, that this group was founded, the Organization for Black Struggle, 'cause, you know, you had the period coming out of the '60s [1960s], the Black Power movement and then there was that lull, you know, because black organizations were being attacked, folks were, you know, ran out of the country, they were killed and so for like the '70s [1970s], there was just a lot of misguided things going on and, and people sort of trying to figure out where do we go from here and quite, you know, frankly, some people disillusioned by even the, the Communist movement, the new Communist movement. So, so, you know, we were part of a group that, that establishes but all of them were not Socialist on, neither were they all left, they were, you know, some of the progressive folks who wanted to set up something for black people to address the issues 'cause when we looked around, we saw that, you know, there was not a whole lot of groups that were addressing the issues of working class black people and you had the Urban League [National Urban League] and you had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and that was about it and, you know, they had their limitations. And so, so we became that, we filled that void here in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay, so when did the or- the Organization for Black Struggle start? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980]. Story_ID: 412103 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty [1980]. Now that's the same year, that's the year that the National Black United Front started, as well. Now, was, which happened first? Did the National Black United Front happen first or-- Speaker 2: The Organization for Black Struggle [St. Louis, Missouri] happened first and then we, we went to the founding of the National Black United Front in Brooklyn [New York] and became a chapter of the Black United Front for, for many years. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I thought the official founding was in Chicago [Illinois] and-- Speaker 2: No, it was Brooklyn. Speaker 1: --the Browns Chapel [ph.], in '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: There might have been some, some pre-meetings going up to that but the actual founding was, was at Reverend Daughtry's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry] church. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Was it Reverend Daughtry's church? Speaker 1: That'd be Daughtry. Daughtry came to Chicago in '80 [1980] and had a meeting with Maulana [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] was there, Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti], Baraka [Amiri Baraka] was there and, had quite a few, you know. Speaker 2: I think we met at the Armory [13th Regiment Armory] there in Brooklyn. I don't think it was at Reverend Daughtry's church, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but that was the official founding and then, I think, the following year we had a national meeting and then we started to move the national conferences around to the chapters, then would host, so there was a rotation set up. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So we, we hosted it, maybe two or three times here in St. Louis [Missouri] but the chapters then took on the responsibility of hosting it. So the first two years were, were in Brooklyn. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. The purpose of the National Black United Front was to do what? Speaker 2: The purpose of the National Black United Front was, was to pull together black organizations and individuals to be a part of a united front that was going to address issues that were affecting black people wherever they were. And so, having a national organization, but in and of itself, is a strength 'cause you can sort of focus your energies and work on a campaign that, that were probably more effective than if you were just a single organization trying to work on it but I think the, the other piece of it was really to try to, to build the movement in a more strategic way and that piece of it, I don't think, happened as we thought 'cause quite early on, for whatever reason that people didn't, didn't, didn't stick and stay and some of it I, I think is based on when people don't see a leading role for them and a lot of this is, you know, some of the, I think, the chauvinism in the movement [black liberation movement], you know, when people can't be in control then they don't build it. And so, the people that were in the, in buff, you know, ended up being not, not necessarily the superstars who came to the founding but the people who were going to do the grunt work and who were going to build on the ground. And so, and so those are the folks who are still prevailing today from what I understand...