 Story_ID: 70725 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Sidney Rushing, S-I-D-N-E-Y, R-U-S-H-I-N-G, and I have a middle initial, L. Speaker 1: Okay, now what does L stand for? Speaker 2: It's Lanier, and that's L-A-N-I-E-R. Speaker 1: Now there are a lot of Laniers in this area. Is there a Lanier that people are named for or is it just a coincidence that so many Laniers are in this part of Mississippi. Speaker 2: You know, I never really thought about that, but my mother told me that I was named, named for a poet. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: I, I got that name from a poet. Speaker 1: Could you know the poet's full name? Speaker 2: I think his name was La, La, was Lanier. No, I don't know the full name. I don't recall the full name. Speaker 1: Okay, what was your date of birth? Speaker 2: August 20th, 1930. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: Carthage, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: C-A-R-T-H-A-G-E, and of course Mississippi, M-I-S-S-I-S-S-I-P-P-P--I-P-P-I (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your occupation? Speaker 2: At, at presently I'm retired, and--'cause I refer to myself now as volunteer. Speaker 1: Okay and what did, what was your profession when you-- Speaker 2: My profession, I was, I started off in life as a, as, as a teacher. Initially, I was a teacher, an educator, and, and, and from education I went into banking. So I spent the largest portion of my career as a, as a banker. Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you tell me today's date? Speaker 2: Today is November the 12th, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at St. Mark United Methodist Church in Gulfport, Mississippi, and that's located on 28th Street and 34th Avenue. Story_ID: 70726 Speaker 1: All right, now before we get into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish kind of questions that we ask, and they only require a brief answer. And they're sort of light questions. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Right now, I'm on a diet, but fish is really my, my favorite food, catfish. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No particular color. I have a tendency to, to stock my wardrobe with black, so black might be my favorite color. Speaker 1: Sir, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Oh yes, this is my favorite time of the year, in the fall of year. I love the fall of the year. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: You know, I haven't much to go on vacation. I haven't taken many vacations. I think I pronounce work too much, and everybody accuse me of being a workaholic, but that's not true. But when I did go on vacation, I, I did go to California. I had a sister and a brother-in-law, and my brother-in-law had a farm there and we worked on the farm in, in the fall of the year, this time of the year, November, my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In, in, the hayfields. Speaker 1: That was vacation (laughter)? Speaker 2: Vacation, that's what we'd do. We'd have a wonderful time out there, and 'cause it, it was--the, the whole operation was mechanized. We really didn't have to do any handwork (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I, I, I really I got so many. I, I, I, I--the thing that I perhaps say most--and I got that from my grandfather- "always do the best you can, and that's all that will ever be required of you." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I guess that I use that more, more often than any other phrase that I know of. Story_ID: 70727 Speaker 1: Now, sir, can you tell us about your parents? Can you give us their names, and dates of birth, and spell their names for us? Speaker 2: My father, the name of my father was Ned Rushing, and he was--his birthday was March the 10th, and he was born in 1902. And, and my mother was Emma Rushing, and she later became a LeFlore, and she was born I believe February the 14th, I--not the 14th--but it was--either the, the, it may have been the 12th, in 1910. Speaker 1: Okay, now her, was her maiden name LeFlore and then she became Rushing or--'cause you said her, her maiden name was Rushing and then she became LeFlore. Speaker 2: No, no, no-- Speaker 1: Or just the opposite? Speaker 2: --that, that was, that, that was her marriage name-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --was Rushing, but her maiden name was Lindsey. Speaker 1: Oh, her, her, her maiden name was Lindsey. Speaker 2: Was Lindsey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and, and then she married my father and she, and she, and her name was Rushing. And my father died when I was quite young, and 'cause she remarried. Speaker 1: Okay and that's how she became LeFlore. Speaker 2: And that's how she became a LeFlore. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay, all right, so she was a LeFlore by marriage. Speaker 2: By, by marriage. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And-- Speaker 2: But the, the, the Lindseys and LeFlores were related. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Well, how, how were they related? What was the-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I can't describe that relationship, but I know they were cousins and, and, and there was a lot of intermarriage between the two. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 70728 Speaker 1: All right, now can you remember any, any information about your family tree, about your ancestors and what they were doing in the 19th Century or what, you know, what they were doing prior to the Civil War, or even, even leading up to your birth. You know, what, what, what did your people do and where did they come from? Did they come from Mississippi on or what? Speaker 2: I understand that my great-grandfather came from South Carolina to Mississippi. And the reason why we have some indication that, that he came from South Carolina from Mississippi other than the stories, he named one of his daughters Carolina, and he also named one of his daughters George--Georgia, so they're close together. And--but he came to Mississippi, and he was a minister, and he was a founder. I don't remember the, the number of churches, but he was a founder of many churches in Central Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know the denomination of the churches? Speaker 2: He was--I mean he, he was a Baptist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a Baptist minister, and he is known as the founder. And as I said before, his name was Ned, Ned Rushing, the same as my father's. Speaker 1: Okay, so he would be Ned Rushing, Sr. or? Speaker 2: He wouldn't be a senior because my father did not carry his name. Story_ID: 70729 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right, so are there any other stories about your ancestors or were there--what about your mother's [Emma Rushing LeFlore] side of the family and-- Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family, there's two sides and course, her, her father's side and, and, and, and her mother's side. And I didn't know very much about her, her father's side, but I did know quite a bit about her mother's side of the family and that was the Tate side of the family. As a matter of fact, when we have reunions, we have Rushing-Tate reunion, because these two families were so very close together. Her, her grandfather was a, a, a, a planter, and he was a very larger farmer in, in, in Leake County. However, he, he left and went to the Mississippi Delta. And in, in the Mississippi Delta and the city of Clarksdale [Mississippi] he was assassinated. Speaker 1: Now, now what do people mean when they say the Mississippi Delta and--well, then I'm gonna ask you why your grandfather [sic, great-grandfather] was assassinated, you know. Speaker 2: Well, in the Mississippi Delta, that, that, that, that is the, the flatlands of, of, of--in the State of Mississippi. It's for--it's, it's one of the geographical areas that is very rich. The soil is very rich, so having very rich soil, soil, it, it made, it made possible for the production of cotton, and much of the cotton was grown in the Mississippi Delta. It starts in Memphis, Tennessee, and it, and it goes all the way down to, to--I, I say to Louisiana. And, and of course, the, the Mississippi River is, is often the, the dividing line. The west side of the Mississippi River is, is often the dividing line between the Delta and the other regions of Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, so the Delta is that flat land along the river? Speaker 2: It, it's the flat land that, that's in the Mississippi Valley there, very fertile land and very productive land. It's some of the most fertile land in the whole world. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but that's why he went there. He, he, he, he left the hill section. And of course the hill section in, in Mississippi is not so productive, so he, he left there and carried his family to the Mississippi Delta. And that's where he, he was--met his death there. Speaker 1: Now what, what are the circumstances surrounding his death? Do you, do, do, do you know any of them? Speaker 2: Oh, I've heard the story many times. He was a--a gentleman that, that, that was known not to take very much off of, off of anybody if they violated him. If, if anybody violated him no matter who they were, he would fight back. So with this white gentleman--but they had cows, and, and you know, cows were very important to the family back in those days, because it was not only a sort of source of food, but it was a source of money. You could raise and sell cattle--cows, and, and of course, this white gentleman--his cows got out, and this white gentleman put his cows up. And, and he, and he gave him warning that he was coming to get his cows, and he did exactly that. He went through this white gentleman's place and he took his cows and can--carried 'em home. But they, they wouldn't attack him then. They waited until he came--he was going to the city. He was on this horse, and of course he--the white man approached him from the rear and, and shot him off his horse. And, and he later died in, in, in the hospital--not in the hospital, but as, as, as a consequence of this wound. I don't exactly know where, where he passed. Speaker 1: About when was that? About what, what year is this, do you know? Speaker 2: You know, it, it, it, it have to have been--my mother was a very small, very small at the time, and her memory of it is quite vivid. I think it had to be around about 1914, 1915, somewhere along there, that's a guess, and that's a guess. But, but, but, but based on her having knowledge of it, it, it would have to be--and she was very small, and it had to be around that period of time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 70730 Speaker 1: What, what--tell me about your father [Ned Rushing] and what kind of a person was he, and how did--you know, what did he do for a living? You know, did he go to school, that kind of thing, you know? Tell us about your father. Speaker 2: No, my father did not have a great deal of education. And, and, and, and, and one of, and, and one of the problems that my father had, he was injured very early (unclear), and, and he was crippled most of his life, so he spent a large portion of his life disabled. And of course he, he, he passed in as, as I recall in his very--I think he was about forty years old when he passed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he, he tried to farm, and, and, and he had, but he had a very small farm be--and it's because he was handicam--handicapped by his disability. But he tried very hard, but he was not able to do very much. Speaker 1: Okay, so he didn't have much help on this farm, and he just-- Speaker 2: Other than his children. He wanted his children to help on the farm and learn how to, and learn how to farm, but he was not very successful, as I said before, because of his own physical disability. Speaker 1: Now were you and your father very close or? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were, we were, we were, we were very close. I, I, I, I was 16 years old when he passed. Story_ID: 70731 Speaker 1: Now can you tell us something about your mother [Emma Rushing LeFlore]? Speaker 2: Now I can, I can go on this all day long (laughter). She was a mich, a mich, a mich--she was the most remarkable lady that I think I probably have ever known. And you, you mentioned earlier, she and Mr. Hinst--Winson Hudson were good friends. I understand that they were classmates at, at Harmony. But they knew each other, and-- Speaker 1: Now what is Harmony, now what's that? Speaker 2: Harmony is one of the subcommunities in Leake County there, and, and she went to school at Harmony. I went, I, I, I actually grew up around Carthage [Mississippi] (laughter), and that, that was the county's, that was the county seat. But within the community you had a lot of subcommunities, like Conway, Lena, and, and, and those kind of names, different names. But my mother was a schoolteacher, and, and she taught various grades. And, and at one point in my life, she was a principal of the school. But in addition to teaching, and that's where most of our livelihood came from, she was also a business lady; she was an entrepreneur. She did people's hair. She learned how to, to do hair from my grandmother, and my grandmother was a beautician, and, and, and she was also taught school too. She was an adult--she, she worked in the, in, in, in, in an adult education program, which was in existence at this time in Mississippi and--but she taught school. In addition to teaching school, she fixed hair, and not only fixing hair, she would make clothes for people, make dresses for people. And, and, and all these things are just not gonna seem, just not gonna seem real. And in addition to this, she, she, she made eyeglasses for people (laughter), people, people that needed eyeglasses. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh, I haven't got to the best part yet. Speaker 1: Now how did she, how did she make eyeglasses--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, she sent off for, she sent off for this package, and, and she would have these, this little circle of thing with many lens in there. And, and she'd turn this thing around to people's eye until they could get the one that they could read out of. And then she would send off for it, and they'd come back with their glasses. They'd be tickled to death. Now when I tell you this one, you're not gonna believe this one. She also made teeth (laughter). Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: She also made teeth for people (laughter). Speaker 1: How did she do that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --process? Speaker 2: Basically the same way a, a, a dentist does it today, you know, would do it. And, and they would have this stuff that looked like bubblegum, and she would put this in their mouth--and these are people that didn't have any teeth--and they would bite down in it, just like, just like when dentists do today. And she would send it off, and they would send the teeth back to her so if they had any problems with the teeth, she'd send 'em back for an adjustment. Now, you, you--I haven't told you the whole story yet-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the whole story yet. She also had a--later, she developed a, a store and a restaurant. She-- Speaker 1: This was all in Carthage? Speaker 2: Yes, and she had a, and she had a, a met--a grocery store. And at, at one point in her life, she furnished all the Head Start programs with supplies in, in, in, in Leake County, and, and on the side of that she had a restaurant. Speaker 1: Now how did she find time for all that? Speaker 2: You know, you know, I often wondered about that myself. She's the, she was the busiest lady that I ever seen. She had a, a, a energy level that I have never seen in my life, a tremendous in--energy, energy level of energy, I mean just a bundle of it. And, and again, I say she was the most remarkable person that I've ever known in my life. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And, and in addition to this, she, she, she, she never missed a year, in my whole life until she retired from teaching school. Story_ID: 70732 Speaker 1: So she [Rushing's mother, Emma Rushing FeFlore] did all this and taught school too and raised a family? Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she taught science (laughter). She was a science teacher. Speaker 1: Now where did she go to college? Did she have a-- Speaker 2: She, she, after going--and this is--(unclear)-when she started teaching, she, she was a high school graduate, and then she went to college in the State of Mississippi called Central Mississippi College. It was at Cardesco (ph.), and it, it went out of existence. And, and later she started--went to Jackson College. It was Jackson College for, for, for, for Colored Teachers at this time. And at the time they were only offering a two-year program, and so she got her two-year program. And later they started off in a, a, a college degree, a four-year degree, and then she got a four-year degree from, from, from, from Jackson College at that time. It's now known as Jackson State University. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What was the name of the school that she taught in? Speaker 2: She taught in--when I was a young boy, the, the first school that I can remember, and in my first year in, in school, is it was at Christian Union. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and Christian Union is, is located in, in Leake County [Mississippi]. And then the next school that she taught was at--well, for the most part, I lived right in front of the school. Our house was right across from, from the school, and the school was called Pilgrim Rest [School]. And--but teachers in those days, they're, they're local trustees. And these local trustees made a decision at the end of the year whether you're gonna teach back there another year. And of course the local trustees were black people within the community. And they, and they were all relatives. Speaker 1: Oh, really, okay. Speaker 2: And for the--I mean for the most-- Speaker 1: They're all related to each other? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all related to each, each other. It, it, it was, it was really, it, it's, it's really a problem. So maybe they--and, and that year she had been teaching that, so they decided, yeah, we, we, we, we gone, we gone get somebody else a chance to teach (laughter). Now this is true. And, and here, so you need to look at some other community because they need a chance here. So that's why she went to Christian Union. She came back from Christian Union and, and, and then she went to Lena, the community of Lena, and, and she taught school there for two or three years. I'm not quite so sure. But then, but then she came back to, to, to Pilgrim Rest, back to Carthage (unclear) where she served as, came back as principal this time. And, and she remained as principal for a long period, period of time. And eventually the schools were consolidated, and when the schools were consolidated, she worked at, at, at, at Jordan High School. And, and, and when they were integrated, she worked at Carthage High School--well, Carthage Junior High School. So she worked up until the schools were integrated. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 70733 Speaker 1: Now can you tell me--can you think back on your childhood and give me some of the idea or give us some idea of some of the sights, and sounds, and smells and growing up in Carthage, Mississippi? What was it like? Speaker 2: It, it was--you grew up you had a, a certain degree of, of freedom. You know, you could always--if it's a lot of creeks around there, and you could always go to these creeks for various reasons. And we'd go to this creek to fish or we'd fish there and, and, and, and not, not, not only fish, but that's where we would swim, you know, that was our swimming pool. So-- Speaker 1: These creeks are, are tributaries of the Pearl River. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, most of 'em, most of 'em were lead, lead, leading into the Pearl River. And of course even the Pearl River itself, didn't live too far from that. So we'd go down there and jump in, and jump into the Per--the, the, the Pearl River once in a while. And, and, and, and in, in the Spring of the year and, and, and even in the fall of the year, oh, it was, it was always beautiful. It's was always beautiful. The foliage there is even beautiful right now. In the spring of the year, the, the, the, the green pastures that you can see and the cattle, it's you, you, you can, I mean you could, you could never forget that. It was a very beautiful scene. It, it, it, it painted a very pretty picture. I, I even like to go there now and look at that picture. Speaker 1: Well, what, what, what kind of things did you like to do other than swim and, you know, what, what, what other things did you do in Carthage as a youth, and were there some people in town that inspired you in one way or another? Speaker 2: Well, as, as, as a, as, as, as a youth, I, I did a lot of reading, and I, I read everything that I could get my hands on. And, and, and I didn't en--engage in, in, in many athletics activities as, as, as, as my brothers did, but I did also play basketball, and I played bay-- baseball and any other athletic, athletic activity that was available at that time. We, we'd go to the pastures and play baseball. That's what--we didn't, we didn't have any fields. We'd mark our own courts off. And it was very interesting. But they, they, they considered me to be an odd, oddball because I would read (laughter). Speaker 1: Was it easy to find books and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I couldn't go to the public library, but I, I, I could go to the drugstore and buy comic books. And, and when I was given money on, on Saturday--you know, when you went downtown, and people went to town on Saturdays--I would take my money and buy me a comic book and I'd, I'd fine me a place to read as many comic books that I could possibly find. I, I had stacks of 'em and any other paper that I could get my hand on I would read it no matter what they was. And I was kind of the joke, an odd, "kind of, kind of the oddball, or something is wrong with this boy. What's wrong, what's, what's--why didn't he do--why does he do all this reading? It doesn't look right for a boy to be reading. A boy should be out there doing something" (laughter). Speaker 1: So, but you, you read a lot? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother encourage you to read or your father? Speaker 2: Yeah, she encouraged me to read because she got a set of encyclopedia, and I read the whole set of encyclopedias (laughter). Speaker 1: So you've always had this hunger for knowledge then, huh, or, or are you just--or did you acquire it someplace, or was this something that you always were drawn to do? Speaker 2: It was something that, it's something that I feel that I was drawn, drawn to do. It just, and I just enjoy, I just enjoyed reading 'cause my mother always encouraged me to read. But I did have a handicap in reading because I never--she never got me glasses. You know, I, I was--I had, had a stigmatism from, from a child, and, and, and it was very difficult; my eyesight and my vision was very poor. And she recognized that, but she was never able to get glasses for me for a one reason or the other. Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to pause right-- Story_ID: 70734 Speaker 1: Tell, tell me about school, about going to school in, in Carthage [Mississippi]. Where did you go to school, and what was school like? Did you like school? And what kind of a little boy were you? Speaker 2: I was--I tell my wife I was a loner when I was a child, but she hardly believes that, knowing me today, but she didn't know me as a child. And, and I, I did like to do a lot of things that I could do by myself, but I also liked to play with the other children. I was, I was never an introvert, and, and I was not com--completely the extrovert; I guess I was a pretty well balanced person. And, and I, I went to school at, in, in the Leake County Public Schools. And, and, and, and in Leake County I attended for--la, la, let's see--four different schools, three elementary, three different elementary schools, and, and one high school; and of course the high school that I attended was located at Walnut Grove, Mississippi. And they did not have a high school at Carthage, so we were transported by a bus-- Speaker 1: To Walnut Grove? Speaker 2: To Walnut Grove. Speaker 1: Okay, that's Walnut, W-A-L-N-U-T-- Speaker 2: W-A-L-N-U-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Walnut-- Speaker 1: Walnut Grove. Speaker 2: --Grove. It was known as Leake County Agricultural High School. And, and at this time, they, they did--and within Leake County they had three black high schools, and, and Leake County Agricultural High School and Harmony High School, and, and Conway High School. And they were three competing schools. The largest one would've been, of course, was Leake County Agricultural High School. And so that was quite a commute. But, but the roads weren't paved at that time, and, and we had to ride about fifteen miles per day on these buses that really weren't fit to, to, to transport human beings or safe to transport human beings. There was no sort of heat whatsoever. And you can't imagine the dust that you would get on you between Carthage and Walnut Grove. And, and, and the muddy roads that we'd have to travel sometime, or oftentimes, the schools buses would, would get stalled trying to get to school. And we wouldn't get to school until 12:00, and that's just about time to (laughter) come back, come back home. It, it was a, it was a, a terrible ordeal. Story_ID: 70735 Speaker 1: Did you--at the time, did you have any idea what was about--what was going on in the white schools? Did you have any idea what that was like as opposed-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --to what you were getting? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I, I knew, I knew quite well, I mean what was going on in the white schools. I, I knew they had gymnasiums up there, and, and I knew they had very nice buildings. And know many of their children were transported, but they had pretty decent transportation to ride on. But the buses that we rode on was converted pulpwood trucks. You know, they, they, they could use 'em in the summer, and in the afternoon they'd haul pulpwood, then they flip a bed back on 'em and then haul children in, in, in the winter times. Speaker 1: So did you have a--so these were just trucks, I mean basically with, with-- Speaker 2: A, a truck. Speaker 1: --with a bench in the truck or, or the seats--how did, how did--those weren't--the, the, these were not school buses 'cause--I'm asking this, the details, because young people are gonna look at this tape at some point, and they're gonna imagine you getting on a school bus. But was this was a school bus? Speaker 2: Well, init--this thing called a school bus, it was actually a flatbed truck, actually a flatbed truck. And he could raise this thing, this bed where we were to sit, and, and, and take it off or put it back down, and it was, it was benches in this bed; it was benches on the, on the, on the inside. And of course he'd have to tie it down so it would not fly off as he traveled along. But it was a cab, it was a cab of a truck. The truck had a cab on it, and we would sit back in, in the, in the back. And we were protected by the elements from this frame that was put on the truck there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It, it, it did have some windows where we could look out, but it was no glass or anything like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a makeshift kind of a cover on the back of a flatbed truck? Speaker 2: It, it was a homemade deal. It, you know, it was something that was located, or manufactured by the bus driver himself oftentimes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so there were windows, but they were, they were right out into the air 'cause you were--there were no, there's no glass in the windows and-- Speaker 2: It was no glass in the windows in, in, in the wintertime, but they had this canvas on the side. And they'd let this canvas da, down and tie it to the side. Speaker 1: Then you'd have to ride in the dark then, right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you'd be in the dark. It wouldn't be, it wouldn't, it wouldn't--there was no heat on there at all, and you'd have to put on plenty clothes in order to survive. If you didn't, you'd freeze to death almost. Speaker 1: That's a difficult way to go to school I guess, you know. Speaker 2: Well, when you, I mean, when you, when you got to school you were tardy anyway. You know, you--and, and when, when you got back home, you, you, you were--and if you did get back home, 'cause a lot of times the school bus would break down or get stuck, and you didn't get back home till, un, until sometimes 10, 11, 12:00 at night. And then you'd have get back in the morning and catch that same bus and, and go back to school. Speaker 1: So the school [Leake County Agricultural High School in Mississippi] was like fifteen miles away? Speaker 2: It, it was like fifteen miles away. We, we traveled down the Highway 35 until we got to a certain point, and then we would go down this very muddy road. And it looked like you're going back in, in, into the woods until we got to the high school off of Highway 35. It's, it's still there today. Speaker 1: Okay, it's not used-- Speaker 2: But, but it's-- Speaker 1: --as a high-- Speaker 2: But it's, it's a junior high school, but it's paved in there now; the, the roads are paved. But when I was traveling, it was no pave. It was never a paved road at all; it was strictly dirt roads all the way in there. Story_ID: 70736 Speaker 1: Now, do you remember any teachers or, or adults in the town [Carthage, Mississippi] or in the school [Leake County Agricultural High School in Mississippi] that were role models for you or that, that took an interest in you when you were in school? Speaker 2: You know, I can, I can remember one particular teacher, and I always remember her. I remember when I was a, a kid and, and my mother [Emma Rushing LeFlore] was away teaching school at Lena, Mississippi, at the time. And it was nobody home but my father [Ned Rushing] and I. And I developed chickenpox, and I couldn't go to school. I had to stay at home, and for the most part, see about myself and--or to Ms. Gill. She would come to see me almost every day and ask me how I was getting along. And finally one day she came and brought me five silver dimes, and, and, and, and that was very important to me because I knew in order to bring me five silver dimes at this time, she had to make a tremendous sacrifice, tremendous sacrifice. And, and I never, I never forgot that for the rest of my life, those five silver dimes, and I haven't seen her since at this--since the end of that particular school year. Speaker 1: It was Ms. Gill? Speaker 2: Gill. Speaker 1: G-I-L-L? Speaker 2: G-I-L-E. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Oh, I think you spelled it correct, G-I-L-L, it, it, it, it was. And I think she left and went to Indiana with her family at, at, at the end of the school year. Story_ID: 70737 Speaker 1: And of course my aunt was a--the Jeanes supervisor of the, the county. Speaker 2: Now can you--for those who don't know--now, now this is important, what you just mentioned, the Jeanes-- supervisors, they're now being written about by people that are doing the history of black education in the United States. Can you, can you kind of tell us what Jeanes supervisor is, and then explain who this, you know, that aunt--what your aunt was doing? Speaker 1: Okay, first of all, my aunt was a graduate of ta, ta, Tougaloo College [in Madison County, Mississippi], and, and, and she graduated long before I was, long before I was born. And, and a Jeanes supervisor was a, a, a person who would teach other teachers how to teach. You must remember that most of the people that were teaching were, were high school graduates. And a lot of 'em were not even high school graduates. And she would visit all the black schools within the county and, and, and, and, and, and, and give them instructions on, on, on, on, on how to teach. And she was, and she was also given addit--additional assignments, and, and that is to recruit black teachers. And I can remember so well--and this is a little bit off of the point, point here, that during the, the summer months, and, and that's, that's during that school's out, she would have to stack books. Well, well, my aunt, you know, she really didn't feel that she should have to separate books. They'd bring all the black schools in from--books from the black schools and just throw 'em in a pile. And of course my job--my, my, my aunt's job was to separate those books, you know, the first grade from the second grade, and the spellers from the, the math books. And of course, that would her something to do across the-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --across the summer. But we would all go in there as children and help her straighten those books out, to make her, her job quite easy. And they, they didn't quite know how she got her job done. And, and of course that would give me an opportunity to read some of the, the books too in, in, in the upper grade. But her job was to train, basically to train teachers and, and to recruit teachers. And, and, and, and believe me, that su--that Jeanes supervisor was a very valuable person. Because a lot of these teachers really needed this sort of training, and I-- Speaker 2: Can you spell it for us, a Jeane-- Speaker 1: Jeane, J-E-A-N-S [sic, J-E-A-N-E-S]. And, and of course, this money came through the Southern, Southern Education Foundation from like--or, or which, which, which is now in existence in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 2: That's Anna T. Jeanes funded it one time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, and, and of course, she was a lady out of I think [Philadelphia] Pennsylvania or some larger city in the East there who gave the money and made it possible. But, but the Southern Education Foundation administered this particular program, and of course they paid, paid the Jeanes teachers. And for the most part, the Jeanes teachers had to be college graduates, and it was very hard to find college graduates during that particular period of time. Speaker 2: So that (unclear)--they were teaching the teachers how to teach. Speaker 1: Their, their jobs were teaching teachers how to teach. And a lot of teachers couldn't even hardly read, and they had to try to teach 'em how to read, how to do the math. They were helping teachers because, in many cases, a lot of these teachers just, you know, just got out of ninth grade. Speaker 2: So this says something about the level of education in the South and I guess Mississippi in particular during the Depression I guess when you grew up that people didn't--a lot of people didn't--couldn't read or write. Speaker 1: Was this was endemic to the whole South, endemic to the whole South. It, it, it was, it was, it t was quite widespread, and, and, and somehow somebody got her to recognize it. You know, she recognized the need that the, the, that these people were actually in distress. They actually needed help. And, and, and, and it doesn't mean to say that there weren't some good teachers out there. There were some good teachers out there, but there, but there was some nightmares too, and we don't talk about those (laughter). Story_ID: 70738 Speaker 1: Now did you have access to radio when--in your neighborhood [Carthage, Mississippi] as--did everybody have a radio? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, I mean we had radi--radios. That's--I can, I can hardly remember in my lifetime when we didn't have a radio. We had radios before we got lights, electricity, because we had the old battery radios. And 'course people would come to my--assemble at my house, at fa--my family's house there, to listen at the Joe Louis fight and any other major even that was coming along. And so we had to hustle very hard to, to, to, to get some batteries. And, and of course I guess that's why my home was also the, in addition to other things, it was also the recreation center, that too (laughter)--yeah, where people assembled to, to, to listen to various programs, in particular if Joe Louis fight. Story_ID: 70739 Speaker 1: Okay, so were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I was, I, I think I, I think in elementary school I was a very--I was a good student. In high school [Leake County Agricultural High School], I, I, I was not really a good student at all. I had so many problems, you know, trying to get to school, and you really couldn't--it was hard to be a good student, un, un, un, unless it was something in (unclear)--in history and, and those kind of subjects I was very good in those. Speaker 1: But some of the scientific and mathematical subjects is a little tougher to-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't have much of it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: But you weren't, you weren't exposed to, to very much of that. And, and, and see, I, I went to an agrihart--agricultural high school, and you have to understand the nature of an agricultural high school. If you went to agricultural high school, then, then, then in the mo--in the mo--in the morning--you, you had split shifts. And, and 'course, one half of day had to be spent in agriculture, and for the girls, one half the day had to be spent in home economics. Well, you then, then you had only three hours left for the academics. You, could, you could only take three academic subjects. Speaker 1: So, let me get this straight. For half of the day, basically, or over half the day, you're learning how to farm better. Speaker 2: How to farm. Speaker 1: And were, were you learning real technical information about farming or just basic farming information? I mean what-- Speaker 2: Basic farming in fa, fa, farming information, how to build a pigpen (laughter); how, how, how to make a plier (ph.) handle; how to make a hammer handle. And I despised it; I hated, I hated it. I just, I really got where I hated school. I didn't, I didn't I didn't, I didn't like it at all. Now some people, you know, could, could adapt to it, but I, I didn't, I didn't ever want anything to do with a farm, and particularly I didn't wanna make no hammer handle (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's good. We, we usually--we often don't get this kind of information from people when they talk about what they actually learned in school, you know, what they were doing. That's, this is, it's interesting stuff. So, so yeah, by three courses I guess during the day and they, they were like three hours you would say or less than that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You, you, you had to spend one half of the day, until 12:00 if you--until 12:00 in, in, in the shop. And, and, and, and the girls would be in, in, in the home economics department. And then, then, then in the afternoon you would take your English course and, and, and math or science or, or--and social studies. And, and, and those were the base--three basic things that you had. Story_ID: 70740 Speaker 1: Now, sir, how many students were in your class [at Leake County Agricultural High School] would you think at any given--in, in a classroom at a given time? Speaker 2: Well, the cla--the classes were much larger than it had been previously because the first year I went to, to high school was the first year--and this is a very important point. With the first year, they, they were trying to bus students. Prior to this, students had to go in the community and board, and they had live with families within the community. And this was a very important, very important source of income for those families within the community, because they charged fee, fees for people to stay in their homes and attend school. And, and this was true at, particularly at Harmony [High School], and Leake County Agricultural High School. Conway [High School], most of the students they went to school there or went--were, were people within that own, their own community there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and, and, and, and, and because of this, this brought a larger number of people to high school, and, and, and they started two sections rather than one section I suppose. And, and, and our classes were pretty small; we had about 35 or 40 people as I recall in each, in each class. It had an A and a B section. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Un-huh, the, the, the, the B went to (unclear) or the A went to agriculture in the morning, and the B went to agriculture in the afternoon. Story_ID: 70741 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now tell me, if--when you were in high school [Leake County Agricultural High School], did you have a sense that you were going to go to college one day? Did you, did you think you would, or you didn't know, or what? Speaker 2: Oh, I always knew that I was going to college. My mother [Emma Rushing LeFlore] never gave me a choice. That's all she ever talked about - you know, you know, when--you are going to college. And, and, and it's, and it's very interesting too, just about time I was going to high school, there were returning veterans. And, and many of these return veterans were also on this school bus with me. And--but, but they left in the eleventh grade or tenth or eleventh grade, and they came back and, and, and finished the high school work, which, which turned out to be a very interesting experience for me because I--we could, we could learn a great deal from them. Speaker 1: So these are veterans from-- Speaker 2: World War II. Speaker 1: World War II, okay, coming back in. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: All right, so, so tell me about graduation from high school, what was that like? Speaker 2: Well, it, it, it da--it, it was about--I, I think my class was about 30 people that graduated, as I recall, and if I rely on mem--memory, it was, it, it, it was a ex, ex, experience that it must not have been so important because I don't remember (laughter) much about it. I, I guess it, it, it, it was just something that, that, that, that, that just, just happened. But it, it, it wasn't a big event in my life. I knew that the next year I was, I was gonna college, and I always knew that I had to go to college 'cause my mother wasn't gonna let me come back home (laughter). We all--and, and of course all six of her children knew that you had to go to college; it was just a requirement. Speaker 1: Okay, and so, and had you picked out a college at this point? Speaker 2: Yes, it was Jackson. It was, it was Jackson College for, for Colored Teachers at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and, and, they, they, they didn't have much of a curriculum either (laughter). Speaker 1: Is that the school that later becomes Jackson State? Speaker 2: Jackson State University. Speaker 1: Okay, in, in Jackson, Mississippi? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 70742 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about what that [Jackson College for Colored Teachers, now Jackson State University in Mississippi] was like. Did that, did that meet your expectations, or, or, or what ideas did you have about it before you went? Speaker 2: Well, well I--it, it, it, it was, it, it was a very interesting experience. I met some very interesting people. I, I met some teachers that seemed to care about the students, and, and, and, and, and, and some of the teachers, and some of the teachers, you know, they were just there to make some money, and that's always been the case in, in, in, in education. I think it's maybe still the same case today. But, but all teachers are not dedicated human beings, and that's rather sad. But Jackson (unclear)-- Jackson, it, it, bought me in contact with students from throughout the state. And I, I was soon to learn that, that, that, that, that a lot of students had, had received a much better education than I had received, and particular from students from the Mississippi Gulf Coast, and particular from students around Brookhaven, Mississippi and, and, and, and in the Jackson [Mississippi] public schools. These agricultural high schools that, that, that, you know, that I attended--did not prepare us as well as I think as some, some of the schools had prepared their students throughout the state. We were competing with the students for the first time that was been prepared than, than, than, than ourselves. It was several my classmates that went on to college with me, and I think, I think all of 'em, I think all of 'em graduated at some point. Story_ID: 70743 Speaker 1: Okay. So who were some of the outstanding teachers or personalities at Jackson State [University in Mississippi] when you were there? And what did you focus on when you were at Jackson State? Speaker 2: You know, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's interesting that you should, you should ask that question. I never really seriously thought about it, but I, I thought Coach Ellis was an exceptional teacher. He was from Morehouse [College in Atlanta, Georgia]. And because of Coach Ellis and because his commitment to, to, to the students there, they came up with a new major, and that new--and that major was physical education. And I decided to--because of him, I decided to, to major in physical education. Well, you know that physical education, it wasn't created for people like myself. It was created mainly for football players (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I, I generally-- Speaker 1: --on physical rather than education. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Education was on physical. Now, but Coach Ellis, when you went to class, he taught. I meant he, he taught the subject matter, but the rest of the classes I went to they talked about football. And I guess I was, I, I was, I, I was, I was almost glad the Korean War came along (laughter). But anyway, it, it, it, it--I realized that I had gotten in, in something that I perhaps shouldn't have been in. It's not be--it's not that I didn't do well, I was just, I was just out of place since I was not a football player. And you know, I could have been a great football player, but I just didn't weigh enough. I did--I didn't weigh but a 130 pounds. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So nobody was interested in recruiting a 130 pounder (laughter), not even for basketball, football, or anything else. It's just, it, it--I just didn't meet the, the, the physical requirements for athletics. Story_ID: 70744 Speaker 1: So, so you said the war came along and, and pulled you out of school [Jackson State University in Mississippi]? Speaker 2: The Korean War. Speaker 1: Okay, what, tell us about that. How, how did you get involved with the Korean War? Speaker 2: Well, the Korean War, at the end of the--my sophomore year, I got a--and as soon as school was out, I, I got a letter. And they, they, they told me that I'd have to volunteer for one of the branches of the service or I would be drafted. And I, I had been communicating with my brother that was Korea. He was in the 24th Infantry, and, and, and, and, and he, he, he had gone--he, he had described in his letters back to me a, a, a very frightening ordeal. It was very frightening to me. And he would tell me in every letter, "No matter what happened, don't come to Korea. Do anything; see if you can get into one of the branches, the, the Navy or the, or, or, or, or the Air Force, but don't come over here in the infantry. Because if you, if you're drafted they're gonna put you in that infantry." And that was just about the case in those days. And--but anyway, they gave me so many days, and before those days expired, I did volunteer to go into the United States Air Force. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 70745 Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about the Air Force. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, how did you like the Air Force? Did you find opportunities there? Speaker 2: Oh yes, I, I, I en--I enjoyed my Air Force experience. Speaker 1: Where did they send you when you joined? Speaker 2: I went to Lackland Air Force Base and from Lackland Air Force Base-- Speaker 1: Is that in Texas? Speaker 2: That's in, in Texas, San Antonio, Texas. And from there they sent me to Sheppard Air Force Base, and that was also in Texas [near Wichita Talls, Texas]. And, and, and from there I was sent to New York, to the headquarters at that time, the headquarters of Eastern Air Defense Force. Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you do? What did you specialize in, in the Air Force? Speaker 2: I was an administrative and in intelligence. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what does that consist of, the intelligence. I mean we think of spies and all that, you know, what-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --what were the-- Speaker 2: That's primary handling class--classified information and, and, and, and assisting with that. And classified information, we was talking about secret and top secret material. And we--and, and of course, your duties were, were basically defined by the station that you happened to be. In Korea my, my, my duties were, were quite different from what they were in New York. In New York I worked basically with maps there. And, and in Korea I also worked with maps in Korea, but it was much--I also had to work with security too, and that's Top Secret Control. Speaker 1: All right. Now, now what year is this? We, we're talking about year, years--this is ni--this is early '50's [1950s] yet, or is it-- Speaker 2: Oh, I, I went in the service in 1951. Speaker 1: Fifty-one [1951], okay. Speaker 2: In a--in, in 1951. And I, I went, I, I, I went to Korea in about in 1953. The Korea War was almost over when I got there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were stationed in Korea actually at a certain point? Speaker 2: Yes, at Kimpo [Air Force Base], and I was assigned to my Reconnaissance Technical Squadron. Speaker 1: Can you spell Kimpo for us? Speaker 2: K-I-M-P-O (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh. Yeah, we always have people spell because, you know, we don't, you know, when pe--people hear this tape, they won't know how to spell-- Speaker 2: They won't know how to spell it (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, when they transcribe the tape, yeah. So, so how long were you in Korea? Speaker 2: I was in Korea for year; the, the tour was a year. And I, I was at Kimpo. And, and of course we had a reserved facility at, at Teague, T-E-A-G-U-E [now Daegu, South Korea]. And, and, and, and that facility there was in case that we were overrun by the enemy, and that was the North Korea and the Chinese, admit that we'd have a, a place to (unclear)--to continue to carry on our activities, our work. Story_ID: 70746 Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any outstanding experiences, remarkable experiences in the [United States] Air Force you, you, you wanna tell us about? Speaker 2: Well, you know, the story that I often tell is of my first assignment, is when I got to New York [Eastern Air Defense Force]. And I was assigned to the intelligence section there, and they seemed to didn't know quite what to do with me, quite where to place me, or what my assignments were going to be, or wa, whether they could--whether I was sent there to serve coffee or, or, or, or, or clean up the floor, what, they, they, they, they maybe they thought that, that wouldn't be the appropriate thing to do, so they, they, they sent me down and put me in the map room. The map room was kind of in, in the basement like. And my job was to go down there and to straighten up the maps, you know, get 'em all straightened out and put, put, put the (unclear) charts in one place, and put the sectional charts in another place. And then, and then the, and, and the--but the other type, just segregate the maps and straighten, straighten 'em all out. So I went down there and I, I did that, thought I did a pretty good job down there. But while down there, developed an interest in maps. I learned everything I could about maps. And when I left out of there--they, they had a map for experts (laughter). Anything they wanna know about maps, they had to direct their question to me. One day at the briefing of a general, I had, I had opportunity to, to really become a star. I didn't know whether I should have spoken at that time or, or whether to keep my mouth closed. And it just happened I, I, I opened my mouth at the right time at this time, and this general was asking about a, a particular type map. And everybody--no one understood what he's talking about. So I, I, so I asked him if he'd let me speak, and I did, and I told him exactly what type of map that he needed. It was, it was an azimuthal equidistant map (laughter), and, and, and he said "That's exactly what it is." And so then I became--after that, I became the map man. If anybody had a question about a map, they always referred the question to me. Speaker 1: So you started as the map cleanup-maintenance man, and ended up as the map expert. Speaker 2: The map expert. Story_ID: 70747 Speaker 1: Let's see, let me get my tra--so, what happened when you--were you able to use that skill [his knowledge of maps] when you came back to the States anywhere? Speaker 2: Throughout the service, I was able to, to use that particular skill in, in, in, in Korea because my--one of the duties that I have, had over there was to read maps and to tell exactly where a target was, was flown. And, and of course the area where the, the target was flown, it, it carried a different security classification. For example, if it had, if it had been flown in, in, in China or up, up, up, up near that particular, the Chinese border, it would of course be classified as "top secret." If it had been flown in, in North Korea, it, it would, it would, it would be "secret." And of course if it's in, in, in South Korea, "confidential." And so you had to know enough about maps to, to, to determine exactly where the target was flown and, and if it's--I, I, I, I, I, I did that, and I segregated the, the (unclear)--the photograter--photographer--according to its classification. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so when did you--is, is, is there anything else in the service that, that stands out? Speaker 2: Well, that, that, that--but the work that I was doing, I, I, I really enjoyed the work. But when I got back to the States, I, I was assigned to Harmon Air Force Base, and I never, I never knew when I would--I mean why I was assigned at Harmon Air Force Base [in Guam], 'cause I didn't have a long period of time to go in this area, as my enlistment was coming to an end. And one day I was approached to--about going into the OSI. And-- Speaker 1: Now, now, now what is the OSI? Speaker 2: Office of Special Investigation. And, and--but anyway, that, I meant that did not materialize, but I was interviewed and, and, and, and, and processed for that. I later decided that's probably--I wanted get out of the service, and--and in order to go in there, so I had to extend my enlistment, you know. And I later de--decided it may be best for me to get out of the service and, and, and, and go back and continue my education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I, I really wanted to be a teacher; that's what I really wanted to do. Story_ID: 70748 Speaker 1: Okay, so you had money from your military experience to continue your, your education? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: All right and/or where did you go, and when, when did you get back, and where'd you go? Speaker 2: Oh, when I got back, I really wanted to go to Tuskegee [University in Alabama]; that's where I really wanted to go, was to Tuskegee. And, and I was making plans to go to Tuskegee, and a, a friend of the family was visiting at the time. And she told me, said "You ought to consider Mississippi Valley [State University in Itta Bena, Mississippi]." I had never heard of Mississippi Valley in my life. And convin--convinced me that was the place to go, and I went to Mississippi Valley. And, and of course the best experience I had over there, I met some wonderful--I made a wonderful friend who has been my friend throughout a lifetime. Speaker 1: Okay, this--who is this-- Speaker 2: Dr., Dr., Dr. William A. Butz. He, he went on to become the, the president of Kentucky State University and an official with the Department of Education. And, and now he's apt to becoming a fet--professor at Delta State University [Cleveland, Mississippi]. He, he, he retired a couple of years ago, and now he, now he's with the Department of Education in Atlanta, Georgia. And for the past forty years it hasn't been a week that we haven't talked to each other (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, this Mississippi Valley State, was it called Mississippi Valley State University? Speaker 2: It, it was called Mississippi--at the time I went there, it was called Mississippi Vocational College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then they, they, they named it later to Mississippi Valley State University. Speaker 1: Yeah, they're the Delta Devils now. They--and there's--the school is famous for having Jerry Rice as one of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Jerry Rice. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, they need--the, the, they named a stadium after Jerry Rice there. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 70749 Speaker 1: So, so, when you finished Mississippi Valley State [University in Itta Bena, Mississippi], what did you do? Did you teach school immediately now after it? Speaker 2: After, after finishing school, I was trying to make up my mind, and I was thinking about going to graduate school. And, and of course I had been encouraged to, to go to graduate school and, and because I had--much of, most of G.I. Bill was, was just still remaining because, you know, I completed most of my col--college work before going to Mississippi Valley [at Jackson State University in Mississippi]. And, and over there, I was making sure that I got teacher certified because I wanted to be a, a teacher. Remember that I, I kind of, I got, I, I kind of got hooked up in, in P.E. [physical education] I knew I (laughter), I knew I wouldn't have done so (laughter), so well in P.E., and I--but any, anyway, after, after graduating, (unclear)--trying to make, make up my mind to, to--whether I was going to graduate school. My brother talked with me, and he wanted to go to Mississippi Gulf Coast. And he told me, says, you, you, you, "but you go down there and you get a job, and that's the highest paying pa, pa--place in the State of Mississippi. Just why don't you, why don't you just go down there and work one year." I said "Okay, I'll do that, then the next I'll go to school, I'll, I'll go to graduate, graduate school." So I came down with him, and the very first day I came, I got here, I was hired. I got, I got, I got a job, and I was hired at, at, at 33rd Avenue High School, the first year to teach social studies and mathematics. Speaker 1: Okay, now what year is this? Speaker 2: It was in 1958. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958] now, okay. Speaker 2: Oh, excuse me--yeah, 1958. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 70750 Speaker 1: Now were there--was there, you know--around 1958 was a time when there was a lot of stirring around Civil Rights activity in the South. And the, the nation was watching--had just watched the drama in Montgomery, Alabama, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and Rosa Parks, and E.D. Nixon and the rest of them. And Montgomery bus boycott '50's--I think '56' [1956] and '57' [1957], right? [sic, 1955 to 1956] Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Then '58' [1958], what, what, what was going on in Mississippi then, and how did the--did it affect you as a teacher? Speaker 2: About this same time, a big issue on the Mississippi Gulf Coast to registered to vote. A lot of people had, in prior years, had, had tried to register to vote and encountered some difficulty. But by the time I came along, there were, there were people who registered to vote encountered very few problems, and so they were doing it in, in, in, in, in mass. So I made certain that my wife and, and, and myself became registered voters. At this time, you also had to pay a poll tax. I made certain that, that the poll tax was paid. Speaker 1: You had to pay a-- Speaker 2: But, but-- Speaker 1: --poll tax now? Speaker 2: Yeah, mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Now what is that, for people who have never heard of a people who have never heard of a poll tax? Speaker 2: Well, you--if you wanted to vote, you had to pay $2 per year tax. Every year you had to go down there and pay your poll tax. And that, and that, and, and the poll tax was put there to disenfranchise people from voting, because a lot of people could not afford to pay that $2 per year. And not only this--they, they never--it, it was aimed at blacks, but they didn't know that they were at the same time disenfranchising a lot of poor whites. They couldn't pay afford--the, the $2 either. So, but we paid--we, we had a, we had our poll tax, and 'cause we went down and, and registered to vote. One of the requirements was to be able to read the Constitution of the State of Mississippi and interpret what you read. And, and 'course my wife and I were given pieces of paper with the Constitution on that to read and, and interpret. And of course the, the, the circuit clerk was the, the person to make a decision, and he, he said we passed (laughter). Story_ID: 70751 Speaker 1: Okay, now this is different from, even with the poll tax and, and this is a lot different from some of the places north of the Gulf in Mississippi where people didn't get a chance to register to vote for years. I mean they, they would actually be threatened at the, at the polling place. And people were, you know, hurt, and some people killed because they tried to register to vote. I think Hubert Lee and Jackson I think was, was killed-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They were trying to registered to vote. And so, so the Gulf is--what do you think the difference is between, between the Gulf and the rest of Mississippi in terms of that? Speaker 2: Well, you know that, that initially when, when, when blacks made an effort to vote, they, they did encount--they did encounter some difficulty. There were certain pioneers like John T. Hall. He was jailed, and, and his, his friend, Lester Pritchard, who was a--eventually became a principal out there in North Gulfport Turkey Creek community. They did, they did encounter some difficulty. But after, after this, after this effort, occasionally people would en--encounter some difficult--culty, but it, it was no thing that created a, a big valid incident. And by, by the, by 1958, pe--people were, were reg--registering and, and, and the blacks were almost--well, that's not in mass, but in large numbers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there, there, there was some, some initial resistance. And these were returning, and, and, and of course the returning veterans did, did, did insist upon voting and--but it's certainly not the resistance that you had in, in, in Upstate Mississippi. Speaker 1: Yeah, is there, is there, is there a reason for it though, do you think? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, I, I, I think, I think there's a reason for it. It's because the, the Gulf Coast has been, always been more cosmon--cosmopolitan and, and, and, and because you had the presence of the military installations here, and not only the military-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --installation, but oth--but other fellow facilities that were located here. And, and, and because of that, the, the, the community did not want the adverse publicity that, that, that this kind of resistance could have generated. Speaker 1: Okay, I suppose the area attracted federal dollars too through federal projects-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and then-- Speaker 1: --(unclear)-- Speaker 2: --and, and, and then, and, and then I, I think another thing that modified ray--racial policies on the, on the Gulf Coast was the, the, the, the, the, the presence of the, of the, of the Catholic religion, and, and the pres--and the presence of, of different, different ethnic group, groups. You, you had a lot of immigrants here, in particular in, in particular in, in, in Biloxi [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what were, were some of these ethnic groups that came here? Speaker 2: Most of 'em were Slavonians, Slavic people, in, in, in Biloxi, but then you had the French. If you looked at, if you looked at the directory here you'll see a lot of strange names like Didos (ph.), Cueves (ph.), and, and, and (laughter) a variety of other names--Swanyais (ph.) (laughter). And it's, it's just a lot of people still carry the, the French name. Speaker 1: Now we--I've been told that there were, there were a number of Greeks here at one time on the Coast-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There, there, there were, there were a lot of Greeks, and 'course then you had a, a lot, lot of people came here on the Gulf Coast from the, from the Middle East, Lebanese, and, and, and of course, they became tremendous businessmen on, on the Gulf--on, on, on the Gulf Coast. And, and, and 'course the Gulf Coast is, is unique to the--it was a city that had two railroads, going east, one--I mean one going east and west, and one coming south. And, and in general, you'd have railroads just going in, in, in, in way--in one direction. And, and because of these railroads, there were a lot of black people who employed on the, on, on, on the railroads, and they made pretty good--and they made good wages. And you'll find people that worked in the longshoremen industry, blacks who worked in the longshoremen in--industry. They made good wages. And, and, and 'course, this and when people, you know, reach that particular level, they're not as, as, as, as dependent upon the white community as, as, as it would be if you were in a rural community. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 70752 Speaker 1: All right, now were, were you involved in the Civil Right Movement here at all in, in Gulfport [Mississippi] or in Biloxi [Mississippi] or New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Not, not, not actively involved in, in, in the civil rights. You could not overt be involved in, in, in the Civil Rights Movement if you were a teacher. If you were a teacher in the State of Mississippi, you had to sign an affidavit listing all the organizations that you belong to. Had you put down the N--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or the, or the COFO [Council of Federated Organizations], or, or, or some of the other organizations, the Southern Christian-- Speaker 1: Leadership-- Speaker 2: --Leadership Council [SCLC], you, you probably would have lost your job, certainly, certainly--I mean certainly they would have questioned that. But I, I, I, I've never known anybody to test it. Yeah, you know, I just--we just put down the Four H Club (laughter) and, and, and a few other organ--organizations because people--teachers didn't wanna take a chance, chance on losing their jobs. Story_ID: 70753 Speaker 1: I think you, you mentioned off camera something called the State Sovereignty Commission. Now what, what was that about, and how did they--did they play a role in backing people up from being involved in Civil Rights? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Now, the State Sovereignty Commission was a watchdog commission, and it, it, it, it watched people that were involved in, in civil rights act--activities, and these people were, were, were targeted. For example, Medgar Evers, the, the--whom I've known all my life, just about all my life, if, if, if you were associated with him in any kind of way, you would likely--you would most likely be, be targeted--Dr. [Felix H.] Dunn, who has a, a very huge file in, in, in the Sovereignty Ca, Ca--Commission, and there are many other people that I can name. And I even got a small file in the Sovereignty Commission, and I, I guess I may have gotten it in there because I knew Medgar Evers. And every time when he was Gulfport [Mississippi], I'd always make it my business to try to talk to him. Speaker 1: Okay, now what kind of a person was Medgar Evers? Speaker 2: Oh, he was just a wonderful person. I remember, I remember him from the days at, at, at Jackson State [University in Mississippi]. It was Jackson College then for Colored Teachers then. He, he would always come on the campus out there, and, and he, he would be telling us stories about segregation. Yeah, he'd be talking about it his experiences in the Army, and, and, and, and he would talk about, he would talk about, you know, the inhumanity of, of the white race against the black race. And sometimes it was, it was, it, it, it created quite an awareness of what are those things that are going along. You can see these things. Unless there's somebody to create awareness, you just go access--accept them as a matter of fact. And he was--but he, but he was the kind of person that would do that. But he'd come on the campus, and when he would come on the campus, oh, my, the boys would just crowd around him. Now this is his--he's gonna tell these, the, these, these, these (unclear) stories, and listened to things that he had to say. But then, then the president put out word, "Now any, any, any, any you boys seen, seen around Medgar Evers out there, you gonna be sent home." Speaker 1: Really, that's, that's pretty strong. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, so, so, so pretty soon, you, you're gonna suffer the consequences. It's gonna be some consequences for, for, for, for, for this. And, and of course, the, the, the crowd around Medgar Evers seemed to diminish a little bit because of this warning that was put out. Now, now, now we don't know whether he put out the warning himself. He didn't say it himself. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But somebody else said it. And so we assumed that it came from--the assumption was that it came from him. Speaker 1: All right, okay, so the president didn't actually sign his name to any kind of thing, just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, but the word was just out there. We just-- Speaker 1: Where it kind of leaked out. Speaker 2: Un-huh, that we don't want you around--you gonna be in trouble if you hang around-- Speaker 1: Did they--did they try to ban him from campus at all? Speaker 2: Oh yes, and he-- Speaker 1: Did they actually tell him that he couldn't--he's not welcome or-- Speaker 2: I, I believe they did, but I'm not quite so sure. I'm not quite so sure, but I, I know he was not a reputable person on the campus there. He, I mean he certainly wasn't a reputable person. He was persona non grata (laughter). Story_ID: 70754 Speaker 1: We were talking about your career as a teacher I guess during the Civil Rights Movement, what was going on here. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you mentioned, you men--you mentioned, you mentioned teachers, I, I guess it, I guess it's why I wanted to be a teacher is because it seemed to be the natural thing for me to do. My mother [Emma Rushing LeFlore] was a teacher, and of 'course, my father's father [Ned Rushing] was a teacher, and all his sisters were teachers with the exception of one. Now, I, I, I, I don't know where they got their education from, but I know the name of the school where they got their education, but it, it, it, it was a college in Meridian, Mississippi. And, and they all became teachers with the exception of one, and this one was the one that never married anybody, the one, the one was called Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, named after the state-- Speaker 2: Named after-- Speaker 1: --your grandfather came from (laughter). Speaker 2: That's right (laughter), yeah, so. You know, I really didn't see anybody else doing anything that, that, that, that, that--doing two things. Where I grew up there were, in the community where I grew up they were black. They were, they were preaching, or, or, or they were teaching, or they were farmers. I certainly didn't wanna be a farmer. And, and I wasn't interested in being a preacher either, like my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what--why weren't you attracted to being a preacher? That seems like a route that a lot of people take? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I, I, I just didn't, I, I just didn't like what he had to--he had to do. I didn't like that work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and the, the--you know, back in those days if--in, in order to rouse a congregation, you, you'll be--you had to put on quite a show. And I wasn't interested in becoming an actor either, as I think part of it's acting (laughter). And, and so I wasn't interested in acting. I, you know, I was, I was up to performing, but not acting (laughter). Story_ID: 70755 Speaker 1: All right, now, how, how did--what, what would you consider some of the highlights of your education career and--here and on the [Gulf] Coast? Speaker 2: My, my edu--as, as a teacher? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, and you became an administrator too in the-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --now didn't you? You, you, you, you remained a teacher? Speaker 2: I, I remained a teacher. That's all I ever wanted to do, was teach. I, I, I, I did--I didn't wanna--even though I had an administrative certificate, I never really wanted to be a, an administrator. I just wanted, I just, I just wa, I just wanted a teach. I still teach. I tell--I still teach Sunday School. And when I was at the banking [Hancock Bank], while I was at the, at the bank they, they--but they said I never stopped teaching there. I always had classes. In the afternoon, there was always somebody that I'd spend time with trying to teach him something or help him with something, a composition or something. Speaker 1: Have any outstanding students that you remember that you taught, that you--I mean or who are some of your favorite students? Speaker 2: I, I have, I have a lot of fa--favorite students. And, and they're so numerous. You probably heard of Rip Daniels on the radio station here [Gulfport, Mississippi]. That ma--that was one of my students. I taught him at one time. And Roan (ph.) Lawrence, who, who is--oh, electrical engineer. He's not only an electrical engineer, but he, he went, he went on to become an administrator with several different large corporations in, in the country--Justin, Justin Holden, who's also a, an, an engineer. And I've, I've taught so many students that, that I succeeded in, in, in life, and they always come back to, just to, to visit with--to visit with me and thank me for the things that I tried to, to do for them, not only black students, but white students as well. And, and it has, it has been the, the, the--it's a whole litany of success there. It's a, it's a tremendous success story. You know, I--and, and you, and you, and you mentioned about my teaching, I, I, I went by the nursing home the other day and there was a young lady in there, and she saw me and she says, "I thank God for this man here," say "because he helped me when, when I, when I was so much in distress," said, "because of the confidence that he gave me, I went on and, and got my master's degree. And I was able to get me a very good job." And she, she was one of the students that would come to me--well, she already had a degree, but she would come to me in, in the bank in the afternoon, and, and, and ask for assistance in, in certain areas and any way I could offer that assistance. And the most important thing is, is, is encouraging the people, the people to, you know, to, to do their best, to try to--it just, it's a little thing I call artful nurturing and, and in that art, artful nurturing, it's encouraging them to develop their full potential. Speaker 1: Now did you teach at a secondary level or they both, both-- Speaker 2: I did both of 'em. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(unclear). Speaker 2: I taught at the college level too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh. Story_ID: 70756 Speaker 1: All right, now how did you get involved in banking? So you go from education to banking. Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's--that was a very dif--that was, that was a very interesting transition, and I've asked--I've been asked that question so many times, and--but--or I, I, I'd, I had an opportunity to go to the Department of Housing and Urban Development for an internship program. And I, I, I, I, I, I was always interested in, in that. It seemed like a awful good challenge for me, and of course I, I got, I got, I got the internship program, and spent a year in, in the internship program. At the end of the year, at the end of the year, you might recall that, that, that [President Richard] Nixon, Nixon had frozen the, the civil service, had frozen all civil service positions. So I, I couldn't, I couldn't, I ca, I ca, I couldn't get a GS Series. Speaker 1: Oh, this is 1970-- Speaker 2: Oh, that was in the '70's [1970s]. Speaker 1: This is when Nixon was leaving, on his way out, or-- Speaker 2: That, that, that-- Speaker 1: --or way--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That was before. That was, that was before he left. That may have been on his first term. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Un-huh, un-huh. But anyway, they were frozen at the time, and, and it was, it was in either in '72' [1972], somewhere, some, some, somewhere in that period of time. It, it was somewhere between sev--seventy, seventy [1970] and seventy-four [1974] for when this happened. But I wasn't able to make--to get a, an appointment, so I started working for a nonprofit housing organization. And, and working this nonprofit housing organization, it, it, it's just the, the, the, the work was just too hard for one man. They, they, they, they gave me more than I for the first time in my life that I was able to do it, and my wife is very unhappy with it. And, and of course, when, when, when, when the, when the government appointed--when, when, when the, the GS appointment came through, it come through in Memphis, Tennessee. Oh, and my wife was greatly disturbed about that, and because this is her home. Her home is Bay St. Louis [Mississippi], and she never wanted to leave the Mississippi Gulf Coast. And so but I was explaining to her, I said well, I'll go on and take the, the, the, the, the appointment in Memphis, but eventually I'll work my way back to the Gulf Coast. But that wasn't satisfactory to her. I, I had--but where, where--I mean while all the discussion was going on about my leaving, a lot of people did, did not want to see me leave the Gulf Coast for whatever reason or another. A friend of mine came by and says, said that if, if--the, "the bank is very interested in, in, in, in recruiting some, some black people to come down there." I said well, "You know they aren't gonna pay me any salary that it would be comparable for--but what I'm, I'm being offered, and you know they aren't serious about putting people in any, in any responsible position down there. The best thing I could do, be a teller, and I don't wanna be no teller. I'm not gonna be a teller." He said always "put the application in." And I said "Well, if you bring me one (laughter)--you know, I thought I'd end it there--if you bring me one, I'll, I'll fill it out for you," for him. I let, I let him know it was for him 'cause I didn't wanna waste my time. He bought it, then I just half filled I out. He carried it back in, in a few minutes, and, and, and maybe the next day they called me and, and I had an interview. And, and 'course I had the interview with the--they carried me to the president, and at, and at the same time the board of directors were meeting. They introduced me to the board of directors. And well, I came on back home and I didn't really think it was even--it was really a serious thing. I just show they, they had a real good show down there today (laughter). And then when I got back, Mac said--so my friend came and said, "They're really serious about, about you. You know, they're really serious about you?" I said, "Well, you tell them that, that, that they need to make up their mind if they're serious about me because I'm getting ready to go--I'm, I'm getting ready to pack." And, and so the word came; they asked me, says, "Well, you got the job, and you can stay--you can come--you can stay on your next job for two weeks to give them proper notice." And then I, I, at the end of two weeks, I was hired at Hancock Bank. Story_ID: 70757 Speaker 1: So what was your position officially at the bank [Hancock Bank]? Speaker 2: In, in my position, I went into management training. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm, I'm very delighted that, that, that's, that happened. That was the best thing that they could have done, because they made me knowing all aspects of banking. I was assigned to almost every department in the bank, and I had to learn about the complete bank operations. Well, not complete, but I got a pretty good view of what, what to--overall view what banking was all about. And I, I consider that, that, that was good, rather than just put me into a job and train me into that particular job. Speaker 1: So this is around 1974 or-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you--what position did you eventually hold in the bank--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I was, I was appointed loan officer, and, and then from loan, loan officer all the way to vice president. Speaker 1: Okay. And in this period of time, I mean just--I mean looking at your resume, I mean you involved in--it, it looks almost like hundreds of organizations. I know it couldn't be that many, but it's--you can't--it's hard to read all those on the page, but I mean what are some of your--can you kind of give us some--well, first, let's talk about the bank first, but then I wanna talk, talk-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --about those other civic activities, 'cause I think they're related in a sense-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--banking--bank and being involved in all the civic stuff. But at the bank, you were the only black officer in the bank, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: For a long period of time. Speaker 1: --yeah. So how did you feel about being the only black person there, and what kind of pressure did you really feel like you were under, or did you feel pressure? Speaker 2: I mean, let me tell you - there was some pressure, but to keep the pressure off, you, and, and, and people should realize this, that you must feel that at the top level they support you, and at the top level I felt supported. So no matter what pressure they put on me, it didn't matter, I could deal with. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so you felt fairly secure. Speaker 2: I felt, I felt, I felt fair--fairly secure because I knew at the top level I was fully supported, if I did the right thing (laughter). Speaker 1: Now did, did the bank employees on a lower level resent you being-- Speaker 2: Oh, of course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You, you know, you have to learn how to walk in a minefield, because, because there are booby traps all around you every day. No, they didn't like it all, and, and, and, and a lot of times they didn't like it because of my relationship with people at the upper level. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you receive any threats or anything from anybody or their just-- Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: --just, just booby traps maybe? Speaker 2: No threats like that. And, and the most part, most of the people were very cordial, they really were. They, they, they do, but I met some very kind, some very kind people, and, and so I--and, and you're gonna meet 'em like that in anywhere you go, you know. But, but any young per--person I just, I, I, I tell 'em all the time, if you, if you, if you're going in, into corporate structure, means you got to have somebody that's gonna, go, go--that's gonna support your. If you don't have somebody that's gonna support you, you, you're not gonna fare very, 'cause it's always somebody that'll eat you up alive. I mean, they don't like you because of the way you part your hair sometimes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 70758 Speaker 1: So were you able to--now, here you are, you're a black loan officer at Hancock Bank, and there hasn't been any other black loan officers around here. Lots of black people have--need loans and want loans. And they look at you and you're the only in there. I mean what was--I mean did--I mean were you able to improve the condition of the community by, by being a loan officer at the Hancock Bank, do you think? Speaker 2: Yeah, what I mean--well, let me go back and say this. My, my, my loan portfolio was not a totally black portfolio. I was able to serve any customer that came in, in, in the bank. It may have been the, the level of respect that they had for me. I hope that's what it (laughter) was, was. And, and then my, my, my portfol--portfolio was--crossed all class lines and all economic lines. I was able to serve all, all, all, all kinds of people. But, but, but basically, I, I think my--it was the majority wa--was with black people came to see, came to see me, they wait, wait in lines for--and I'd feel sorry for 'em a lot of times, and, and in lines for half a day just, just to see me. And, and, and I was able to help people I know that otherwise would not have been able to, to, to, to be helped. And they knew, but they were getting--they felt, too, that they were getting this help because, because of my presence in the bank. And, and I, I did have a very loyal customer base. And they did not want me to fail, the black community for the most part, so they made certain. They paid me when they might have, might have neg-neg-neglected somebody else. But, but they wondered--everybody wondered about the secret of my success, "Why people pay you back. You--what do you have, any special magic or something (laughter)?" No, I think it's because of the mutual respect that we had for each other. Speaker 1: And that's something I think people in the community need to--that's the kind of story we need to hear more of. I think we get--oftentimes the black communities are maligned for not sticking together or not wanting to help one another become successful. And with the story you just told, it's kind of the opposite of what we, we, we hear so much of, you know, but it's a good, it's a good story, you know, the-- Speaker 2: Well, they made, they made me feel that way, and I, you know, I would tell 'em, I said, "Don't embarrass me (laughter)." And, and I, you know, I want you to become a good customer of the bank. So we had the--and, and, and a lot of these things you can overcome with communication and with, with, with, with really earnest communications. Communicate from the heart. Story_ID: 70759 Speaker 1: Now, being, you know, from your position at the bank, I mean I, I don't know if it--if, if your civic activity accelerated once you got--you became involved in the bank. But you, you certainly or in the past few years have been involved in, in so many civic activities. Can you tell about some of them and sort of tell us of your civic activity and board memberships and other things? Speaker 2: It, it's, it's, it's been--it's, it's almost amazing and, and sometimes the--not the burden, but the responsibilities I think sometimes get too heavy for me. But, but, but when I was at the bank there--and, and, one time I was at the bank I was named Outstanding Employee of the Year. I must not have brought that picture. I meant to bring that picture, when the president was giving me that award. And--but I, I think the pinnacle of, of everything is when I was (unclear) to the State College Board, and that's one of the most prestigious boards in the State of Mississippi and one, and one of the most sought off--sought after positions in the State of Mississippi. And that's the governing board of all colleges and universities within the State of Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and, and, and the bank itself was very proud that it, it was first time that a, that the, the bank had very had anybody named for the college board. And, and the, and the bank seemed to be very proud of that. And, and I always felt that the, that, that the administration was very proud of it, and so I, I, I couldn't let them down. I had to do it. I had to do a good job, not, not, not for myself, but for my friends and my supporters. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me, I know one other organization that really stands out in my mind is the Brown Condors. Would you wanna tell us about what the, what the Brown Condors is all about? Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's the--in the--that's one of my lady's in, in, involvements. And of course, right now it's probably one of my pet projects or, or, or pet civic activity. John C. Robinson was, was, was an individual that grew up here in, in, in Gulfport, Mississippi. He was born in Florida, and he, he grew up right here in the area that we are talking now, now. [HM] Reverend [Harry] Tartt knew a met--knew him as, as, as, as a young man, and, and 'course here--and, and he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's Reverend Harry Tartt, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Reverend Harry Tartt. And-- Speaker 1: T-A-R-- Speaker 2: T-T. Speaker 1: T-T, right. Speaker 2: And, and, and of course he ad--he admired this--mean I'd heard him talk about him, you, you, you know. And, but anyway, John C. Robinson is a, is a pioneer, American, black aviator. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Story_ID: 70760 Speaker 1: So, but you're, you're talking about the--we were talking about the Brown Condors I think in, in, in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a minute ago and before we got interrupted, but you said John C. Robinson--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, John C. Robinson grew up-- Speaker 1: --native of Gulfport [Mississippi]-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, all right, he, he grew up in Gulfport and he, he, he attended the public schools in Gulfport and, and, and later went into Tuskegee Institute [in Alabama]--and, and I, and I, I, I make that reference because I wanna come back to it--and met--he, from there he came back to Gulfport, stayed a very short period of time, and went to Chicago [Illinois]. And, and in, in, in Chicago, he became interested in, in flying while he was working as a janitor at the, at, at the, the Wright Aeronautical School [Curtiss-Wright School of Aeronautics] there, there in Chicago. But eventually he was ad--admitted to that, that school, he along with several others, and, and of course they were, they were graduates. And, and of course it was--it was really no, no bright future for black aviators at that, that, at that time. And so he built an airport there in, in, in Robbins, Illinois. And, and 'course later he became--by making the, the story short, later he became the commander-in-chief for the Ethiopian Air Force, and he was probably the, the first American during World War II to fight against the fascism. Speaker 1: Now, let me just interject this in. A lot of people don't maybe know this history, but in the 1930s, when the Italians invaded Ethiopia for the second time in a century I guess, they, they were fairly successful. The first time they failed, but the second time they were fairly successful. Haile Selassie was the new emperor I think of Ethiopia at the time the, the black Americans and black people really all over the world felt personally offended by the invasion of Ethiopia. And black pe--people who were Christians and (unclear) read the Bible and they read the passage: "and Ethiopia shall stretch out her arms to God," and that sort of thing, and they felt that that was a black nation that was historical and had this ancient heritage. And here it was being invaded by Italy, and they wanted to defend Ethiopia at all cost. And people raised money all over the U.S. to send arms and aid, and black men actually tried to find passage to Ethiopia to go to defend Ethiopia. And so John Robinson was one, one of those who, who went. Speaker 2: And so John Robinson was one of those people there. The, the call led him to, to Ethiopia. And, and of course he, he headed the air force and, and of course the Air Force was--'course the air force was defeated-his army was defeated, and he came back to the United States. Story_ID: 70761 Speaker 1: And then after that [the Italian invasion of Ethiopia], he was very instrumental in, in, in, in, in the formation of the Tuskegee Airmen Program. And, and that's where here in Gulfport [Mississippi], because he grew up in Gulfport. We're trying to find some appropriate way to honor him. And by the way, Haile Selassie can--John C. Robinson bought Haile Selassie here to this community. He, he spoke at, at one of our churches here, known as Mount Bethel Baptist Church. Speaker 2: About when was that? Speaker 1: As far as I can get at that date, I do know some people who, who would remember that day. But I, I--it was--I, I, I, I had that date together-- Speaker 2: It was word--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It, it, it was in the '30's [1930s]-- Speaker 2: --war-- Speaker 1: --it, it, it was in the '30's [1930s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It, it was somewhere, but '30' [1930], '38' [1938] or something like that. It, it, it, it was, it was prior, it was prior to--I'll tell you, I'll tell you--invasion-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I, I believe, but I'm not certain about that. I, I, I, I need to check that reference because there, there were a lot of people that--not a lot of people that remembers that, but there are some people that remember his appearance here in Gulfport. Speaker 2: Okay, and what, what eventually happened to John Robinson? Speaker 1: He was killed in, in, in, in an after an accident in Ethiopia. And he was also buried there. Speaker 2: When was he--was he killed like during the Italian War or was it afterwards or? Speaker 1: Oh, it was, it was after the war [1954]. He was not killed, he was not killed in the war. He was involved in an accident, and as a result of that accident, his injury in the accident, he, he died. I knew his mother [Celeste Robinson], and--but I didn't know his sta--his stepfather. She was, she'd passed. And by the way, you-[HM] Reverend [Harry] Tartt preached his mother's funeral. He, he went all the way to New York to, to preach his mother's funeral. And by any stretch of the imagination, without a stretch of the imagination, I should put it this way, John C. Robinson was truly an American hero. And of course there, there is a book that was written about him, known as the Brown Condor. And, and, and there's another book now that, that, that has been written about him. It should be nearing completion very shortly. In Robbins, Illinois, (laughter) but they plan to, to recognize his accomplishment too. Speaker 2: All right, we're going to change tape. Story_ID: 70762 Speaker 1: Yeah, so is the goal to, to build a monument to John C. Robinson here in Gulfport? Speaker 2: Yes, we, we, we hope that there will be a museum built, and, and that museum will, will be called the John C. Robinson museum. It's, I mean we, I mean we're in the planning stage for that now, but, but there are a lot of--there, there's a lot of steps that, that hasn't been taken into consideration yet. Speaker 1: Well, it might be--what you might have is a basis for a museum that would focus on blacks in aviation in the United States. I don't think there's, there's anything like, like that at the present time. Speaker 2: Well, well, and to, to, to get the kind of support that I think we need to do what we need to do. We need to become a pretty inclusive, you know, but, but where the emphasis is on black aviation (laughter), but to get the support from the local governments. Speaker 1: Okay, so maybe something on Mississippi aviation or something (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, oh yes, it's, it's John C. Robinson, he would be the lead, and, and, and, and, and, and, and of course you--but you have (unclear)--a lot of other astronauts here, here locally, I think you have two that distinguish themselves. Speaker 1: Which two are those? Speaker 2: One is Fred Hayes. The other one I can't think of his name. Story_ID: 70763 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me, what are your--you, you, you've had a long career of civic life here as an educator, and as a vice president of a bank, and loan officer, and involved in all these volunteer activities and civil rights activities, but what are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: And I, I hope that we will become focused on correct problems. I hope that we be, that we become focused on the, the, the drug problems within our communities, because they're, they're, they're, they're absolutely destroying our communities. And because of drugs, it's not only addicting our people and, and, and, and, and, and taking off the income of our--taking away the income of our people, destroying, destroying families, it, it, it's, it's, it's connected with the murder rate, you know, and that seems to be the greatest--I'd guess you'd call it a killer of black men. It, it's black men shooting each other, and at the bottom of this is, is drugs. And this is the kind of problem that, that need to--that, that we need to focus on. I think we need to try to rear--rid ourselves of the drug menace. And we're gonna have to do this if we're gonna change--and we're gonna have to start looking at our girls too. We'd mit--we, we, we, we gotta instill with them some sort of pride, and, and, and, and tell them that there's a better way that than, than become mothers without fathers, without a father in the house, you know. It used to be a very sad thing in the community when, when--and a disgrace when I--when our girls got pregnant, but today it carries no shame; two, three children, it's, it's, it, it, it's does not create any shame or disgrace. And, and we're, and we're then, and then and these, these are the basic problems that we're going to have to work with. And then today, I, I, I was listening to a radio show as I was coming here today. This, this, this--they were talking about going to India, and other places, and other places to import engineers and computer science people. And, and, and, and, and the girls, and, and the girl reply: "Why on earth don't they start training our people here?" Well, you know, that's a, that's a good question, why don't you? But you, if you're gonna train our people to be engineers and computer specialist and going into other technical fields, highly technical fields, you're gon' have to start with the--you, you got to start at the bottom and work all the way up the top. You got to start with your, your grade school. You, you're gon' have to start with your parent, and make sure that those children get in school and, and get there education. And, and we're gonna have to start working, we, we, we're gonna have to start with the parents. We, in other words, rather than talking about some of the problems that, that we have, we, we're gonna have to start trying to find some solutions to, to, to these problems, and especially in education, and especially in crime, as, as it, as it's related to drugs-- Speaker 1: Do you think the--sir, do you think the, the answer lies more internally or externally? Speaker 2: It, it, it, it, it, it, it lies within our community, internal. And we're gonna have to po--approach it at the com--at the community level. You can't solve this problem at the state level; you can't solve it at the national level. We're gonna have to do the job this time. Marching will not do the job. We have-- we got to do some grass root work and just say this condition is not acceptable; we're just not going to accept this; we're not gonna accept the fact that our, our, our children are not doing their best at school. We gotta do something about it. We, we got to do something about teenage pregnancy. And we got to do something about the drugs who are taking over our communities-- Story_ID: 70764 Speaker 1: --Now sir, I know you're still involved in a lot of activities, but what do you--when you look back on what you've done, what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy, and that, that's a very interesting question. I never had time to really thought to, to, to, I, I, I meant to think about that. But if, if, if, if I want to--I would like for my legacy to be that I, I tried to help somebody, and everybody that I saw, that, that I could help, I tried to offer my helping hand. And that's what I'd like my legacy to be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not that I had, not, not how much money I have, which 'cause I don't have any money, (laughter) and really don't need a lot of it. But that's what I'd like for it to be. Story_ID: 70765 Speaker 1: And this is slightly different: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Let the work I've done speak for me. That's the way I'd like to be remembered: let the work I've done speak for me. And that's, that's the best I can put it. Speaker 1: All right, well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter), okay. Story_ID: 70766 Speaker 1: Okay, that is me, and I believe I was fourteen years old. I'd just left Piney Wood [Piney Woods Country Life School in Rankin County, Mississippi], and we had been to Piney Wood to in-involve, involve ourselves in a chicken judging contest. And by the way, my buddy and I won the state chicken judging contest that year (laughter). Speaker 2: That's my son, Syd Rushing. Syd Rushing is an actor. He, he had some, some pretty good success in Chicago and in New York, but he's currently in, in California. And, and right now he is a writer, at present time. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: That is my family. And of course, that is my two sisters in, in the middle, and of course my baby brother on, on the end, and of course I'm the one right up under the, the 12/28/1995. Speaker 1: That is my wife and I, and that picture that she's holding there is a portrait that was given to me upon my retirement from the state county's board after having served twelve years. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): That year? Speaker 1: That was in 1996. Speaker 2: And that, that is the president of the [Mississippi] State College Board presenting or presenting with the certificate or nomination for Outstanding Trustee in America. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): How about a year for that one? Speaker 2: I beg pardon? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Do you remember the year for this one? Speaker 2: I, I believe that was in 1995. Speaker 1: Okay and, and that's my farewell speech to the State College Board. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Same date too, right? Speaker 1: In 1996. And, and you, you see that's the gift that they give you when you retire. Speaker 2: And that is my daughter, my only daughter, and, and she has given me one son, and she's now expecting another child. She's, she's in Houston, Texas. That's where she resides today. Speaker 1: And that is my wife, Carolyn Patterson Rushing, of forty-two years. She's, she's been a wonderful wife. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Year, or date, or occasion, if it's important? Speaker 1: Oh, that's upon my retirement. She came to visit me upon my retirement, when I was retiring from Hancock Bank, 1996. Speaker 2: And again, that is my wife, Carolyn. And Carolyn was the principal of 20th Street Elementary School. This, just up the street here from, from, from, from where we are sitting now. She retired a couple of years before I retired. Speaker 1: And that's Sidney L. Rushing in the United States Air Force. I was stationed in, in Korea, and I was at Kimpo Air Force Base at that time. And I, I was with the six--Sixty-Seven Tactical Recon--ut-oh, let me get it right, the Sixty-Seven Tactical Recon Squadron. Speaker 2: That's Sidney Rushing, and I'm, I'm sitting-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Excuse me, sir. Speaker 2: That is myself in the center there. And, and of course, that is Dr. Nelson, the gentleman on my right-hand side. Dr. Nelson is, is the head of the university hospital there in Jackson. And of course you see the, the chancellor, and, and that's the chancellor of the University of Mississippi, [R.] Gerald Turner, Turner. And standing behind me are my fellow board members. Speaker 1: Oh, now that's my pride and joy right there. that's Pa-Pa and, and [his grandson] Ju-Ju. His name is Jugian (ph.) and we call him Julian. And everybody call him my little man. He was my sidekick. He's now living in Houston, Texas. I miss him very much, and, and I, I, I think he misses me. But he a wonderful young man. I know he is gonna be a, a, a, a great man one of these days. Speaker 2: And that is the full college board there, that's--at, at, at that particular time. And of course you see that picture on the--I, I, I assume that is the left-hand side, isn't it?--and, and, and, and, and the lady on, on the right-hand side. But tho--those, I mean those are the gentleman. Some of those gentleman that you see on that picture served, served with me for a period--entire period of twelve years. And you also see the commissioner of higher education there, of who was, was [W.] Ray Cleer. He's, he is sitting next to me on the couch there. Speaker 1: At the top there is my two sisters, my two lovely sisters, one lives in California, and the other one lives in Jackson, Mississippi. And they will be visiting me in, in a few days. They always come visit me in November. November is always my favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: And, and the two, and the two gentleman below are my brothers. Each of them is now deceased. The other one is, is Dee. We call him-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Just do the one on the left for a second (unclear)--I get that. Speaker 2: The large--I meant the large picture there is, is Dee. Speaker 1: And, and of course the other one is, is Ollie, Ollie Rushing. And he was the one that served in Korea. He served with the 24th Infantry and the 25th Infantry. He was a combat infantry for his intran--for his entire tour over in Korea, and he had some, some awful experiences to tell. It's an interest--an in--an interesting experience to tell. Dee was a comedian of the family. Now he could make, he, he could make anybody laugh at any time, no matter what the circumstances was. He was a very brilliant young man, but he chose to be a plumber, and that's what he did most of his life. Speaker 2: Oh, that is a pic--the picture at the bottom is, is a picture of my father and my aunt. Her name is Lula Bell, and of course my father, as we indicated earlier, is his name is Ned Rushing. Speaker 1: At the top is, is my uncle. His name was Bonnie Rushing. And of course the lady there is my mother [Emma Rushing]. That's my mother when she was about eighteen years of age, I understand. And she and my uncle were very, very close. Speaker 2: Again, that's a picture from me in Korea. I was standing behind the off--at the top picture there, I was standing behind the office when that picture was made. Speaker 1: And at the bottom there is, is, is, is the staff. That's the, the intelligence section. And, and sitting in, in, in the middle there, I can't remember the other's name, but I remember the commander, the intelligence officer; his name was Sweet Carter. Sweet Carter was from Mississippi; he was also from Mississippi. Speaker 2: Now that is my mother. That is the lady that could do so many things, and, and she even amazed herself. She even laughed at, at herself by, by being able to do so many things. She, she was a dentist; she also made eyeglass--glasses; she was also a science teacher; she was the, she was the principal at one time; she was the owner of a (laughter), a restaurant, and also operated a very successful grocery store business. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): (Unclear)--I know you said it at the beginning of the interview, but next to the photo, her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Emma Rushing LeFlore. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Can you spell LeFlore, please? Speaker 2: It's Emma L-E-F-L-O-R-E, LeFlore. Speaker 1: Yeah, that is my, my family there, my father's [Ned Rushing] family. And, and the man who, the man who's sitting down holding the, the, the, the girl is my grandfather, and his name was Wilson Rushing. He was also a schoolteacher. And the little man right be, beside him, that is my father. And of course the lady who's standing up, that was my oldest aunt; her name was Martha Walker. She, too, was a schoolteacher. And then the lady in the, in the center is my grandmother. And the lady next to her, we, we, we refer to her as Aunt Baby, but her name was really Susan. And the, the little lady that he is holding--that's Papa Wilson that's holding--is, her name is Lula Bell, and she, she resided at Mound Bayou, Mississippi, and she was also a, a schoolteacher. So two of--the, the, the grandfather was a schoolteacher and two of the daughters were, were school--schoolteachers...