 Story_ID: 670938 Speaker 1: I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Today is December 17th, 2016. We are in South Orange, New Jersey. Speaker 2: West Orange. Speaker 1: West Orange, New Jersey. And I would like for you to please say and spell your name. Tell us your birth date and what you do. Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Tamara Harris Robinson. My date of birth is August 13th, 1967. And I am a divorce coach. Story_ID: 670939 Speaker 1: We start with what we call People magazine type questions (laughter). What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is navy. Speaker 1: Food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, don't laugh, tuna fish (laughter). Speaker 1: Time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time is summertime. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Miami [Florida]. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: Yeah. My saying, I say: don't be mainstream, find your own stream. Story_ID: 670940 Speaker 1: We like to explore your family history on both sides. Let's start with your father. Can you tell me his name, when and where he was born, and, you know, tell me about him, please (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. So my father was Earl Harris. He was born in the 1920s, I think 1922. I can't remember the exact time, but he was a Depression [Great Depression] baby, and he was born in the St. Thomas in the U.S. Virgin Islands. And he was born to Julia Rodwell and James Harris, my, my paternal grandfather and grandmother. And Julia was the daughter--I can't remember her father's name. I--we had a tree done many, many years ago when I was a kid, and I couldn't put my hands on it. But what I do remember in terms of family stories is that her dad actually came from Ireland. He was Irish. And he came to escape the potato famine, so he came to the Virgin Islands and met with her mother and, and my grandmother was born. My grandfather-- Speaker 1: Were they married? Speaker 2: No. Typical Caribbean-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --stories, you know, it's, it's just one of the journeys in life, I think, when you're in these type of environments. And when you think, too, about the races and what, what could have happened for a, you know, white male, obviously, interacting with a black woman in the islands and producing a child, what the options would have been for a healthy marriage would have been none at that time (laughter). And so, no, she was not married and actually didn't marry any of my father's siblings' dads. It was just, I think, typically, what you see in those type of Caribbean environments economically, you know, you do what you have to do to take care of your children. My grandfather, what we were able to do--and, again, it was so long ago when I was a kid when this happened because my father was an older parent when I was, I was born, but we did--we were able to trace that we were descended from slaves from Africa on my, on my paternal grandfather's side. And a lot of our family, a lot of our family that came in as slaves into the Caribbean came in through Tortola in the British Virgin Islands and then made their way over to St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] and St. Thomas, so that's, that's my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the boats came into Tortola. Speaker 2: Well, at least the slave--and, and actually, there's a family slave burial plot in Tortola, in Virgin Gorda [British Virgin Islands], and I'd--we--I remember as a kid going into Jost Van Dyke [British Virgin Islands], and we went up as a big family. It was one of our family reunions, and we actually went to see the grave of one of our great-great-grandparents, who was a slave on the island, so, you know, intimately connected to slavery and its impact on the lineage of my family. Speaker 1: Do you know from what country? Speaker 2: No. But now I'm doing this, I'm going to go find out. I think that's one of the beautiful times when you get to do these types of sort of reflections on life that I, I knew where I came from very clearly as a kid, and our families made sure that we did know that, but, you know, as you navigate the world and you have your own kids, you forget. We moved around. I moved around a lot, so a lot of those kinds of records and information have been misplaced or just disappeared, but my father was known as our family historian, and he spent a lot of time researching this. And so, you know, participating in this project, I definitely want to go back and explore that. Story_ID: 670941 Speaker 1: What was your father's work? Speaker 2: So he has--I--you know, a very interesting story as a man of color, so he grew up as a young man in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]. He actually wasn't raised by my, my grandmother [Julia Rodwell]. He was raised by his godmother. She was a very successful entrepreneurial woman. She had a bakery on the island. She was a landowner. She had apartments. She made money in that way, so, you know, grew up under a female entrepreneur. My grandmother, who struggled financially, was actually an iron, iron woman in one of the hotels in St. Thomas, the Hotel of 1829 [sic. Hotel 1829]. It's a historical hotel in Charlotte Amalie [U.S. Virgin Islands], so she worked as a seamstress and a, and a housekeeper, basically, in the hotel, so my father [Earl Harris] had this very interesting lifestyle where, you know, his mother was, was struggling and, and was trying to make ends meet, and was--and knew that she wouldn't really provide for all of her children, and then he had this other lifestyle with his godmother where, you know--who couldn't have children on her own, so he was, you know, dressed up in his, you know, nice shorts and his little bow ties and would go to church, so it was--I, I can imagine just a very confusing time for him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he lived with her? Speaker 2: Um-hm, he lived with her. Speaker 1: How many children did his mother have? Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: And where is he in the birth order? Speaker 2: He is the third. He's the third. Speaker 1: Do you know how--why was he was the one chosen? Speaker 2: I'm not sure about that. I mean, this is one of those family stories that you just--nobody really talked about it. I think what--from what limited understanding I have, she couldn't have children, and I think, you know, I think when you look in a lot of communities of color, it's not an uncommon story. You know, you, you have relatives or family members that have better--more means and can provide. At that time, he was the first son, so maybe that had something to do with it. Speaker 1: So he's the third child, but the first son. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: And I think that might have had something to do with it, and so you never know how these conversations go and what, what the trade is or the expectation, but, you know, it wasn't a situation where he was taken away. He saw his mother, he knew his father [James Harris]. His father subsequently left. He was a--he had a store, actually, in St. Thomas. He had a--like a dry goods store and sold items, and then my grandfather actually left and went to New York [New York] and had a store in Harlem, and my father, when he was a teenager, left the island and went to live with my grandfather in Harlem and work in his store. So I would remember stories as a kid of, you know, my father delivering goods, but, you know, he was the young spritely, you know, little active little teenager. And I do remember stories, too, of even though he was working for my grandfather, you know, they struggled. I mean, you had an adolescent young man who probably had--you know--had a lot of things on his mind, and wanted to run the streets in Harlem, and, you know, he had a father who was trying to run a business, so they would, they would get into it a couple of times. Speaker 1: So at what age about did he come? Speaker 2: Fifteen. He was a teenager, teenage boy. And so what I find interesting about that part of my life when I would listen to those stories, even as a kid, is I remember having family members who were successful businesspeople. They were entrepreneurs. You know, they weren't--even in a system where, you know, people of color may not have been as successful, they were able to find means, provide a service in a community, stay connected to a community but also create a viable business for themselves, and so that's what my dad grew up in. And that was something that always stuck with me as a kid. Story_ID: 670942 Speaker 1: Did he talk about growing up on the island and what the dynamics were at the time that he was growing up? Like what, what community did he grow up in? And what were social dynamics like? Speaker 2: Yeah. So fast forwarding, and, and as we meander through life, you'll--we'll talk about this, but I wanted to kind of go forward to bring it backward. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because forward really defines what was his primary influence as a young man growing up-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the island. And one of the things my, my dad [Earl Harris] did was--when--as he got advanced in his careers, he worked for one of the senators on the island and used that opportunity--he was always known as a researcher, historian. He was always writing letters to the, the newspaper, you know, letting them know his, his thoughts or his research or his opinions on things, and he had done some research on this gentleman called Rothschild Francis, and he was a, another entrepreneur. He had actually gone to the states, had created his own independent newspaper [The Emancipator], had gotten some, some individuals to basically finance a printing press that he returned back home to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] with and then created a newspaper because he was basically trying to--not say almost unionize but really kind of collect the men on the island to--in order to be able to advocate for quality employment, for just, you know, life--quality of life type of issues on the island. So that, that happened much later in life, but what I wanted to bring that to you was, my dad as a kid remembered this man, you know, in the public square, talking to people, you know, sort of like the guy in the barbershop that just kind of sort of really coalesces everyone and says, "Man, you know, this is the stuff that we need to be doing." But even more importantly, was, was addressing a narrative, right, and then disseminating information to the--to a community that sometimes always wasn't as informed. And when you grow up--obviously, the island wasn't colonized when he was a kid, but, you know, you had an island where you had--you were, you were owned by Denmark, and then you were sold to the U.S., and so my grandfather [James Harris] actually spoke Danish, so as a young man, my, my grandfather grew up under the possession of the Danish. I mean, I, I remember my aunt having friends who studied Danish in school, so you were a Danish possession, a Danish territory, and then you were transitioned to sale under the U.S., obviously, when the department of interior [U.S. Department of the Interior] was looking for beachheads and, and sort of positions during the war [World War I, WWI]. So my father, you know, grew up with a father who had that influence. You, you also had independent men on the island, men of color, right, who were basically trying to do a lot of the social justice and sort of advocacy work that you see nowadays. Well, that was my father's sort of growing up experience, so when you ask the sort of what times was he in, you know, when he was growing up, there are no people of color in power. You know, all of the heads of the territory were appointed by the U.S., and so-- Speaker 1: Because by the time he grew up, the U.S. was in possession (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighteen twenty--1925 was the transfer [sic.]. I think it was either '17 [1917] or '25 [1925], so it had been transferred to the U.S., but the U.S. sent their representatives to run the territory. All of the governors were appointed. None of them were elected. Story_ID: 670943 Speaker 1: Let me just back up a little bit more because the U.S. Virgin Islands, to my knowledge, changed hands like seven or eight times over--European, different-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --European countries-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were in possession of it over the years, which is more than a lot of other places. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Where there was a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. As opposed to being a, you know, sort of absconded by the Spanish or the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --French, exactly. Speaker 1: I think it was--to my recollection, it's about seven different countries-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --before the U.S. So in terms of-- Speaker 2: Influence and community (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That impacted the community. Again, as a young girl, I mean, I can speak--you know, I, I know my VI history, but as a young girl what I saw when I was born and navigated the community is that--and I think that's a really important point, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], because I grew up as a kid in a microcosm of, of the world, quite frankly. When I grew up, we had pockets of different towns, right, so you have Frenchtown [U.S. Virgin Islands], you know, which is, which is sort of near the fisherman wharf, and, and that's a community of people that have sort of the French, French influence, right, and so the--sort of the town nickname was the Frenchies, right. And then you also had people who had been part of the Danish lineage, so I remember as a young girl having senators, you know, in--Luence, (Unclear) Luence [ph.], who, whose was family was of Danish heritage, so that was another influence that I remembered growing up. You also--because, again, we didn't get to my mother's [Theresita Shelburn Harris] side of the family, which I know very little about, but my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, only spoke Spanish, but she was a woman of your complexion, so, you know, it's not clear to me if she was from Puerto Rico, the Hispaniola area, or whether she was born in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], but, again, came from people who emigrated from the--you know, Puerto Rico or one of the Hispanic, the Dominican islands [Dominican Republic]. I mean, I get mistaken for Dominican and Puerto Rican all the time. My family is very mixed, you know, with Irish, African, you know, Hispanic, Caribbean, Indian. There's a whole lot of influence, Danish, you know, there's a lot of influence there, so when you come from a Caribbean environment where you--the visual is so clear--you know, when you walk down Main Street, or you walk on the waterfront, you see the Danish influence. You know, you see some of the--you see the pirate castles, so you know that this was an island that was inhabited from--it was a multicultural, multiethnic environment from very early on, so you had so much intermingling, so much intermixing, and, you know, and, and you didn't have the American influence, per se, but you had--you know, I grew up, I--you had Trinidadians, so you had Indians, you know, from Jamaica. You had Chinese people who emigrated from Jamaica. I mean, so you grew up as a kid in an island where, you know, we went to school with Asian kids. We knew people from Denmark. I had kids that came from the U.S., so I'm interacting with kids who grew up in Georgia because their parents maybe came down with the church, and they were doing a rotation in the Caribbean, so my exposure as a kid was, was very multi, multiracial, multiethnic, and very unique. Story_ID: 670944 Speaker 1: How far back do you say you can trace your father's family? Speaker 2: To his father's grandmother, so my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was enslaved? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and that's who you, you believe is in that burial plot? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: I just--Martha [ph.]. Speaker 1: Martha. It's Martha. Speaker 2: And I have to go and dig, but that is my recollection, my best recollection. Speaker 1: And so the, the family over the generations, what, what was their work? Was there farming as well? Because now the U.S. Virgin Islands, is--market is tourism (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tourism, yeah. Speaker 1: But back then, what was the work that your family members were-- Speaker 2: Yeah. You had land and you farmed. I mean, even in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]--in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], definitely. But even in St. Thomas when I, when I would interact with distant cousins, as a young girl. I mean, now, it's--obviously, it's different, but as a young girl, you know, I remember--one of the things I remember my father [Earl Harris] telling me--my parents had just very--it was very interesting what they identified as the thing that grounded you and gave you power in the world, right. So my father, his mantra was always, you have to have a piece of the rock. When you own the land, you're a, you're a belonger. Literally, I mean, when you go to the Virgin--when you go to the British Virgin Islands, when they run you through immigration, they say, "Belongers?" And they say, "Oh, yeah. Are you a belonger?" And I'll never forget when we went for our, our family reunion, my father said, they said, "Belongers to the left, and, you know, immigrant--," you know, people who don't belong, basically, on the right. And my father went to the cust- the immigration person and said, we--you know, "So and So is our family." And the guy said, "Oh, you go ahead in this line." And so it was a, it was just--I was thinking I must have been twelve or--twelve years--something very young, and I just found that so fascinating. So my father's mantra was piece of the rock, own the land, have a home. Then you have an asset. Then you have something you can make money on. I don't know if you've noticed if you've traveled to the Caribbean, but there are a lot of homes in St. Thomas for sure, where when you build a house in St. Thomas as a, as a local, you always have a goal of building apartments on the bottom because that was your store of income, right. So you could get a renter in there. And even if you didn't have a renter, if your kids decided to stay home, they could stay there with their families, and even if they didn't pay rent, they could help support the expense of keeping the home, so there was always this, this anchoring around a house, this anchoring around property because you could grow your own mangos, you know, you could grow vegetables. You could at least have a beautiful piece--but no one could ever take you off the island because you had a home. So that side of the family, that's what I grew up with. My mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] didn't have that sort of history, so her sort of paradigm for what would, would make you successful and ground you in the world was education. You know, it was, you got to get that degree. You've got to get--you know, go as far as you can with education because that's gonna provide you the means for income, so when you think about family legacy and, and your views on money and your views on your ability to acquire money, you know, when you think of somebody who comes from a very landed mindset, right, that aristocratic, own the land, be the--you know--be the land, own a home versus go work in a profession and get income and cash flow, those are my two sort of anchoring experiences (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And tell me about your mother-- Story_ID: 670945 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about your mother. What's her name, and-- Speaker 2: My mom's name is Theresita Harris [Theresita Shelburn Harris]. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: Theresita, T-H-E-R-I-S-I-T-A [sic.]. Speaker 1: And, and you said she was born in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands]? Speaker 2: She was born in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Speaker 1: In St. Thomas. And what, what's her birthday, do you know? Speaker 2: It's, it's confusing (laughter). She's got two (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know what year? Speaker 2: She had two birth certificates. One was '54 [1954], one was '55 [1955]. It was--it's a very complicated dynamic, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Do tell. Speaker 2: I never--well, and so--I--it was--I never knew my grandfather. I never met my grandmother. I've seen pictures of my maternal grandmother. I don't know who my grandfather is on that side. Speaker 1: And who did she grow up with? Speaker 2: So, again, she was raised by an aunt. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I, I basically (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which is very common in the Caribbean. Speaker 2: It is very common, but I think what is not very common is to have two parents that were raised by non--outside of their, their parent, the birth parent. And I think that, that, you know, when you think about some of the things that I care about and that I advocate for--so I think on a personal level, it, it grounds you as a parent, right, because you say, okay, well, I definitely want my kids to have a different experience, right? A different opportunity. I definitely had one because I knew that, that impacted them in terms of how they wanted show up as parents and parent, you know, be available and present in their child's life. But I think for me, you know, I have a very, very strong connection and understanding and empathy for kids who don't grow up with adults in their lives, or do--or who don't have that--with that normal parental relationship that so many of us take for granted, so that's why I think about foster care, and a lot of those sort of mentoring programming, you know, because sometimes you, you don't have the blessing and privilege of having that parent in your life. Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about what her experience was like growing up with her aunt? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was stressful. Again-- Speaker 1: Stressful how (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) my mother--so my--again, another woman who didn't have children, and so--but was a hard woman. I mean, life was hard for my mother, and I think that--for my, my mother's aunt, and so--and, who subsequently, actually, died of breast cancer, so, you know, obviously had been medical issues, and she was living and caring for her husband who was blind, so she already had a lot of stressors in her life, and my mother was a very low maintenance kid, but she was a very sensitive person. But the thing, I think, that really ended up impacting my mother the most is that she grew up very independent. She had to. So she was working from the time she was in high school. She--I remember pictures of her in her yearbook. You know, she always had this smile on her face no matter what was going on for her. And, I--you know, people would always talk about her, you know, "Terry always--," her nickname was Terry, everybody called her Terry. No one called her by her full name. She was always--she always had a smile, but she hid a lot of distress, a lot of pain. And she had a very challenging life growing up. She--there were many siblings on her side. I've--I'm close to her one sister. She has another sister that I, I knew who's, who's since passed, and she has a brother who I've met a few times, but, again, very disconnected from that side of the family, not a very sort of connected family (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did the other siblings live together? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No. Speaker 1: Each of her-- Speaker 2: When they were--at a certain age, they did, but then when my mother left, I think everybody was split up when my mother was with my, my great aunt. Speaker 1: So she wasn't initially with your great aunt. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: How long did she live in the home with her-- Speaker 2: With my great aunt, or with, with her mother? Speaker 1: With her mother. Speaker 2: That, I'm not clear about. I know she went to my great aunt when she, when she was a teenager. Speaker 1: Okay. So she'd lived with her as a child. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. And, and what is her birth order in the family? Speaker 2: She was the oldest. Speaker 1: And she was the one who was sent to live with the great aunt, and the other kids stayed at home. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And she was pretty much responsible. Again, typical story in a lot of families, you know, and I don't think that, that's--so she was the primary caretaker for her siblings, yeah. Speaker 1: While she lived with them. Speaker 2: Yeah. And her mother would be out working and doing, you know, whatever job she could, but, you know, it's one of those stories where I've got to be out here doing this, so you have to be home helping with the kids. Speaker 1: And, and as a teenager, she then went to live with her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her, her aunt. Speaker 1: --her aunt. And did she continue her education? Speaker 2: She did. She--so she went to Catholic school on the island, so she went all the way through to high school. Went--and, again, this is a story I've never understood fully, but left--once she graduated--she did graduate from high school, and then she went off island to New York [New York] to--my understanding is to go to college, and I don't know what happened there. She didn't go. And, instead, ended up working in one of the department stores. I want to say Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.], but one of the, one of the department stores in, in, in the city. Speaker 1: But she came to New York by herself? Speaker 2: Yeah. She was sent with--I think from Catholic school, she was sent for by this family to go to college and in between that journey and going to college, it didn't happen, and then she ended up working. Story_ID: 670946 Speaker 1: When did she meet your father [Earl Harris]? Speaker 2: So it's a small island, so they knew each other, and there was a big age disparity, and my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] was my father's third wife. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yes, so, so she--I--so they'd, they'd known each other since she was, I think, a teenager because, again, the families, you know, are all sort of connected in some way, events and parties and so she knew of my father. They knew each other. I'm not sure. So they met in, in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] when she was a kid, and I don't know how they reconnected. I do know one of the connections was through my father's sister, my aunt, who lived in New York [New York], so I'm not sure if when they were both in New York they saw each other there because she was sort of the family matriarch on, on my father's side, so people would kind of, you know, when you go and you sort of travel, and everybody collects--there's usually one family person that's the anchor that everyone congregates at the house for parties, holidays, you know, all of that sort of stuff, so my aunt was that sort of person, and I'm not sure if that's sort of where they were connecting, but they did-- Speaker 1: Your father's sister. Speaker 2: And my, my father's sister. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Leona. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Leona Morgan [ph.]. And so she--so, you know, again, with the story, my, my father was forty-two when I was born. My mother was twenty-four. And I was, I think, an unplanned surprise, and so when my aunt--I remember my aunt specifically telling me the story that she had gone to St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] to visit my, my dad, and my mom was hanging, you know, cloth diapers, I guess, in the, in the time, on the, on the clothing line, so that's how she learned of my, my birth. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: So it was an--unexpected surprise. But I have my aunt's middle name. My middle name is Leona, which was named after her. Speaker 1: And hanging cloth diapers, wow. That's what, that's what you used then (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I was--well, I'm not that young. So (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --I'm dating myself, but, yeah. Speaker 1: But you're also from the islands. Speaker 2: Yeah, from the islands, yeah. Speaker 1: So it's different. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: So where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in St. Croix, but then we--within a year, we were in St. Thomas. Speaker 1: So they were living in St. Croix. Speaker 2: Right, after my birth, yeah. Story_ID: 670947 Speaker 1: First, tell me, when you look back to your childhood, what's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Pause) My earliest childhood memory is us living as a family, again, in this concept of, the house above was in the process of being built, but we were in the apartment below, and it was an efficiency. And my earliest childhood memory is crawling, like walking, crawling, in that little efficiency apartment, just happy. That's my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where was this? Speaker 2: This was in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 670948 Speaker 1: And what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember as a child (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my god. I remember this white, white stove, this small little white stove. I remember my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] cooking. I remember her being in like a, like a short--sleeveless housecoat type dress. I remember being held by her and being on her shoulder. I remember being held and hugged by my father [Earl Harris]. I, I remember that very vividly. I remember we had sort of like a little porch area outside, and I used to just kind of sit outside, and the house faced the airport [Harry S. Truman Airport; Cyril E. King Airport, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands], but, you know, obviously, we were high on a hill, and you could see the planes, so I always used to remember watching the planes and wondering like where people were coming and going and wanting to be on a plane and wanting to be going somewhere. That--those are my, most--and--but just seeing the sea of blue, beautiful water, just always being surrounded by water. That's one of my--you know, you go into town, and you'd be on the waterfront, and you were surrounded by water. You'd go to the beach. You were surrounded by water. You could even go on the other side of the island [St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands], and your vista was always beautiful blue water. It was green and blue. But I just, just always remember green--looking through the green trees at the airport and always seeing blue. Maybe that's why it's my favorite color. I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: Beautiful. Story_ID: 670949 Speaker 1: Do you have siblings? Speaker 2: I do. I have one brother [Gamal Harris]. We're a year and a day apart. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), so. Speaker 1: And he is the second child. Speaker 2: He's the second, yes. Speaker 1: So I'd like to talk about the [U.S.] Virgin Islands. So you, you lived in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] for a short time, then moved to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]. St. Thomas is the bigger island, correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct. Speaker 1: And there are three, St. John [U.S. Virgin Islands], St.-- Speaker 2: Well, St. Croix is actually bigger than St. Thomas. Speaker 1: Oh, sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In terms of-- Speaker 1: Population. Speaker 2: --population, correct, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. St. Croix, St. Thomas, and St. John-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --are the islands, right? Can you talk about the islands and when you were growing up, you, you mentioned earlier about the mix of cultures, but just describe St. Croix as you're--excuse me. Speaker 2: St. Thomas. Speaker 1: St. Thomas as you were growing up. Speaker 2: As I was growing up. So, again, you know, growing up in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], I don't know if you remember--and, again, I learned this later in life studying history, and especially Caribbean history and Latin American history, but the Virgin Islands, to my understanding, was this very sort of little sleeping backwater area. You know, after the [U.S.] military left and, and all of that. It was a small, small little island, like, you know, we talked about people lived off fruit. There were services there. You know, as, as you began to build a governmental infrastructure, there began to be more opportunities, and I remember as a kid growing up, by the time I grew up, I was growing up in the time where we were having our first black governor [Melvin Herbert Evans], so all of the governors, you know, in my father's [Earl Harris] lifetime, my mother's lifetime were white, white men. And so I was coming into the--to, to my young adulthood and my childhood just as we were beginning to get people of color in power, but when you talk about different ethnicities, I grew up on an island in my time where everyone I knew that was in power or, or had means were of color, right, so I grew up with men who ran their own businesses, right. I remember as a kid, you know, I went to school. We had to wear uniforms, so every, every season, every summer, we would go to the store. I remember the store out by marketplace, and we would go and get the fabric, and my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] would sew the uniforms, or we would get somebody else to sew the school uniforms. He was, he was a light skinned man, but he'd grown up in the island, and biracial multi, multiethnic. I remember going into Market, Market Square [Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands] where a lot of the local people would sell their fruit, would sell all kinds of, you know, vegetables, and all kinds of, you know, stewed tamans and, and different food stuffs. These were all dark black skinned Caribbean, West Indian, Virgin Island women. Story_ID: 670950 Speaker 1: You were telling me about the--who you're seeing, including the women who were selling-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --fruit and-- Speaker 2: So I'm seeing all of these hues, the beautiful hues of brown, and black, and yellow and mocha and cinnamon and latte. And then we'd go and buy fish in Frenchtown [U.S. Virgin Islands], and then you see, you know, basically, what looks like French, Anglo-French folk. And then you'd go into town on the main street or on the waterfront, or you'd go to a restaurant, and then you would see white Americans, or you would see Europeans. I mean, I remember, as a young kid, maybe like ten, going to--we had a Gucci store on the island because people--you know, we--in the '60s [1960s], once Cuba closed down, the VI really skyrocketed because people needed a warm climate to vacation in, and so you'd think about all those people with yachts and boats or resort season travelers, the [U.S.] Virgin Islands was a stop. And I, I always remembered meeting a lot of people who would come down for vacation, and, basically, sell their house, sell their stuff and buy a home on the island, so they got it. They would come and see the beauty and splendor of this, and, and they wanted to be a part of it, so, again, from a very--I remember seeing Japanese people, you know, Asian people. So very early on, I, I had this interesting mix of very local, West Indian, Caribbean, but also very cosmopolitan, because we had, you know, European stores. We had--my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] worked in the Continental [Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands], which sold like--I always remember for years having this Scottish wool shawl that she gave me, which you couldn't get--I mean, this was very expensive, so I remember this sort of juxtaposition, or this dichotomy of just this very wealthy, affluent, traveler lifestyle and, and catering to that type of person in addition to this sort of very local Caribbean island, West Indian experience, so that, that was my experience growing up. My, my mother, we used to--you know--we used to go to the beach. My father [Earl Harris], my father had this sort of guy's hang out at Sebastian restaurant. I have this picture in my home of this; this photographer took of the waterfront with Sebastian's [Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands] in 1967. It's gone now. It's like a jewelry store (laughter). It's like, it's like where all the tourists come to--from the, the cruise ships go to shop. But, you know, a lot of the, the memories of my childhood are gone because they've either been converted to tourist shops or they've just been destroyed. Story_ID: 670951 Speaker 1: What work did your mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] and your father [Earl Harris] do as you were growing up (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, yes, so my--so, again, my father--just going back, so, you know, his journey, just in short, was from the store in Harlem [New York, New York], and then he would tell me stories about being a porter on the trains to Connecticut. Speaker 1: So when--oh, there. Okay. Speaker 2: Because remember, he was an older person, so, you know, all-- Speaker 1: Well, then you had--before-- Speaker 2: Oh, on the island. Speaker 1: So when--actually, this brings up a different question because he went to New York [New York], but then came back. Speaker 2: Correct. Came--so in--as--left from sort of teenagers to twenties, thirties. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right, and then went back as a forty year old man, correct. Speaker 1: Oh, as a grown man he went-- Speaker 2: Yeah, when I--when he-- Speaker 1: --back. Speaker 2: --moved back with his kids, yeah. Speaker 1: So did, did he and your mother get together in the U.S., or did-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, and they, they moved back to--why did they move back? Speaker 2: That, I don't know. I think at that point in his life, he was done with the states. You know, there are a lot of stories. It was stressful being a black man in America, and, especially, a black Caribbean man where you knew where you came from, and you knew differently, and you had a different ability to exercise your, your power. I knew that the godmother that raised him, again, she had land. She had property. So when she died, she actually bequeathed that to him, so he had some apartments in town that he rented and had income from, so I think, you know, I think it's just one of those inflection points. It happened for me, too. When you have kids, you really begin to think about--you know, I was his first child. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Even though he had been married, so there were no kids from the previous marriages. Speaker 1: And had he married West Indian women or American women, or-- Speaker 2: I think they were both American. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I never knew anything about them. He never talked about them with me, never saw any pictures. It just was like a family--quiet family--nobody discussed it, so I don't know. One, I think, died of cancer, and then the other one, I'm not sure if they divorced, but I know that it didn't, it didn't last, so I think for him, potentially, having a child, I think, was maybe the trigger to say it's time to go back home. Speaker 1: And when he came back, because his aunt had left him land-- Speaker 2: They didn't live in town. They lived in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], and then he had been--I don't know how he got the land that he had to build the house he had on. I know it was a family transaction, so I think the St. Croix living was to at least have that first apartment built, so that you could go and live in the house and then build from there. I mean, I do remember as a kid, friends, his friends, his--people coming over and building with him, like they were laying the concrete. You could see the metal, the metal bars as they were pouring the foundation. I remember that as a kid because you would go upstairs to get to the car, and you would see all the work being done on the house. People would come up for the weekend when they weren't working, so it was a, it was a labor of love, a slow process, but I think the other piece that I saw as a kid was this, again, this spirit of entrepreneurism. You help each other, and you build things on your own. You know, there was no construction company to come and build your house. You had to get the guys you knew who weren't working on other, other people's houses and their other jobs, and then you would--they would fit you in as they could. That's what I remember as a kid. Speaker 1: And, and did he have a shop in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] when you were growing up (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, so, no, no. So when he got back to St. Thomas, he actually got involved in politics, so he was on the utilities commission [Public Utilities Commission]. He was involved in a lot of other things, and so that part, as a young kid, too, I remember a politi- political parent. Again, I, I think you can't live in a community like that and avoid politics because it's, it's--I--that's the other thing I remember my father distinctly saying to me is his daily bread. Like, if you want to eat and live and thrive, you need to be politically engaged. You need to be politically active. And I saw the manifestation of that because if your candidate wasn't in power, you didn't have a job. Like, you, you lived it. I mean, you know, I remember experiences like that, you know, where you back the wrong candidate or he--your man is out. You're scrounging around. Maybe you're working here. You're working there. You're getting a little money doing whatever. I mean, I remember that. I remember my father going through those type of phases. Speaker 1: And what about your mom? Speaker 2: My mother, again, was, was more, again, more the career route, so my mother was an executive assistant for the regional vice president for a bank that handled all of the Caribbean region, and so that was her work, so she was the more corporate grounded, traditional pathing, and my father was sort of the entrepreneur, build a house, collect the rent and kind of, you know, get engaged in the community. Story_ID: 670952 Speaker 1: How long did you all live in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] before you came to the states? Speaker 2: So my, my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] left my dad [Earl Harris], and we actually relocated to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. She--we moved to Philly when I was in seventh grade, in seventh grade. Speaker 1: So you were about how old, twelve? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like eleven, twelve, yeah. Speaker 1: So in that--in the time that you were growing up there, you, you just described the kinds of entrepreneurial ventures that you saw and all of that. Was the country already beginning to change and become more, more tourist focused when you were there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I mean, I remember--so I left and then I--so I remember growing up as a kid, and I--this is another vivid memory. My brother [Gamal Harris] and I--like, we literally could leave school, and if my father was out or maybe on his way home already, and we'd missed him, and my mother wasn't ready to leave, we could hitch a ride home with people, like family, friends of family, and get home, get to the top of the hill, walk home together. By the time I was leaving, and, and maybe, you know--by that point, I would say that things were beginning change. Like it wasn't that safe. I, I think it was-- Speaker 1: It wasn't that safe? Speaker 2: Well, or just that you weren't doing things like that anymore. I remember, it wasn't until later on, but I--and I don't remember as a kid at that age hearing or knowing anything about drugs or the police. I don't--at least from my perspective, it was not in my awareness at that point. I think those type of things didn't happen until like sort of much later, teens, early twenties where it really began to transition because, again, the, the economic demographic of the people that came to the island were, you know, the wealth was still there, and, and the island hadn't begun to become as built up, so all of these developments that you see--and I think, too, the, the shift had happened by the time I was leaving to go to Philadelphia where from the--I would say from the time I was nine to twelve, so nine years old to twelve years old. I remember being a nine year old girl and going to the legislature [Legislature of the Virgin Islands] and seeing, you know, a black female senate president. I remember knowing a black chief justice of the court because, remember, we had our court, and then the next court up would be the, the circuit court in Philadelphia [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit], so there's a lot of autonomy. Speaker 1: So, so St. Thomas is connected to Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Well, because of the court, you know, in terms of appeals, right, so the court is independent in the VI. If you appeal, you're going to go to the states, and the Philadelphia court was the court, the appellate court-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --that was connected to that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to that territory. The chief of police was a black man. So by the time I was in my formative years as a teenager where you really begin to form your concept of what's, what's achievable in, in life. I, I saw all of that. So--and it was good. You know, what I'm saying? So it wasn't tarnished by, oh, were there drugs? Was there all kind of stuff coming in? It was a very strong time. I mean, all of these people had studied overseas or even--or not overseas, but off island. Some of them had started at the university, College of the Virgin Islands [University of the Virgin Islands, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands], but a lot of them went to historically black colleges [HBCUs], went overseas, and then came back and were being impactful in the, in the island. Speaker 1: Well, and they--is--the University of the West Indies [sic.], where is that? Speaker 2: Well, it's--when I was growing up, it was C, CVI, College of the Virgin Islands, and then over time, it got its university status. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I grew up on an island where I just grew up around a historically black college. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean, that's one of the trad- one of the historical black colleges. Speaker 1: Which is somewhat unusual. Speaker 2: Yeah. And it was an aspiration of mine to go. I mean, I--and even my--I have cousins that went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Howard and--or, not Howard--Hampton, Fisk and Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. So it was always on my radar. I mean, to me, that was the bastion of, you know, where, where talented black people went because I grew up on an island around talented black people. That's something I aspired to, and education was something that was important to my family and to me. It wasn't--I think economically, I hadn't figured out how that was going to happen, but I knew the outcome was something that I wanted in life, and that I, I would have wanted to have studied at a black institution. Story_ID: 670953 Speaker 1: Where did you go to school when you were in, in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]? Speaker 2: Parochial education. So, again, you know, you think about the things that influence you in life, and there was always this sort of--you know, my, my--both my parents were willing to spend extra money to put me in environments where I had less people in the classroom and more attention. And so, for me, you know, when you think about this dynamic now in society where it's sort of a value judgment of public is better than private, for me, you know, I, I think that economics have something to do with it in terms of the community that you create in a classroom, right, who can afford to be there and who can't. But I do remember, like I said, there were times when it was a struggle, right, for my dad [Earl Harris] and my mom [Theresita Shelburn Harris] to do these things, but they--that came first before anything else, you know, we went without stuff to be able to go to school. My parents actually separated when I was eight, so, you know, that's--that, that was sort of the beginning of that, that whole journey, but I, I always remember going to parochial school, so I--but it was all different religions (laughter), so my, my early years, I was in Moravian school, and then I went to an Episcopalian school, and then I went to a Wesleyan--Wesleyan school [Wesleyan Academy, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands], and I met all these interesting people because, you know, it was always grounded in faith, and you had religious classes. But I grew up early on being exposed to faith but understanding that it could manifest in a lot of different ways because you had all these different denominations, but at the end of the day, those, those entities, those institutions, the churches were the ones creating schools as a form of income, as a form of educating, and, and that was a very popular thing in, in the island, and I--there was definitely this feeling that, that education was different than going to the public school. I don't agree. Like I said, I think for me, the benefit was it was a smaller class size and more attention. Story_ID: 670954 Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the church in your family? Speaker 2: So it's, it's a little complicated. So my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris], obviously, grew up Catholic, went to Catholic school her entire life, so she had the full on, and, and she was not a spiritual--I mean, she wasn't--she, she--church was important to her, and it was very important to her that we be baptized, I had a godmother. My father [Earl Harris] grew up in the Episcopalian religion, went to church every Sunday with his godmother, and somehow through the end of all of that, became very anti-church, so between the two of them, they couldn't agree, and I was never baptized and never--so my godmother was always putting pressure on my mother to have me have communion and do all of the things I needed to do to have, to have her be my legitimate Catholic godmother, and it just wasn't something that they could agree on. I think what going to--so I did not grow up with a church experience on Sunday. I grew up with the church experience during the school week, so I had to take Bible study. I remember failing one year because I asked--I kept challenging the teacher, and he gave me an F because I asked too many questions, so (laughter)--and I just kept saying, "Well, but if God loves me, why, why wouldn't he--why would he have a problem with me asking these questions? I just want to understand." And so, yeah, he was from Trini- and he was very authoritative, and, you know, just, you don't question. You just receive it and take it with you. And I remember distinctly my father going up to the school and giving them, giving them a lot of grief because this, this wasn't okay. I, I became very spiritual later on in my life, but, but I--what I always look at that time is that God has always been around me just not in a traditional way. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And that's what I think growing up in the Caribbean has made me just a very untraditional person, like tradition--and, and I think the other thing, too, is even as a kid, just never accepting what people told me at face value. I had to, I had to test it. I had to ask. And I have a right to ask, and I, I felt empowered to ask, and if--even if you failed me for asking, I was okay with that. I don't ever--I don't even remember crying for getting the F. I was just like, well he's mad I'm asking all these questions, so it was a very interesting, interesting experience, but it didn't make me less spiritual or more spiritual. It--I, you know, I think it's kind of like the whole charter school argument now. You know, when you have a portfolio of options for educating your child, and you have the choice and the ability to pay for something different, you have optionality. I think when you don't have that, then you have to, you have to make do with the choice you have. Story_ID: 670955 Speaker 1: I want to talk about skin color because that's always (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Let's talk about that (laughter). Okay. Let's talk about that. Speaker 1: --a sensitive topic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole]. Speaker 1: --in our communities, and, and you're-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --coming from an island that you've just described all of the different peoples who have populated the island over time, and, you know, you yourself are very fair skinned. How--what are the skin color dynamics on St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], and how did you navigate that? Speaker 2: Ooh, so that's, that's been--it's been a very--it's been a very interesting journey, and so I will start with the overarching mantra that I have which is race--I think growing up in the islands and my experience with skin color, I think by the time I was eleven, I, I distinctly remember this, eleven, twelve years old, internalizing that race is a social construct, and it has nothing to do with me, and the reason I said that is because--I would say twelve because it kind of solidified when I moved to the states, so I'm the lightest person in my family. My family, your complexion--my, my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris], outside of my mother, who was always frustrated that she always passed for everything but black. I mean, she--always mistaken for Hispanic, Hawaiian, Italian, you know, everything, so she had her own issues and journey with race, but I remember growing up in my family being teased a lot for being this light skinned. Speaker 1: By family members? Speaker 2: By family members. My father [Earl Harris] used to call me his little white cheese, and his little--but, yeah, and so--or when I would--you know, if I was too pale, he would say, "We need to get you out in the sun and get you some color," so that was, that was what I experienced in the home with someone that was supposed to sort of accept you no matter what, but what I realized, that was his own issues with color and race and didn't--you know, is what it was. But he wasn't the only one. I would go home or if I'd be out and you'd see people. They'd say, "Oh, my god. Why you so light? You know, you don't get out in the sun." "What's wrong with you? Get your daughter out in the sun." So this was like this pervasive thing that I would hear, and I, I remember one summer actually getting sun poisoning because I was trying to get darker. I had to go to the doctor. I had to get this medicine 'cause my--I mean, I was just--I had ruined my, my gums were a mess, so as a young kid, remembering so--wanting so desperately to be black, like be dark and, and darker, you know, and, and loving it. Like not--so I grew up as a kid knowing that black is a thing of beauty, and I wanted--you know, and I, I was trying to do what I could about it, but it was what it was. So I moved to the states, and I'm now living in a town where it's very Jewish. Irish people go to the Catholic school, on the way to my school [Thomas K. Finletter Elementary School; Thomas K. Finletter School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I remember getting on the bus, and these two Irish boys on their way to school, got on the bus, saw me, and said, "Oh, my god, look at the little N girl." And I looked at them, and I said--I--I'm gonna--I said, I said, "Thank you." (Laughter) And I said, I said, "You think I'm black? Thank you so much." And the bus driver died laughing, died laughing, and they thought I was crazy. Those two guys looked at me, and they didn't even know what to do with me because what they thought they were doing in terms of hurling me an insult, I was like, finally, somebody recognizes I'm black. And I said that. "Finally, finally, somebody sees I'm black." And so they were, they were horrified because they didn't, they didn't know what to do with that. And then you fast forward, and so that's, you know, middle school, and then you get to high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and then I have guys hitting on me 'cause I'm, I'm--then I'm hearing terms that I never heard in the Caribbean, you know, red bone, high, high yellow, you know, all the things that they say about-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --light skinned girls, and-- Speaker 1: They didn't say that there. Speaker 2: I didn't hear those terms until I moved to the states. That's just not what we--you know, that's not a-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --terminology that we used down there. But what--so and then getting all this attention because I'm, I'm black. I mean, so there's no question about that, or I had been accepted into this tribe, but I'm, I'm on this other side of the spectrum that somehow makes me more attractive or more, you know, desirable or whatever. Story_ID: 670956 Speaker 1: So what I got very early on as a teenager, you know, by the age of thirteen, was that this has nothing to do with me. This is, this is other people's stuff, and this is institutionalized, intentionalized, you know, sort of mind work, and it was very freeing because it allowed me--so, so by the time I was a teenager, I had a couple thoughts; I was very distinctly anchored and secure in my, my space as a woman of color, as a black woman. As a Caribbean woman, I knew my heritage. I knew where I came from. I was proud of where I came from. I, I was grounded in the fact that I was a woman of color, a black woman. Sometimes it was a struggle convincing--I've had black people say, "Oh, well, you're not really black. You know, you're honorary black," or, "you're too light to be black." Or, you know, "We'll accept you in, but really you look white." Or my black friends saying, "Oh, who's that white girl? Oh, it's Tamara [HistoryMaker Tamara Harris Robinson]." You know, so this, this concept of skin and race and color, I've, I've dealt with my entire life, but the thing that I'll say is that the, the privilege that my light skin affords me sometimes to be in rooms and, and have people not feel as uncomfortable because maybe they perceive me as the lighter skinned black or the other black or not so black, allows me--I'm never forgetting that it's a privilege and what I'm supposed to do with that, right. I never sit there and say, oh, good, I can pass. Or, good, I don't--you know, I--it, it allows me to be even stronger in my advocacy because the one thing that would shut you down to me is, is gone, right. So it's helped me in my advocacy work. It's helped me--and as I've traveled--I've, I've lived overseas, you know, I've traveled. When you get out of the U.S., you know, you find people are still curious about skin, but your nationality frequently, you know, is, is the, is the primary presumption, and there, there's a curiosity about why you may look the way you look. But it's seen as a blending and mixing of ethnicities, as opposed to this defining thing about who are you and what you can accomplish and what you're defined as, so, you know, what I always say to young students of color is, you got to get out, travel, get out of the states. You have got to see that this world is, is not this, this confining set of, of, you know, restrictive thoughts about something that has nothing to do with--something to do with pigment. You got this much pigment, and then people are going to define your entire life for you. Does that, does that make any sense? And when you get out of this country, you begin to see and--see outside of that box. But it's been--race is, is a challenge. I've gotten to a stage in life now where I don't, I don't have to explain myself to anyone. You know, I, I travel. If I go to Miami [Florida], if I go to Latin America, the first people thing, people speak to me in Spanish. You know, Hispanic people are always--you know, I think race, what it does do is it creates this sort of community that if you are wanting to connect, it's an easy way to connect, but when you don't sit in a defined box with race, you have to work a little harder to connect with people. Story_ID: 670957 Speaker 1: When you came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so you're a teenager, are you speaking with an accent? Speaker 2: I never was. I was always teased when I was a kid. My, my brother [Gamal Harris] has a very strong accent. I--still to this day--I--even as a kid, people would tell I talked white. I talk like a Yankee. I just, you know, I was--I had my own stream. I was not easily defined ever. And, and I, I don't know if I shared this on the questionnaire, but one of the first jobs I had was at the local PBS station [WTJX-TV, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands]. I was a voiceover for a kids show somehow called 'Under the Taman Tree' ['Undah de Taman Tree']. And I had a contract, and, it was, you know, a local kids' show, and we would-- Speaker 1: In Philadelphia. Speaker 2: No, in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Speaker 1: In St. Thomas, oh. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I was, I think, ten when I had my first TV contract (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First TV contract. And so I was this voiceover, but the station manager lived in our apartment building or apartment complex where I lived with my mom [Theresita Shelburn Harris], and, you know, we would socialize 'cause his--he had kids, so we would always kind of congregate, and he just loved my voice. And he said, you know, we're looking for somebody who has a Caribbean accent but very strong diction, very--you know, and so I was hired for two seasons to do this show as a kid. I had a contract. My--you know, we, we had somebody look at it, and so even from that early age, I--but, again, it wasn't acting in front of the camera, but it was my ability to speak and, and be heard, and so, again, you know, because I was not typical, I was chosen, and, you know, I, I mean, I--they were looking for a very--but, again, what was interesting was the man who hired me was a black man, but he was from the states, so I always wonder, you know, I always wonder now like if it had been a Caribbean person, you know, would he have been looking for that? But, yeah. My--I think the thing that I would say about being this light is that what you find when you're not a clear color that people can identify you with that it's, it's one thing because people will welcome you in different ways, and it might afford you privilege, but I think the deeper issue is that your authenticity is always questioned. You know what I'm saying? I think that's what happens when you grow up biracial, mixed race, is that you, you know, until you mature and you really begin to define who you are, I think it's tough as a teenager, I think it's tough as a kid, I think it's tough as a young adult sometimes when you're trying so hard to be in communities and be accepted because you're always in this defensive position of having to explain that you belong, and I think you, you hit an inflection point as an adult. At some point, you know, all of us have different points in our lives, but there comes this point where you get to a point where you say, I'm going to create the community I belong in. I, I, I'm, I'm enough. I don't have to define me. And if you have a problem and you can't handle me because you can't define me, then you don't get to be a part of my community, you know. Story_ID: 670958 Speaker 1: Let's go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. You come with your mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] and your brother [Gamal Harris], correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no. My brother stayed in the islands [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Speaker 1: Oh, he stayed. Speaker 2: With his--with my dad [Earl Harris], yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So it's the two of you who come. Where do you go? Speaker 2: We lived in--so she got a transfer with the bank that she worked with, and so we moved to Philadelphia, so we moved to an apartment. Speaker 1: What, what area of Philadelphia are you living? Speaker 2: It was near Cheltenham [Pennsylvania]. It was near Cheltenham (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so you enter high school. Speaker 2: No. I had finished-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --out middle school. Speaker 1: Okay. Where did you go to school? Speaker 2: Finletter elementary [Thomas K. Finletter Elementary School; Thomas K. Finletter School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], well, Finletter elementary into middle school, so I went there through eighth grade (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is what years now? Speaker 2: Okay. Don't quote me on the years, but I went there--I finished out seventh grade and eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So if I started high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in '80 [1980], so this would have been '79 [1979], '78 [1978] into '79 [1979]. Story_ID: 670959 Speaker 1: Is Finletter [Thomas K. Finletter Elementary School; Thomas K. Finletter School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] a public school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about Finletter. Speaker 2: So a typical public school, you know, very mixed, so it was a nice experience. My, my neighborhood where I lived, my apartment building, I had a good friend. He was a black male. I had Jewish friends. You know, it was, it was a transition, but I was able to develop some very strong friendships. Went to my first bar- you know, bat mitzvah, bar mitzvah, so those were like experiences so I, I had like the typical, you know, at least East Coast middle school experience. And then, well, I had one, one friend. Her parents owned--they were very entrepreneurial. They had a candy store. Then they turned it into a grocery store, so I actually worked for them after school. So, again, very, you know, (unclear). Speaker 1: At what age? Speaker 2: At thirteen, yeah, yeah, so we did--you know-- Speaker 1: And what did your mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris]--she was working for the bank that she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was, yeah. And she still was an executive assistant, yeah. Speaker 1: So when you--you're, you're now interacting with Americans, so some West Indians talk about feeling kind of a culture shock-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --not always being welcomed. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So I'm curious, what was your immersion into America like? Speaker 2: That's a good question. So I think it was, it was easier than I expected. Again, it was not--I, I didn't--you know, again, outside of some of those smaller like racial--I mean, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was interesting because the area I lived in, I--you know, that was a very unusual experience on the bus. That never happened to me again. So, you know, in terms of that being sort of a daily existence, that was not my experience. I remember my teachers being, you know, very lovely. They were all, all white (laughter), so, you know, but I never remember being made to feel less than. I mean, the principal was very welcoming. I played in the, the band. I actually was in a play. We did 'Damn Yankees,' in my eighth grade year I did that. So, you know, I had like a typical school life. I don't remember being this kid that was sort of isolated and didn't feel like she fit in. That wasn't my, that wasn't my-- Speaker 1: What did you play (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) experience. I played the flute. And I have to say, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], I think part of the reason that, that happened was, as I said to you, when I was in school in--even in parochial school [in Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands], I had two white female friends; one was from Louisiana, one was from Georgia. You know, so, again, I think I had this exposure to American kids that allowed me to integrate a little bit more successfully than maybe somebody that might have just grown up, been only around a certain kind of kid or environment and then have to be in the states because it is different. I think for me, the biggest, the biggest occurrence came in high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then in college, as opposed to middle school because at that point, you don't have--I think in terms of your understanding of history, you know, you're still sort of more welcoming because you have less filters by which to eliminate people or more demands to actually be in a box. When what I found was interesting for me is when I started getting exposed to sort of race relations, race issues, and realizing--it hit me, I would say, sort of--not necessarily in high school, but really in college that I didn't have the typical black American experience. I mean, again, I grew up--so when people would talk with frustration about what was happening in the states, and they needed to see this happening and this person in power and this--you know, more teachers and--that wasn't my experience as a kid. I, I--so I almost felt like, why do we have to beg for this? Like this is normal. This--you should never have to explain why this should have to be justified, so I think that's when, you know, when you say fitting in and really beginning to understand what my experience was like versus, you know, somebody coming from the South, I mean, that's--I think when you start going to college is when you really start getting an exposure to Americana, you know, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you go? Speaker 2: I went to University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Story_ID: 670960 Speaker 1: Actually I want to ask you a--something about your family. You left your father [Earl Harris] and your brother [Gamal Harris], they, they stayed. Was that difficult for you? Speaker 2: Yes, extremely. It was, it was not a good time for either of us, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you stay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a lot of-- Speaker 1: --in touch with your brother? Speaker 2: Not for a couple of years. It was tough. Speaker 1: And how old was he? Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: He's-- Speaker 2: We're a year apart, so he was-- Speaker 1: You're, you're like a year apart. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So--and were you close at home? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was a struggle. It was a struggle. It was tough. It was tough. I think, you know, my parents had separated, and it was a very challenging time for my mom [Theresita Shelburn Harris], and my father was not an easy person to be separated from, and I think, you know, looking back as an adult woman, I think she did what she needed to do to take care of herself, and I think she decided, you know, economically, it would have been very hard for her with two kids, and I think-- Speaker 1: So she made the decision. Speaker 2: Yeah. She left. We left. And it was, it was unexpected, so it was a very sad time in our family, yeah. Speaker 1: And how did he manage being in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]? Speaker 2: It was tough. It was tough. Speaker 1: Did he stay there? Speaker 2: He eventually came up for high school, but I was off into college [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] by that, by that time. So it was--you know, I think--I will say that, that was one of the more sort of painful chapters in our family history. I lost touch with them, and it was, it was really sad. And I think that, you know, when I sit in the divorce work that I do now, I, you know, one of my special--what I do is I focus on people going through very high conflict, very extremely stressful divorces, and there's a lot of that type of dynamic there; whether it's just alienation verbally, or physical alienation. And, you know, it's, it's a very--it's, it's extremely stressful on the kids, and it can be very damaging if you don't have support and help and, and all of that. Speaker 1: And your father was more than twenty years older than your mother. How long did he live? Speaker 2: He died in 2007, so he was in his eighties when he passed. Speaker 1: Did you maintain a relationship with him? Speaker 2: Later, yeah. Speaker 1: You rekindled. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And he--I was with him as he died, so I, I--the very amazing journey to actually watch life leave a body, and the conversations you have. I remember him fighting death, and, you know, you think about when you live on an earth for eighty something years, and you've done a lot, you know, a lot that I don't--you know, 'cause, you know, you know, I'm in my--I'm almost fifty, I'm forty-nine, and I think about, you know, when you meet somebody at fifty, there's a whole fifty years that you don't really know about them. So when you have a kid at forty-two, that's four decades of life that you, you know, unless they choose to share it with you, you'll, you'll never know. And when he, he was, he was blind at that point. Diabetes had, had--he was on dialysis, and it just was--it had--his body had declined, and it was time. And he was--and this gets back to the whole Depression [Great Depression] kid and, and what becomes important to you, and he was clutching his hospital gown and crying, and saying he wasn't ready to go, and he was--I remember--now I know where the term death grip comes from because he was holding my hand, and it literally was bruised by the time he let go. And, you know, he--and I said, I said--he said, "Tammy [HistoryMaker Tamara Harris Robinson], you know, I'm, I'm scared. I don't want to go." And he said, I--and I said, "What are you afraid of?" He said, "I don't have any money." And I said, "Well, where you're going, you don't, you don't need that." And he started crying. I guess it hit him like, you cannot take anything. You're not even--your hospital gown, not, not even the casing that your spirit--that's holding your spirit, and in that moment, there was just--I was really struggling to try to--you know, we'd been on so many journeys, so many chapters, all of these type of things, and I was really looking for a way to give him peace, and I just started telling him how much he had been loved, you know, he--I said, "You, your, your kids love you." I said, "You know, even though you and mom are--you know, you weren't always good to mom. She loves you." He started laughing. He said, "I forgive--you know, I hope she forgives me." I said, "She does." And I started talking about all the things he had done in the island, the legacy he had left behind, you know, and I said that he had done the work on Rothschild Francis, and he created a bus, and they had a national day at the schools, and they would have a ceremony. It's an official day on the island, and, you know, I said, "Look at all these kids, this legacy of love that you've left for their history, their culture, their advocacy." I, I started telling him, I said, "Your grandchildren love you." You know, and he just calmed down, and, and then when he said he saw my--his aunt--my, my aunt, his sister, he was waving to her. She passed. And he said she was in the room. And I said, "Okay, well--." He said, "Tammy, it's time for me to go." I said, "Well, then that's what you have to do." I said, "I'll see you on the other side." So if--you know, it's a real testimony to, you know, no matter how challenging, and you take breaks in life, you, you know, sometimes things don't go the way they're supposed to. You know, we're only human, and at the end of the day, you hold onto it. You can't take it with you. You could keep it for a very long time, but you can't take it with you. Story_ID: 670961 Speaker 1: Let's go back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. You went to an all-girls high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: --whi- which was a public school. This, I mean it was a famous school actually (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. It was the first magnet school. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I call it the first magnet school, yeah. Speaker 1: And educationally, as you were now going to school in the U.S., this particular high school is hard to get in, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very competitive. Speaker 1: --and very challenging. How were you as a student? Speaker 2: I was, I was a solid student. I would, I would say that I was not going to win any national honor of merit awards. I worked, so I--you know, the school was in Olney in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I worked in Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then I commuted home to West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at night, so I was doing my homework on the train. I would, you know, my mom [Theresita Shelburn Harris] was a single mom, and I paid for all my school stuff on my own. She worked. She went to school at night. She was going to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], took her eleven years to get her college degree, but she did it. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So I did what I could to make things easier and be independent and take care of myself, and so the thing that I--looking back, I miss, was because I had that type of lifestyle, I didn't get to participate in sports, you know, a lot of extracurricular things that make you part of the school community. I mean, after school, I left, and I had my afterschool life. Speaker 1: Your job. Speaker 2: My job, my afterschool life was my job. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And my homework, and so-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --so that was my school experience. Speaker 1: Did you go to school with Sheila Bridges? Speaker 2: Probably. I'd have to think about that. I was in a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she's maybe a year or so older than you. Speaker 2: A year ahead of me. Okay. Speaker 1: So you might not know 'cause in high school that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it's--it was a big school, and it was very--it was a microcosm of Philly. I mean, you had girls from the hood in North Philly. You had girls from Rittenhouse Square [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, wealthy families that lived in central, you know, central Philadelphia, Center City. You had girls from--you know, Italian girls from South Street, and you had girls from Cheltenham [Pennsylvania], and you had girls from West Philly. I mean, it was a commuter school, and, again, it was just this very special unique environment where you had--you know, you interacted with girls from all economic walks of life, different ethnicities. We were there, we, we didn't have to worry about the boys and the makeup. We got there. We stud- I took Latin when I was in high school. It helped me with my languages. It gave me a very strong foundation. I loved my Spanish class. I loved my English teacher, but I didn't come--you know, science was fine, but I--it's funny. Out of that high school experience, I still wasn't--I didn't come out saying, okay, I'm going to be a doctor, or I'm going to be a lawyer. I didn't come out of--I came out of that experience very confident, but I didn't come out of there knowing my professional direction yet. That, that I would say. It was, it was one of these experiences, but I knew that I came--I was going to an institution where very accomplished women graduated. We did things. And that's the one thing that I would say about legacy, is you were reminded of that at that school. You were reminded of the women who were judges and attorneys and, and serious, you know, people in society because that--at that time when I went to school in the '80s [1980s], they'd had a very amazing reputation, and you would meet girls, high girls, you know, from, from all over, and it was one of the things that made me went to apply to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I actually wanted to go to an all-girls college from that experience. Speaker 1: And that school was unique in the racial and economic-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --diversity because Philadelphia is, is fairly well segregated. Speaker 2: Exact- very much segregated. Speaker 1: Even now. Speaker 2: Absolutely. There are lines you don't cross, right, and--exactly. And, and also, too, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], the fact that it was anchored in North Philadelphia. I mean, it just was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What does North Philadelphia mean? Speaker 2: Well, in terms of the economics, right. I mean, you--it was in the Olney area, so, you know, when--by the time I went to school there, it was in decline, you know, and, I mean, it wasn't a very--you know, you--one--once you went into Mount Airy [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or Germantown, you know, you would see some of the estate homes, or some of the very sort of elegant suburb, suburban communities, but that wasn't Olney. You know, it was definitely a part of the--sort of the urban profile of Philadelphia, so it wasn't as if we were in this beautiful suburban campus, is my point. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So you were in the midst of the city. You had access to the best transportation. I mean, I think what happened going to a school like that is most people--you know, you weren't typically picked up at school. You were taking the bus, the subway, the tram, you know, you, you were, you were in the city, and so, you know, that thing that I think about kids nowadays where you grow up in the suburbs. You're chauffeured everywhere with your parents or a nanny or, you know, high school or college kid that's driving you, you don't get that sort of gritty street sense, street smart, you know what I mean that you would get growing up in Manhattan [New York] or the city. Philly was unique like that. I mean, and I know it's a very segregated place, but, but somehow that school brought it together, and it was, to me, one of the first magnet schools, you know, where you really--you were there because of your academic credentials. You had to pass a test that was--you know, they basically took from the top down and then they cut off, and if you made the cut off, you were in. If you didn't, you weren't. So it was as egalitarian as it could be-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --in a--in, like you said, in a city like Philadelphia that was so segregated. Story_ID: 670962 Speaker 1: Now, you wanted to go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], but you did not. Speaker 2: No. I couldn't afford it. And so I applied to Phila- you know, Pennsylvania schools because I could get scholarships, and it was, it was close to home, you know, at least commuting, commuting wise. Speaker 1: Where did you go? Speaker 2: I ended up going to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], sight unseen. I had not visited the campus, no, we--I did not have--when I went to school, my--and I tell--you know, when I had my scholarship program [New Jersey Advocates for Education], I would tell students this because when you talk to students in Newark [New Jersey], you know, and they look at this, they think, oh, you have this lifestyle, and, you know, you had the best of the best and all of this, but when I went to Pitt, my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] couldn't afford to take me. I actually took the train by myself from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] with my trunk and my suitcase, and took myself to, to campus. Which, you know, when I was a kid--and I would see all these parents driving their kids to school, and, and all the drop offs, and I remember thinking, you know, not frustrated, but just how privileged I was that I could, could do this, grateful. And thinking that I'm going to make the most of this opportunity, so that my kids, when it was their turn, they wouldn't have this experience, so I was taking my kids to college. You know, it was sort of like, I'm doing the college tours. I'm gonna--this is, this, this was my experience, and it's going to get me where I have to go, but it's not going to be my kids' experience. Story_ID: 670963 Speaker 1: Thinking of your mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] moving to the states in order to have a better life, right-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to create opportunity. The cost of living is very different, so it was a struggle for her-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --financially. Was it always a struggle for her? Speaker 2: Always. I--actually, I will say this. She had one stretch in her life that was a beautiful stretch, so, as I said, she--it took her eleven years to get her degree. I actually graduated from college [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and business school [University of Pittsburgh Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] before she did. And she ended up getting her undergrad in, in business, human resources at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so she would go at night, you know, work full time. Sometimes she'd take a semester off. She'd take two classes. She, she worked it out, but it was a slow methodical process, and I'll never forget, forget the day she called me and told me that she got her degree, and with that--and she, at that point, she had always been in an executive administrative position but supporting very powerful people, so the executive vice president, you know, the head of research, all of those type of positions, so she was always good at what she did, and she decided that she was going to go back home. This is the thing about the Caribbean. You always end up back there somehow, some way, somehow, so she had decided, you know, it was time to get back home, and she had never let her relationships go down there. You know, she had done very well when she worked in the bank and had basically grown up with people there, so one of the gentleman that she had known for years, he ended up actually becoming the regional head of Banco Popular, so, basically, he ran the, the banks in the U.S. Virgin Islands, the British Virgin Islands as well, and so when he became the head of that, he was looking for a strong admin assistant. He recruited my mom. So she had her degree, and she packed up her bags and she went home, and she basically was the head--she was his assistant, and then she was promoted to run human resources for that region. Speaker 1: How long was she there? Speaker 2: She was there for a quite a while, actually, for, for many, years, for over ten years, and so she worked with rehabilitation, you know, like employee rehabilitation organizations. She got involved to help the bank, represent the bank when they were being sued by tellers, or, you know, other employees. She did recruitment programs. When they had hurricanes, she had to organize and coordinate and made the efforts to help the employees and, and their, their clients, so, you know, she had to go to Puerto Rico and represent the bank on their behalf. She traveled for the bank. I mean, so she, she took what was a challenging life and accomplished a great deal, you know, for a journey that I think would have put most people on a very different path. Story_ID: 670964 Speaker 1: When you go to University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], what are you studying? Speaker 2: So, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], when I went to University of Pittsburgh--first of all, I didn't want to go to college after I realized I--so I told my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] I was not going to go to college. I was going to be a stewardess (laughter). So because, remember, I grew up wanting to see the world, I was going to see the world, I was gonna be on a plane, I was going to see the world, and the only way I could see that happening was as a stewardess. And my mother said, "I am not going to college and, you know, busting my, my brains to, to have you live that kind of lifestyle." She's like, "You can do that anytime," she said, "you're going to go to college. You're going to get a degree, and then you can do whatever you want, but not without that piece of paper." So freshman year, I was--I wasn't sure. I was--you know, I made up for a lot of lost time as a student because I was--I had such a demanding life as a high school student, so I had a lot of fun freshman year, too much fun. So I had a little sit down chat with my mother, and she said if I didn't get my grades together, I was coming home and going to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and the thought of living at home after I'd worked so hard to get out of there was not even an option, so I, you know, I went back and got my grades together. But I remembered when your sophomore year, you needed to pick your-- Speaker 1: Major. Speaker 2: --your major, and the summer before I went back to school, my mother--again, at this point, she worked for the head of equity research at Provident Bank [Provident National Bank; PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.], which was a regional bank in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and this was a woman, she worked for a woman named Cindy Mezze [ph.], and she was an incredible woman. She had a liberal arts degree, you know, this is when they were really increasing the number of women in, in finance, and so she ran a division, and my mother brought me in--it was almost--she created her own take your daughter to work day, and she brought me into the office and made me spend the entire day there with her, and I got to sit, and I got to meet with Cindy. I got to meet with her boss who was the, the VP of the sort of the, the brokerage side, and then she had me walk into every analyst, equity research analyst's office and talk to them about the sectors they covered, so I talked to a woman who covered the pharmaceutical sector. I talked to an African American male who covered the hotel property real estate sector. I talk to someone that covered automotives. I mean, it was, it was an education, and so she did that, and when it was time to go back to school, and we were having conversations about my major, she said--you know, I wanted to study Spanish. Everything I wanted to do, my mother said, "No, you're not doing that." I wanted to be a Spanish major, and she said, "What are you going to do with that?" And I said, "I'm going to teach." And she said, "How much do teachers make studying Spanish?" So she actually made me go and research that. And it wasn't a lot at the time. And so I said, "Okay, well this is not going to work for me." So she said, "Why don't you do this: why don't--," she said, "you can always minor in Spanish. You know, you can do those type of things." She said, "Why don't you take economics?" She said-- Speaker 1: Your mother? Speaker 2: Yeah. She said because, you know, she tried to talk me into business, and I said I wouldn't do it. And she said, "Why don't you take economics because," she said, "it will help you think strategically." She said, "And from that platform, you can do a lot of things. You can study, you know, socioeconomics, you can study macro, micro. It still gives you an ability to study business if that's something you want to do." And she said, "If you want to go into human resources, it will expand your--," which is what I eventually--I wanted to help people. That's, that's the one thing I knew I wanted to do. And when I was a kid, if you'd asked me when I was nine, ten, you know, what did you want to be? I would have said I wanted to be a lawyer or a judge. Those were the two things I wanted to be. And so I decided to become and economic major, but it was through that experience--and she said--and I remember talking to both Cindy and Libby [ph.], who was one of the research analysts in the apartment--department, and they were both liberal arts majors in college, and I remember Libby saying to me that, you know, she, she was interested in something completely different from finance, but that degree gave her critical thinking skills and the ability to basically have a very wide filter when she was looking at companies, so the last piece was the finance, which she was able to learn, and so my mother said, you know, "Look, with that grounding, economics can take you so very far as a platform for all the things you want." She said, "If you want to be a lawyer, you can apply as an econ major. If you want to be a political science person, if you want to work for the UN [United Nations]. If you want to work in finance. It," she said, "it's the one major that would allow you a lot of opportunity and doesn't box you in and gives you maximum flexibility." And, and she was right because I've, I've been done so much with that. Story_ID: 670965 Speaker 1: So you studied that--you study economics at University of Pittsburgh, and Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] is a town not dissimilar to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. It's about the same size, maybe it's a little smaller, right? Speaker 2: I, I would say it's a little smaller. What I found--I, I agree with you. What I found in Pittsburgh, at least in the, in the area that I navigated at Pitt is--the thing you learn about Pittsburgh is it really is very divided. You've got the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. You've got the city. You've got sort of the wealthy areas outside of there. And so you--and not only that, when you go to a place like University of Pittsburgh, now you're not just dealing with--I would say--almost borderline Midwest, you know, experiences, but now I'm going to school with people who grew up in coal mining towns, people who, you know, are from Philadelphia, but a very different mindset, right, not as cosmopolitan, right. Not as, not as exposed internationally. But what I was able to do, and this is one of the things I always tell my students is, no matter what environment you're in, you have to find the space that's your home, right. And so one of the things that I did is I was able to make a way. We had one of the top graduate schools of international studies, and so when I went in that building, that's where I saw everybody from Africa, from Latin America, from Russia, and then we had East Asian studies department, and that's where you--because I took Japanese my first two semesters at Pitt, I took Japanese. I took French. I love, I love languages. And, you know, decided to focus on Spanish. When I got to Pitt, I placed into third year Spanish because I'd been speaking Spanish from the time I was in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands. It's part of the curriculum, so what I was able to do was actually put myself an in environment in Pittsburgh, in Pitt, that really gave me that international exposure, and then from is there, I was able to get a certificate in Latin American studies. I was able to live overseas in Costa Rica for a summer. I did a research project on their healthcare system because, at that time, they had socialized medicine, so what we're looking at now with the affordable healthcare act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010], I actually lived in a small town with a family, and part of my research project was to take that, that social system that they said was egalitarian and go into a local regional clinic and see if the community and the people in that town were actually getting the same standard of healthcare that people in San Jose [Costa Rica] were getting, so that was my research project. So I was able to do things like that at the university such as the University of Pittsburgh that, to this day, I don't know if I would have been able to do that at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] or another college, so sometimes, you know, when you go with an open mind, you can have some amazing incredible opportunities. Speaker 1: You went to graduate school there as well, correct? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And what was your--what, what were you studying? Speaker 2: So I--so, again, for me, remember, growing up in my experience, I, I knew that--especially dealing with all these folks at my mother's bank [Provident National Bank; PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.] and--is that, you know, having a master's degree was an expectation if I wanted to get to a certain level economically, professionally, and I always thought of myself as a very focused type of serious person. I kind of knew my end game, and I knew that I needed to do that, so one of the things that happened is, at Pitt, they had an M.B.A. fair, at the, at the school, and I was looking at some of the recruiting schools that were trying to get students to come to their M.B.A. program, and one of the schools at the table was the University of Pittsburgh [University of Pittsburgh Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and I had a conversation with the, the executive director at that program, and we talked about my grades. We talked about my study in--overseas in Costa Rica, and what I was interested in, and they were seeking to expand their program, and I was encouraged to apply, which I did, and I was, I was accepted. Story_ID: 670966 Speaker 1: So you go to business school. Speaker 2: Yes. The Katz--Joseph M. Katz business school [University of Pittsburgh Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], yes. So you've decided to follow your mother's advice. Speaker 1: I have. And I see an outcome, and I think for me, it was, again, where could you be impactful? And how could I combine my desire to help people, work with people, and, and have it be financially lucrative, you know, have it--have, have me an ability to be employed? I, I did not follow that vein of own the land. Buy a house. Own real estate. I, I was trying to find a way in Corporate America, and, you know, like I was saying, my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris]--I think if she hadn't introduced me to all of those people where I could see a path, I would probably have not been that focused, and I, I did what I knew and what I was exposed to, and, you know, to this day, I credit her, and I never thought that I would end up actually doing that work. That's the irony of all ironies, that I just wanted to be in HR [human resources]. I wanted to help people. I wanted to be impactful in their lives. I wanted to help them, help them be productive, happy, thriving, functioning, and I thought in a corporate environment with an HR emphasis and background, that I could do that. Speaker 2: And what years did you go to business school? Speaker 1: So I--they had--at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], they had an accelerated program, so you didn't have a summer in between, you just went straight through, so I graduated from undergrad in 1988, and then I graduated from Pitt in 1989. Speaker 2: Ah, okay. Speaker 1: So I went straight through, and at that point I was twenty-one. Speaker 2: And what was your concentration while you were there? Speaker 1: HR. Speaker 2: HR. Story_ID: 670967 Speaker 1: And then when you graduate [from the University of Pittsburgh Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], where do you work? Speaker 2: So I went to work at 3M in Minneapolis [Minnesota]. I--it was a brief-- Speaker 1: Minneapolis? Speaker 2: --stint. I, again, they had what sounded like an amazing program where they were taking talent and trying to really sort of groom the next generation of managers in their HR [human resources] division as they were expanding, and what they were doing was training us in, in corporate, and then as part of our rotation, we had to--as jobs and opportunities came up--we had to apply, and sort of apply and compete with other 3M personnel in the HR fields because, remember, they had corporate, but then they had plants all over the country and international divisions, so I actually ended up applying after my, my training for a position as an assistant human resources manager in Cynthiana, Kentucky at their plant, which, actually, at the time, 'cause, remember, this was the late '80s [1980s], this plant was bleeding edge. This woman was one of their first female engineers that was actually running a major plant. It was a plant that did all of the Post-it Note technology, so in the '80s [1980s] that was-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --one of their big revenue drivers, and so they had a young HR manager, a very noted person, and they were looking for strong talent to support him in the town because this, this was going to be one of their premier plants. So I was flown down there, and I interviewed with the plant manager, the HR manager, other people on the staff. It was very interesting. And I actually was offered the job. I had to compete with other people in other HR divisions that were applying for the same job, and I, I was, I was the one selected, so it was a, it was a big honor. I actually, at the time, wanted to live--after I saw all of this--you know, again, because of my background, and being a woman of color, I did my demographic research and realized that there, I think, at the time, was maybe one black family in the town, so I had made the request that I wanted to live in Lexington, Kentucky, which was about maybe, forty- forty, forty-five minutes away from, from the local town, and I was told at the time that I couldn't do that because part of being an HR person was--the requirement was that you needed to be in the community and, you know, all of that stuff, so I said I understood. I completely understood that thinking, but as a single black woman, to have me--at the time, I was twenty-one, twenty-one, twenty-two, so to have me live in that town with no social life, everyone is sort of there. I'm an HR person, so it's not like people are going to be coming and hanging out with me and telling me (laughter), you know, telling me what life is like at work, that I wanted to go to Lexington. I wanted to study at the school, maybe take a class. It was a much more younger town. I had all my demographic data. I was showing them why this would make me happy, and you would want to have happy--a happy person in this type of job that--really thriving so that you could really be of, of use for the organization and, and do the best in your job. And I was, I was encouraged to let that go. So after a long think, I made the decision that, you know, it wasn't the right opportunity, and I needed to move on because, you know, once you say no to those type of things, you know, we weren't aligned, and there was no way I was going to be able to convince them. And, ironically enough, when I resigned, that's when the, "Oh, well, if you--that's where you want to live, you can," but at that point, it was, it was time to move on, so I ended up relocating to New York [New York]. Story_ID: 670968 Speaker 1: Before you get to New York [New York], the fact that you told these people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I know. Speaker 1: --no when you just--you're just starting out in your career. Speaker 2: Twenty, twenty-two, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you consult with your mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] about this? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What, what was your, what was your process? Speaker 2: So my process was the following: I was, I was very--I was, I was depressed. I was very concerned because I knew if I--the thing that I've always learned even as a kid, and I think because so much of my life was spent navigating spaces where you had to always sort of take care of yourself, you know, you're on the subway. You're on the train. You're going to work. You're doing all of these different things that--I knew how to take care of myself, and I knew how to not put myself in situations that would create very distressing outcomes, so I always had this ability to sort of see two and three steps ahead, that if I did X, Z was going to happen. And if I, and if I, if I was forced to do Y, or if I came up with Y, maybe I could avoid Z, and, and it, it would work out, so that was sort of my approach. My biggest concern at the time was that I had these student loans, and, you know, when you're coming out of school, and this is for anybody coming out of college, undergrad, graduate school, your first concern is how am I going to pay my bills? And so that was my concern, and then the second piece was the--not, not the--for me it wasn't shame. It was just anger at myself that I had made a bad decision that, you know, for the first opportunity that seemed so right, that for this little thing that I wanted to do that would keep me healthy, happy, and sane and preserve my, my wellness so that I could show up and give of myself to the corporation [3M] and do the work they needed me to do, that I wasn't, that I wasn't given that, was actually disappointing. And I remember my, my mentor. He's, he's since passed, but we had this conversa- he was in tears when I was leaving because, you know, I was, I was a noted person, obviously, to--it was like a little star to come and get this job. It was very competitive to compete for this, and so for his mentee to actually get this position, and then, you know, walk away, was just--he couldn't--he didn't get it. And I remember a conversation I had with my mother, and I--she said, "You know what, Tammy [HistoryMaker Tamara Harris Robinson], you have to get to New York. Get to your family," to my aunt, who lived in Queens [New York]. And she said, "You figure it out from there, but what you can't do is go there," because my concern was if I went there, I would lose all of my support system, and it would be even more challenging to, to move on in the next job and to be in a small town [Cynthiana, Kentucky], the options were limited, and my, my desire was not to get a job in Lexington [Kentucky]. You know what I mean? So if it didn't work out, my options--and I did all this research beforehand, so I knew what I was getting into. And I remember my mentor was just so disappointed. You could just see the pain on his face just not understanding. To your point, he said, "How are you saying no to this? Do you understand how lucky you are to have this job?" It was all of this. And I looked at him, and I said, "You have a daughter, right?" And he said, "Yeah." And I said--and she, she was a business major. She had graduated. And I said, "What if she got a job with Kaiser Aluminum [Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation]?" You remember who Kaiser Aluminum is? I said--and I said, "Great job, and she got positioned in, in South Africa." And so she's excited, she's getting money, she's getting the expat [expatriate] salary. And I said, "And they said, 'Yeah, we'd love to have you, only thing is, you can't live in Johannesburg [South Africa]. You have to live in Soweto [South Africa] because that's where the factory workers are, and you have to be in that town where the factory is and the mines are.'" And he--I said, "What would you tell your daughter?" He said, "I'd tell her not to take the job." And as he's telling me this, he literally catches himself and says, "Oh, my god. I get it." And I said, "So why is it different for your daughter and different--why, why does she get that option and not me?" And I said, "Until you answer that question, it's going to be very hard to have diversity in this organization because all I wanted was to know that I mattered enough that you would be able to take care of--you know, make sure that I--I said I was going to pay my rent. I was willing to commute forty-five minutes every day, each way to do this work, and you would have never had a complaint from me. I just needed to be anchored here so I felt safe and secure." And I said, "I, I had to fight for that and threaten to leave before that happened." Speaker 1: That was a lot of confidence you had. Story_ID: 670969 Speaker 1: So you moved back to New York [New York]. You were in, you were in Minneapolis [Minnesota], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You move back to New York. Are you moving to New York with a job, or are you just moving back (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No job. No job. So I live with my aunt, kind of regroup for a minute there. You know, it's, it's a little bit of a ego bruiser to go through something like that, a little, but, you know, it's--I've been through disappointments before, and I would say resilience is something that I've had to go through that cycle multiple times, so I never sat there and thought I wouldn't get better. I just had to sort of recalibrate. So my first--so two things happen. I--when I was in business school [University of Pittsburgh Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], one of the companies I had interviewed with was Prudential [Prudential Financial Services; Prudential Financial, Inc.], and I actually--they had made me an offer--and I said no to go to Minnesota. So, obviously, that was one of the first phone calls I made when I came back, but then that was a whole process to start because I had missed a whole employment cycle, so that was an opportunity, but it was not anything that was even remotely, you know, guaranteed. So in the meantime, I said, I've got to find a temp situation or, you know, so I went to this temp agency. It was an African American male who owned the agency. I can't remember his name now. But he, he had my information, and he said to me, "I'm afraid to place you because I know you're going to get a job, and you're going to leave the opportunity." He said, "This is--this resume is not anything that's even remotely--you know, you're too qualified for part time work." And I said, "Well, I don't have anything right now." So he said, okay. Well--he went through his file. He had a little index card box file, so he's going through his-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --index cards. It's old school. And he pulls out this opportunity, and it's with an insurance agency, and they were looking to hire someone to help them with their college recruitment, so I walk in--and this has been the story of many of my sort of corporate job interviews. So I go to the interview, and the woman takes one look at me, and she says, "You know, I'm just--I don't see it. You know, you're, you're too--we're looking for somebody younger." All these things she said, you know, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Younger? You were pretty young. Speaker 2: I was pretty young, yeah. Again-- Speaker 1: You were, what, twenty-one? Speaker 2: Twenty-two. Speaker 1: Twenty-two, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Twenty-two. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Twenty-two. So, again, don't know what that was about, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], but, you know, it was a-- Speaker 1: It's also interesting that she said that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a whole lot of resistance, yes. I was older. You know, they wanted someone that was closer to--oh, no. That's what it was. She said I was too--she said, she said, I, I was too far removed from school, and I wasn't old enough, and I said--oh, that's what it was. She said I was too young. That's what she said to me. Speaker 1: Okay. That makes-- Speaker 2: She said I was too young. I apologize. Because she said, "You know, we're looking for somebody with a little bit more recruitment experience and all of this." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I said, well--so I started asking a lot of questions, and by the time we finished, you know, I said, "Look, don't you think it's actually better to hire someone that's just pretty much close out of this experience that's just been through a recruitment cycle, been hired, offered jobs by major corporations that could really help students understand, you know, what's going on?" And so by the time we went through the interview, I did get the job opportunity. But in the meantime, Prudential came through 'cause I was interviewing with both (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he was right (laughter). Speaker 2: So I ended up--and he was right, and I called him and apologized. And he said, "I'm not surprised." He was very gracious about it, but I-- Speaker 1: So you didn't even start at the other place? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no. I never even accepted the job. I went to Prudential. Speaker 1: Now-- Story_ID: 670970 Speaker 1: Now, what was your job at Prudential [Prudential Financial Services; Prudential Financial, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Same type of program. They were looking for M.B.A. candidates to work through the asset management group and rotate--again, all--I always got involved in sort of the leadership development type pipelines. And so, again, with the, the training, the goal was to have you run through some, some professional training. I did the, the financial analyst program there. And then, again, you had to go and compete for job opportunities. You had an assigned mentor, and so when I went through my process, one of the opportunities that came up was the opportunity to run this program called the New Business Installation Team [ph.] in the-- Speaker 1: New It Business (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, New Business Installation Team, so it's called-- Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: --New BIT. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what that team did is they managed transition, right. So what you would have is, say, for example, a firm like AT&T [AT&T Inc.] had their defined contribution plan with Fidelity [Fidelity Investments], and they decided, we don't want Fidelity to be our manager anymore. We want Prudential to do it. You would take the money, which was the assets, and then you would take the records, right, all of the statements of the employees, and, basically, you would have--what we did in that transition space was, we--they had the money in the bank. We had a specific discrete amount of time to look through all of the statements, find discrepancies. At the end of our process, the statements had to foot to the assets, and then we cycled and began the program. So I was hired to run that seven person team in Scranton, Pennsylvania, so I had to relocate to Scranton, which was interesting, but we did that. And I--with that job, I really had the benefit--I went marketing. We--so we were going to see Alameda County [California], we were going to Denver [Colorado]. We went to all of these retirement systems to basically pitch for the business for them to bring their assets and their defined contribution plans to Prudential, so I got to interact with some very interesting folks, all males on the team. My boss was a male. Everybody involved was a male. And I remember when we had this--our first big account that I was part of marketing, and my boss sat me down, and he said, "Okay. This, this is it." He said, "We've been working on pitching this business. We've got it." He said, "It's your job," he said, "this, this is a high visibility client, and if you get this, we will consider promoting you to manager after this process is done." It was--I was twenty-four, and I literally had weekly meetings. We had a war room where I had a big white board on the wall, and we had a plan. I had, I had to engage every manager in the process, get all their teams coordinated. We had daily meetings, weekly meetings, and the short story is we, we got it done on time and right, and we had a big party, big celebration, and my promotion came shortly after that. Story_ID: 670971 Speaker 1: You didn't stay at Prudential [Prudential Financial Services; Prudential Financial, Inc.], though. Speaker 2: No. So I--at that time, too, I was dating, and I got engaged, and then we had made the decision to get married, and so after all of that, I needed to transition back to New Jersey because that's where my, my fiance at the time, my ex [Robinson's ex-husband] lived, so, you know, we took some time to sort of navigate back to New Jersey, and then after we got married in ninety- we got married December of '93 [1993]. By June of '94 [1994], we were living in Hong Kong. Speaker 1: And his work took you to Hong Kong? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: And did you work while you were in Hong Kong? Speaker 2: So I took the first year off because we didn't know if the opportunity would be viable. It wasn't with Prudential. It was a small investment fund, and so we said-- Speaker 1: He worked in the same business as you? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And is he American? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. And he--so we went out there, and we said, look, we're going to give this a year, and if it doesn't work, we'll come back, so after the--so that first year, I, I didn't work. I traveled with him because he invested all over Asia, so we--I would go on trips, so I got to experience parts of Asia. But what I did because I can't stay quiet, and I love culture. I, I actually ended up joining the American Women's Association [American Women's Association of Hong Kong], and that was my way to socialize and meet people. And then I started taking Mandarin classes at Chiao Tung University [National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan], so I was studying Chinese, and I was volunteering and hanging out with my, my new husband, and so we--with the AWA, I got involved in fundraising because what they did is they raised money, they had galas, they had different fundraising events, but they got very involved in the Asian community, so they would help at orphanages. They would do different drives at schools, so I did what I like to do, which is meet as many people as I could, so I got involved with their gala, and as part of that journey, I ended up developing a lot of corporate relationships because I would call and ask for room nights at the hotels, or, you know, some gift bag for the auction, so I made a lot of connections, so when we made the decision to stay after the first year, I decided to interview, and I interviewed with a hotel chain through one of the relationships I had there, and then I interviewed with Morgan, Grenfell [Morgan, Grenfell and Company, Ltd.] which subsequently became Deutsche Bank [Deutsche Bank AG]. Speaker 1: And that's where you went to work? Speaker 2: I went to work at, at Morgan, Grenfell. Story_ID: 670972 Speaker 1: When you made the choice to step away from your budding career to get married, what, what went on inside for you with that choice? Because that's a big-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --that's a big decision to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --step away from a career. Speaker 2: It is. So--but what's interesting, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], is I, I have to rewind a minute. So, remember, for me, I, I always think ahead, so I got married in December, and I had been--after I had done that whole New BIT team [New Business Installation Team (ph.)] and worked at Prudential [Prudential Financial Services; Prudential Financial, Inc.], I knew that there were--I wanted to transition to an international job, and it was very interesting because December, the marriage happened, and in January, I started taking Chinese at Berlitz [Berlitz Corporation]. I just started taking Mandarin. I said, okay, I've spoken--I've, I've study Japanese for two semesters. I, I know, I know Spanish. I know a little bit of French, and I started looking at the demographics that were going on, and I said, okay, Japanese is always going to be a useful language, but if I have Mandarin and Spanish, I'd probably have like two--and English--two thirds of the world covered, you know, between, Asia, Taiwan, you know, all--so I started studying Mandarin. And what happened for me is, one of my friends at--who worked at Prudential, she had a girlfriend that was part of a buying group, and she had arranged a buying trip to Hong Kong, and she said, "Look, I know you want to do something with China. I know you want to do something international," that was my goal, to be in international business, I didn't know what, what that was going to look like, so she said, "why don't you come on this trip, and you can go to Hong Kong and Southern China and, and meet some interesting people," and so I went. And we went on this trip. I used up all, any vacation time in the new year, came back. And in the meantime, my ex had been going to business school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and they had a trip to Singapore. I couldn't go. But because I had been in Hong Kong for ten, for ten days, when he was there, he, he had been trying and networking, trying to get to Asia as well. When he was there, he had an opportunity, and people were approaching him to interview for positions, so I--he called me, and he said, "What do you think?" I said, "Well, come back with a job offer, and we'll figure it out." And he came back with a couple of job offers, and so for me, it wasn't a sacrifice. It was actually the next step in something that I had set the intention to that I didn't think I could even manifest. For years, I was going to go to Berlitz for, for a year and get my Mandarin down and network, and try to figure out how to do all of this, so I was at Berlitz. I went on this trip, went to Hong Kong, said oh, it's like Chinatown [New York, New York], except a lot more Asian people (laughter). And so I, so I said, oh, I can do this, you know, and so when the opportunity came for him, it wasn't, oh, my god, I can't leave anybody. I can't do anything. But what I didn't realize at the time to your point is the sense of adventure that we had because we didn't go on an expat [expatriate] package. We didn't--I mean, we packed ourselves up and moved ourselves out there, which is something most people, at that stage in their life would never do. They just wouldn't. It, it takes a lot (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even though he offered the job, they didn't-- Speaker 2: No, no. You get out here, you have a desk. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And how long were you in Hong Kong? Speaker 2: Six years. My first daughter [Paige Robinson] was born there. Speaker 1: And did you work at Deutsche Bank [Deutsche Bank AG] the whole time? Speaker 2: No. So at Deutsche, I--so it was Morgan, Grenfell [Morgan, Grenfell and Company, Ltd.], which was a British investment bank, and then-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --they were brought out by Deutsche Bank, which was is the German firm, and I--so I was there for a couple of years, and then I went to Citigroup [Citigroup Inc.] and was a research analyst there, but the irony was, again, you know, the marketing job for the hotel was an assistant marketing manager position, you know, so I would be selling the hotel and, and networking and doing that versus the, the Morgan, Grenfell job, which was an equity research analyst job, which are the very same people that my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] had me spend the day with all those years ago. That was the job I took in Asia as an equity--and I covered hotels, so I spoke to the African American men that covered real estate, and then--so I covered hotels, and then I covered retail, and then once I went to Citigroup, I only covered retail. Story_ID: 670973 Speaker 1: While you're there, you're, you're steadily building your career. When it's time, why do you come back? Speaker 2: So markets cra- you know, markets had tanked so, remember that was sort of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, where were you--what year are we at? Speaker 2: ----so that's 1999, 2000. So remember '98 [1998], so, you know, you're looking at the landscape; investment opportunities are limited, banks are beginning to sort of, you know, unwind and, and let go of staff, and, and we had this little five month old [Paige Robinson], our little baby, so we kind of said, okay, you know, we've been out here for six years. We have a first grandchild, at least in my family, you know, it was not the first grandchild for his family, but my father [Earl Harris] was getting older 'cause, remember, he was an older parent, and we hadn't really seen our family a lot. And so it was a good inflection point to come back home, and that's what we did. Speaker 1: And did you come back home with jobs? Speaker 2: No. But, again, so (laughter). Well, because that would be the normal thing to do, right? So, no, we didn't come back with a job. We came back with a five month old, a little baby, and so, but, but job opportunities, so, again, for my ex [Robinson's ex-husband], he came back with some job offers, took one again that led him--that was involved in Asia, and so, literally, I think he--we were in a situation of unemployment for two months. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And then after that, we were back off to the races, and he was back in Asia traveling again. Speaker 1: And what about you? Speaker 2: Well, because our daughter was so young, I was able to travel with him, so there was a couple of opportunities that he was working on, so we lived in--we came back in January of 2000. By, I think, April or May, we were back in Asia, but living, you know, a month in Hong Kong, a couple of weeks in Jakarta [Indonesia], so we were--but she was small and portable, and, you know, and we knew the areas. We, we were--so it was, it was a good time. Thailand, we were in Bangkok [Thailand] for a little while, so it was, it was good. Speaker 1: And when did you come back to the states? Speaker 2: So we, we were--we came back, I think that--the end of the summer, maybe, or like, like that-- Speaker 1: Oh, that same year. Speaker 2: --that same year that--settled, and then we were in New York [New York] in, in Manhattan, and we were there for a couple of years. Actually, we didn't--we were there for a few years. Our first dau- our second daughter [Simone Robinson] was born in Manhattan. And, and then we relocated to the suburbs in 2002 after 9/11 [September 11, 2001]. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And that was the catalyst, really, for that discussion, I think. We--the--when 9/11 happened, it was the first day of my oldest daughter's preschool, and you could see the smoke. We, we had so--I mean, I, I'm in shock that I don't know anyone personally. Like a one on one relationship that, that died in that attack, but, obviously, one degree of separation. It's a whole other number, but I remember seeing the smoke as we were walking back from dropping her off at school, watching those (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was her preschool? Speaker 2: It was on the Upper East Side [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 670974 Speaker 1: So before we, we go there, I'd just like to have a sense of what your experience was like being in Asia, living there. You know, you are--you're from the islands [U.S. Virgin Islands]. You lived on the East Coast of America for some years, but this is a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --totally different experience. Speaker 2: It is. It is. So it was very interesting, again, because I went from two different experiences, right, so I worked at a British bank, so a lot of my colleges at the first employment opportunity that I saw daily, my boss was from the states. He was married to a Singaporean. My analyst colleagues were British, Australian, and Asian, and there was another good friend of ours who was on the trading desk, he was Malaysian, Chinese. So even though it was--I was in Hong Kong, my work environment was very, again, international, so that was quite fascinating. My clients were from all over, right. So I had British clients, you know, clients from--a lot of them from Europe because it was a British investment bank, so that was my--sort of my Morgan, Grenfell experience [Morgan, Grenfell and Company, Ltd.; Deutsche Bank AG], and it was, it was quite fascinating. And so that--we can talk about work, and we can talk about sort of life (background noise). So the--when I went to Citigroup [Citigroup Inc.], clients were more American, a little bit European. So that's the client side of it. And then, remember, I covered companies, so the majority of companies I covered were, were Chinese, I mean, so I was meeting with Chinese CFOs, Chinese CEOs, you know, my--when I started covering regional retail, I got to travel to Thailand, to Japan, to Korea, to Indonesia, so my work experience exposed me to people from all walks of life, and they never looked at me and questioned whether I deserved to be in the room. They saw me as an American, but I think they were always very curious as to what I was, but, at the end of the day, money was the clearing conversation, so it was always about their business, the stocks. I, I always knew my, my clients very well. I always knew my companies very well. I could talk to them about their stores. I was in their stores. And I think because I was a African--a female of color, I didn't have to deal sometimes with maybe the gender issues that you would have to in a, in a Asian relationship. They, they saw me as someone who had access to American investors, European investors, so I think that, that the relationship was different, right, and the interaction was different because it was with purpose. I don't think I ever had a racial experience or any Asian company manager or anybody disrespect me in the whole time I worked there. Even in my, my offices, it was a positive experience, so, you know, I think sometimes when I, I found sometimes when I dealt with the American side of the work, that, that's when, again, we talked about that racial dynamic and some of those type of issues would come into play. Speaker 1: Even while you were over there. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: I remember there was one time there was an analyst that I was talking to, and I had been calling to just get some information on the U.S. side, and--yeah, I was, I was writing some research, some equity research for, for clients, and I remember him saying, "Well, nobody cares about that. Nobody is going to read that information," right. And so it was not the most welcoming phone call, and it wasn't the most informative conversation. And what I found very ironic is when I ended up writing the research, that person actually called and asked for three hundred copies for their clients. So, again, you know, one of those experiences where, you know, people just--you know, you, you just take it for what it is. You know, this is just sometimes part of the--doing the business, so if I were male (background noise), would that have been different? Story_ID: 670975 Speaker 1: When you come back, what year is it that you move back to the United States? Speaker 2: From China? From, from Hong Kong, 2000, 2000. Speaker 1: Well, but then you go back on the road with, with your husband [Robinson's ex-husband] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. That's--so just for a couple of months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then we're back in states. So we had a place in the states. We traveled and then we came back. Speaker 1: And where do you--where--you were saying that--you were telling me about 9/11 [September 11, 2001]. So where were you? Where were you living? Speaker 2: On the Upper East Side [New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in 9/11. Speaker 1: And your daughter [Paige Robinson] was just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In school, was going--was just starting preschool. She was three. And my youngest [Simone Robinson] was a newborn. She was a month old, like a month or two old, and so I think when that happened, it was one of those moments; again, I didn't know anybody that personally went, so I wasn't one of those people that was going to multiple funerals. I mean, I, I had friends who actually should have been in the building but didn't go or someone whose car was damaged, but no personal intimate connection to someone that we had lost. But I think when those type of things happen, and you have kids, and you think about the viability of the city, you know, we made the decision that it was, it was time to start looking in the suburbs, so we looked in New Jersey, and within a year, we were, we were in New Jersey. Story_ID: 670976 Speaker 1: And then you founded an organization [New Jersey Advocates for Education] shortly after that-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What--tell me about that. Speaker 2: So we came to New Jersey, and we actually went to--so we, you know, we set up in the suburbs, and I'm meeting people, and, you know, have got kids. My old- my oldest now is going still into elementary school, so I'm beginning to, you know, connect with the community, and my, my ex [Robinson's ex-husband] and I went to an event, actually, a UNCF [United Negro College Fund] event, that was being hosted down in Princeton [New Jersey] by some UNCF alum that had gone to historically--some of the, some of the UNCF HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], and so it was a group of African American professionals; lawyers, bankers, people in the Princeton area, that decided to host this event. And I met the area director at the time, and one of the things that they did at the event is they had a guest speaker, and it was a young man who had grown up in Newark [New Jersey], and had gotten a ton of scholarships. You know, his mother kept him on the strong path and got him to a major university here in New Jersey, had gotten scholarships, a full ride, and he was going to study chemistry, science, and he had done well in his school environments, but once you got to this predominantly white institution, started to get depressed, you know, wasn't as smart as his peers. Professors, to your point about teachers and how sort of supportive they are, wasn't really finding he was in a community that was nurturing of his environment, and now he was out of his element, right, away from home, away from his mother, and it reflected in his grades. And he was becoming very depressed, and he was actually at the point where he was maybe in jeopardy of losing his scholarship, so he was very much in distress, very much struggling. So he said a cousin had invited him to come down and visit him for homecoming at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and he said when he walked on that campus, he literally called his mother and said he's going to be transferring to Morehouse, and his mother was devastated because he was giving up his full ride. He had to work three jobs to, to graduate from that school, but he did it, and then he went onto get his degree in chemistry and worked in some of the--at one of the pharmas, but then actually left to go teach in the City of Newark. And he had won teacher of the year in math and science and actually twice, which was a new, a new experience. So he talked about what Morehouse had done for him and going to an HBCU and actually had received a UNCF scholarship, so that was the journey. And I have to say, I was so moved. And, actually, when I worked at Prudential [Prudential Financial Services; Prudential Financial, Inc.] when we had United Way [United Way of America; United Way Worldwide] drives, UNCF at the time was one of the recipients, so I gave money to UNCF, and, again, I went to a--you know, I had a--I went to--I lived on an island that had a car- HBCU [College of the Virgin Islands; University of the Virgin Islands, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands], knew people from HBCUs, so very much involved and invested in that. So I went up to the area director and said, "You know, I'd love to support" (background noise)-- Speaker 1: Keep going, keep going. Speaker 2: "I'd love to support UNCF," and I said, "You can, you can actually, you know, tell me what I can do, but I'm, I'm willing to--you know, how can I be of help?" And he said, "Well, if you want to host an event in your area, we'd love to have you do that." I said, "No, no. I have two kids [Paige Robinson and Simone Robinson], I just want to lick some stamps, and, you know, do some--you know, seal some envelopes. I don't have time for that. I've got like, young, young kids." So he said, he looked at me and my accent, and he said, "You know, we need young people like you doing things like this." He said, "You know, we've had a lot of folks in the New Jersey area that have lifted us up and carried us a long way, but they're onto, to new and different things in their phase of life, and, you know, what we're doing here in Princeton, we don't have anybody in the space that you live in, and we would love to replicate something like this there." So my ex and I went home, and we realized, you know, if we did this, this would be a commitment. This wasn't just, you know, write a check. If we were going to do something, we needed support, so we gathered a group of our friends from the kitchen cabinet and said, "Look, you know, we're thinking of having this event. We will underwrite it. We'll pay for the party, but if we do that, would each of you be willing to either fill a table or write a check that's the equivalent of a table?" And everyone in that room, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], had either gone to an HBCU, received UNCF money, had been a scholarship recipient, or they were very passionate about education for minority youth, and there wasn't a single person that didn't say yes. And we had our first event. It was a fashion show at our home. We had [HistoryMaker] B Michael, we had all kinds of people. It was, it was actually quite interesting what we pulled together, and we had about 220 people, and we raised $107,000 at our first event. Story_ID: 670977 Speaker 1: You raised--then you created an organization [New Jersey Advocates for Education]. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So-- Speaker 2: So what we did--'cause, remember, UNCF [United Negro College Fund] is a scholarship granting organization, and they provide operating support to colleges, right, so when we raised this money, then the decision had to be made, okay, do we just give it to UNCF and let them disburse the money based on their sort of criteria? Do we create criteria and make it a private, directed scholarship? And what was the, the bandwidth for that? Right, because it's one thing to sit and say I'll invite friends to a party and write a check. It's another thing to say, I'm actually going to sit on a scholarship committee. I'm actually going to support these students. And I, I think the, the next big decision we had to make was not only what to do with the money, but how were we going to ensure that this money we provided actually did help graduate these students, because as you know, a lot of scholarship programs, they write wonderful checks, and you give the students the money, and then by junior year, they're gone. There's all kinds of stuff going--and they don't graduate. And that was one thing that we, as a group, decided we wanted to avoid, so we tried the first year with volunteer support administering the scholarships, but what we realized is in order to do it effectively and actually get people to and through college, you need a dedicated staff, you needed a program, you needed a committed engagement of them, their families. And we were going after, not the 4.0 students, but students like myself, the solid kids that but for this money, they may not go to college, or they may go to an associate's college and school. But if you got them on this path, this literally could be life transforming for them. And so with that desire, we made the decision to actually start and create a nonprofit that would actually raise these moneys. The, the UNCF administered the money, but what we did personally was we supported the--this nonprofit by paying for the salaries of the staff, and then they worked with the UNCF. We went to the high schools and we recruited students. We talked to the guidance counselor, so we encouraged them to apply for the scholarship. We selected the students based on academic and other criteria, and then once they were selected, we had a mentoring component where they were required to, to report all of their classes, their syllabus, we put it on a database, so we knew every quiz that was coming up, every exam. We tracked their grades. We gave them, in advance--again, remember, being three chess moves ahead. They could access their GPA [grade point average] and always stay connected to how they were doing in their classes so that they could get help before things got bad. And then as a freshman, you were required to meet with our advisors either in person or by phone weekly, and then that eased up every progressive year until you graduated. Speaker 1: How many students were part of this? Speaker 2: So over 150 students, yeah. Speaker 1: And over what period of time? Speaker 2: So I was involved from 2004 until 2009. Speaker 1: And did it close in 2009? Speaker 2: No, no. It's still there. Speaker 1: It's still there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So just in terms of how it works with UNCF, you were able to like personalize, I guess, the experience. Is it normal-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is it normal that an agency would be that involved with selecting the students and mentoring them along the way? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, when you look at UNCF, right, because I sat on the board. There's two types of scholarships, right. There's restricted and unrestricted. So the restricted scholarships could come from individuals. They could come from corporations. You know, if a corporation says, "We want, you know, students with a 3.5 interested in chemistry." Or it could come from a church, "We want people, you know, in the Detroit [Michigan] area, you know, with this GPA, with this profile." So what we did is we, we created the restriction, right. So what we did actually with UNCF was we developed a relationship where we defined the criteria. They held the assets. So once we targeted and identified our students and granted the scholarship, we directed UNCF to pay the moneys directly to their chosen colleges. So what we did, is we did a step removed, right. So we created this organization, this nonprofit organization that actually was the education scholarship program and the mentoring component, and UNCF basically directed the resources. Story_ID: 670978 Speaker 1: What is your ex-husband's name? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: Oh, we don't want to say that. Okay. So you, you left in 2009 because? Speaker 2: I went to--I was going through a divorce, and I actually had applied to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and through my--in my divorce journey, had decided I wanted to go back to school and get a master's in social work and public policy. So I started fall semester at NYU at that time. Speaker 1: And were--so you were in school then full time. Speaker 2: And I'm also on the board of UNCF [United Negro College Fund], yes, and I have my children [Paige Robinson and Simone Robinson], yes. Speaker 1: How are you juggling all those things? Speaker 2: I had, I had support. My mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris] was a huge support, yeah. Speaker 1: She was back in the states at that time? Speaker 2: She was. Yeah, oh, so, so long journey. When she retired from the bank [Banco Popular], she relocated to the states. And when we lived in--I, I think we forgot a cycle in my life. When we were in New Jersey, we were here for two years, and then we moved to Beijing [China]. Speaker 1: That, that--well, I was looking at that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Right, so we left for Beijing in 2004. We were there '04 [2004] through '07 [2007]. So my mother actually stayed in our home, managed us, our affairs while we were overseas, and we would return back every summer because we had the scholarship program [New Jersey Advocates for Education], so we had a summer fundraiser, but I was administering and working with my team from Beijing, so, you know, obviously, on a different time cycle, but I had a staff, and we had a routine and a cycle, where we would recruit in the summer, and then get the students onboard, have an orientation, and then by the time I went back for the school year to China, my, my team had the students in hand and were managing that process. Speaker 1: How did your children manage going to school in China? Was it an international school? Speaker 2: Yeah. So they went to two different schools. The first one was a, was a school that was actually based out of Hong Kong and they had a couple branches in China, and that was interesting because it was bilingual. They had an English speaking teacher, and a Chinese, Mandarin Chinese teacher, so they would take Chinese every day, and they would hear both languages in the class, and then so that was very interesting, and when we were there, you know, I had, I had support, and the woman that was in our home, she didn't speak any English, so my kids had to communicate with her in Mandarin, as did I, and so we did that the time--the whole time we were there, and then their second schooling was at a, as a--at an international school, which was not bilingual. It was, you know, very Americanized and westernized. Story_ID: 670979 Speaker 1: There's so much thought about the relationship between the U.S. and China, and, you know, lots of questions without a lot of information in terms of most--what most Americans think. You know, they're--China is often presented as the big bad wolf. What was your--what did you see the relationship between U.S. and China being? Speaker 2: I think when you can speak the language, you have very different interactions with people, so that's number one. I think Beijing [China] is very different from Hong Kong because, you know, English is the clearing language in Hong Kong. I will say the one thing that I noticed as the handover was happening because I was living in Hong Kong when that was happening, was that when I first moved to Hong Kong, all of the taxi drivers spoke Cantonese, which is the, the language in, in sort of Southern China, right, Hong Kong and like Guangdong [China] and Southern China provinces. But as we were approaching '97 [1997] which was when the, the UK [United Kingdom] was handing over the, the Hong Kong territories over to China, a lot of the cab drivers started speaking Mandarin. I found that very fascinating. And, and you began to see a change in the way the news was reported about China, almost like this slight self censoring. That was very interesting to me. Business wise, nothing, you know, nothing. I, I didn't perceive any big change, so, remember, the Hong Kong experience was more as a working woman. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And so, again, much more international grounded. You were--I was in finance, so, you know, money, money trumps everything, so you didn't really see an impact there. What I do think was beginning to happen as well, though, because, remember, I was there from '94 [1994] all the--you know, for six years, so '94 [1994] into 2000, you began to see--I remember when I first got there, a lot of the overseas investment banks, right, would come and there would be a lot of international staff; London [England], you know, Australia, the U.S. I would say that towards the, the end of my time--I remember when I was at Citigroup [Citigroup Inc.], of the majority of the analysts in the office were Asian. I mean, obviously, educated overseas, but, but you began to see some of that, some of that movement because I think as people realized they were doing more with, with China, that you needed to have an office and a business that reflected the, the nation you were doing business with, and that was very important to them. I mean, you know, China, even if you were born overseas as a U.S. citizen, you know, you're not--you don't get a Chinese passport. You have to be ethnically Han Chinese to be--to receive a Chinese passport, so, you know, when you think about that as the grounding of the perception of authenticity that we keep talking about when it comes to race and ethnicity, you know, being authentically Chinese and being able to speak to the Chinese and reflect them, I think began to become a big trend internationally. You couldn't get away with having an office that didn't have any Asian representation. And I think that's a good thing. I mean, you know, using that economic power to actually say, look, you've got to (background noise) have people in here that look like me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So you were telling me about the dynamics (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, so, so, again, so, again, we're talking about the multilayers of how China has been impacted, right. Or as, as you sort of see over time, being American in China. So from the financial perspective, I was saying, over the years, I saw much more of an increase in making sure that Asian staff were there, and then also the emergence of Asian driven banks, investment banks and companies that were much more influential in China, and, you know, if you were an American company, you needed to be able to work with these firms because over time, Hong Kong wasn't the epicenter anymore, right, Beijing, Shanghai [China], those were the now places that you had to navigate. Knowing Mandarin was a distinct advantage. Being Chinese was a distinct advantage, and you had to navigate a lot of complicated relationships, so that--those were some of the things that I began to see happen over time when I was an analyst. When I was in Beijing, my experience there, even though I had this scholarship program [New Jersey Advocates for Education] I was running, was more an expat mom [expatriate]. I had my kids [Paige Robinson and Simone Robinson], and so I did things like Girl Scouts [Girls Scouts of the United States of America]. You know, so my experience in Beijing was much more an American expat experience. You know, I was dealing with moms at my daughters' schools, and I had this fun--this, this other thing I did outside of that, but I remember distinctly, it, it was always interesting interacting with people in China, and I think because of the opportunities I had to go to events and dinners. I, I had a really interesting experience talking to parents who had teenage kids in China, single men, who were looking for, you know, a wife, and, and worried about whether they would have a family. You know, mothers who had to work very hard and had to leave kids at home, so what I learned and what I, I knew to be true, but what my experience was that I found no matter where I was, the things that we deal with as mothers, as women, you know, divorce, distress in your marriage, unhappy situations, you know, work dynamics. Those are strains and themes that happen no matter what our nationality, no matter what culture we're living in. Speaker 2: In your network of friends there, was this an international group? Did it include-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --women from Beijing? Speaker 1: Actually, no Americans. (Laughter) My, my friendship circle was--well, I would say one was an American, but she was Chinese ethnicity. That was my one American friend. And another woman, actually, she was African American, but that was later towards the end of my stay there. Most of my friends were French, a French woman married to a Chinese man, and one Hong Kong Chinese female, and another, another Hong Kong Chinese female. I mean, my, my friendship circle was very Asian, actually (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hm. Story_ID: 670980 Speaker 1: You came back, and then what is the Robinson Harris Foundation [Robinson Harris Foundation, Inc.; Tamara L. Harris Foundation, Inc.], is that--that's what your work was next? Speaker 2: Well, no (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or was that the same thing? Speaker 2: So that was the same time. So remember, I said that we, we funded the, the operating expenses-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --of the scholarship program, which was the New Jersey Advocates for Education, so we set up a private foundation that held assets that supported that education work (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Got it. Speaker 2: And, and the work of other schools and, and the UNCF [United Negro College Fund] and other organizations. Speaker 1: Now, instead of going back into Corporate America, you are--your work is focused on this project, correct? Speaker 2: Yeah. So what I did--and that was, that was full time work. I mean, I basically ran a scholarship program, and then at the time, once I returned back to the states from Asia, 2007--remember, I'm developing a relationship with UNCF now because they're holding our scholarship assets. They're also the recipient of a grant from our private family foundation, so the relationship now is becoming much deeper. I'm going to UNCF HBCU schools [historically black colleges and universities]. I'm talking. I'm learning more about the organization on a deeper level, and I'm, I'm a big supporter. And so out of those conversations, you know, it had gotten to the level where the relationship with Dr. Lomax [HistoryMaker Michael Lomax] and his development team and the New Jersey folks and, and all of these people had become so integrated that I was asked to be--to consider being on the board, their national board. And to your point, I was one of the--I think I was the first one that wasn't a corporate person to actually sit on the UNCF board. That was, that was--it, it was an interesting perspective, and at the time, it was felt that it was--you know, I, I was such a supporter, and you had the corporations, but there was this extra piece of it in terms of pipeline management and being an example to corporations and to other donors of what, what this type of work and support could look like because I was, I was fully integrated, right. I was, I was supporting them, the, the organization. I had a scholarship program that was a user of their administrative capacity, and I had students that were attending some of the universities, so it was a fully integrated connection, and I think through all of that capacity, it was, it was in conversations that it was the right time to bring somebody like me on the board. Speaker 1: And you served on that board for what years? Speaker 2: Five years, I think '08 [2008] to '13 [2013]. Story_ID: 670981 Speaker 1: So working on the board of UNCF [United Negro College Fund] at a time--so Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is in office. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There, you know, there certainly is interest in supporting HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], but the economy is a wreck, so what's-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: That's right. Oh my gosh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so for, for students, a lot of HBCUs are failing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, the--and many students, many of the brightest black students are no longer choosing to go to HBCUs either because they're getting scholarships elsewhere, or they think that the education is not as good as it used to be, so these are some of the challenges-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --that, that UNCF was facing. How--what are those conversations like on the board? And what are you trying to do? What are you working on during the period-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that you're there? Speaker 2: That's, that's--all of that, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole]. I mean, I think actually that's a really good encapsulation of what was going on when I was asked to be on the board, and I will say this. It was not a triage situation, but it was really more of a how can we be strategic? You know, what's the next--what's the strategy for the next five years, right? I can't tell you--and this is even before I joined the board. How many people always, you know, check, you know, comment on HBCUs? Do we even need them? Are they relevant? And, you know, what are they doing? Like you said, oh, the best and brightest kids of color don't even go to these schools. But the thing that I've learned, again, when you're doing data driven decisions, right, which is how I like to operate in the world, is that there's always a story. There's always a sub story, and if you don't understand the sub story, especially, when it comes to minorities of color, I will say that, you know, growing up in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], going through my personal journey as a person of color in this space, but also having that anchoring growing up in the Caribbean, remember, I'm coming at this from HBCUs are a source of pride, and if they're a failed institution, A, you--first of all, you can't tell me there's other failed--there's not other failed institutions that aren't HBCUs, so if we're going to have this conversation, I'm going to have it across the board because we have to start looking at where the funding sources are, what the opportunities are for alums. And sometimes it's bad management, but it's not every school. So you always start--I always say start from a place of power. What are the gems? What are the strengths? And so when you started looking at some of these HBCUs, you had schools like Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] that were increasingly getting an Asian population because they had one of the strongest pharmacy programs, so you had certain schools where it literally was an arbitrage. People were understanding this was a hidden gem and, and going to these schools, but you had this overarching argument that HBCUs were failing, right. So the question was, how do you start best practices, right? How do you start highlighting some of these schools? And then how do you start aligning some of the smaller schools that maybe are struggling and are always in this place of struggle? But what is their role and place in that specific space? If you're in a small town in South Carolina, and your only option is vocational school, an associate's college, or an HBCU? What is it they're doing well? What is it they're not? And are there opportunities for, you know, mergers, relationships? Can you bring in technology? Because the thing that people don't realize is with all of these schools, no matter whether you think they're great or, or not, all of these schools have--to your point about my mother [Theresita Shelburn Harris], right. When was the good time? When was the time that they never had to worry about resources? When was the time that they never had to worry about capacity? Never. It's always been from a place of struggle. And so when that's the narrative, right, it's very hard to get people excited, right. People don't want to be around struggle. They want to be around success and when it's all good. So that was a lot of the conversation, right, in that, in that early time. Where are the bright spots? And how can we get off the struggled story? And when it is struggle, what is it we need to do to shore it up? Like, what's triage, and what's the next, what's the next capacity for this organization? So that was a lot of what I asked about and started to learn when I got there. The other thing was, I, I was asked to chair their gala because I think, you know, part of what they saw was the success of all these years of running this gala in New Jersey to raise money for this New Jersey scholarship program [New Jersey Advocates for Education]. You know, it became a destination. It became the thing to go to people to put on their calendar. It was the party to go to in the summer. You'd see all your friends. You know, how could you transfer, transfer that work to what was predominantly a corporate dinner in New York [New York]? So that was the other expectation and ask and piece of my work was how do we bring that energy to the New York gala? And I chaired it for two years, and, you know, between the corporate engagement and the moneys we raised through individuals and table purchases and, and other things, we were able to raise almost $7 million the two years that I chaired the gala. But that was all informed by a lot of the work that I had done at the local level. So it was sort of how do you bring that energy, that engagement? How do you serve as a role model for other, for other people in Detroit [Michigan], other cities that this could be sort of replicated in? And then the third piece of my work and my--and what was presented to me in terms of the role that I could play on the board in my capacity was how do I get out to these students? And tell them my story, tell them what I'm doing, you know, talk about my journey and why it's so important to be at the school, do well at the school. What can UNCF provide for you? That was a big part of what I did. So I, I participated in a couple of empowering events at, at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], at Clark [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. The irony was, all these years, I wanted to go to Spelman and couldn't go. I was able to actually speak on a panel at Spelman. Story_ID: 670982 Speaker 1: So when we were talking about sort of best practices from the New Jersey gala and, and how that could be sort of transferred to New York [New York], one of the things that we did every year, after the first year, was a fun party. Speaker 2: In New Jersey. Speaker 1: In New Jersey. And--but each subsequent year, I worked with UNCF [United Negro College Fund] to make sure that we had a UNCF college president come and speak at our event, so we would support and underwrite getting them to come and speak, so we had, you know, Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], when she was still at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Dr. Cole. We had Dean Mobley [Sybil C. Mobley] from FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. We had Dr. Franklin [HistoryMaker Robert Franklin]. We had Dr. Francis [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], so as the party grew, and the audience grew, people began to connect to what HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] and what UNCF were all about. And people would walk away and say, I had no idea of those statistics that, you know, Xavier--you know, some of the top doctors graduate from HBCUs, some of the top businesspeople, so people needed to be educated, and that's one of the things that we did with our event, and that's one of the things that we decided to do moving forward with, with the board and the galas in New York, and I think just having somebody that had a different perspective, and to your point, didn't--had a, had a openness and a freedom that maybe a lot of people didn't to say and, and speak things, speak truth to power and sort of put things on the table, created a new level of engagement that I had, had declined over time. And I think it was with that success that we were able to have two successful dinners. Story_ID: 670983 Speaker 1: I visited Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] when [HistoryMaker] Julianne Malveaux was president and got to see, you know, how--what the curriculum is like and also talk to Dr. Lomax [HistoryMaker Michael Lomax]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --several times, and one of the things that I learned that HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] commonly do that, that is a bridge, I guess, is many students coming to these schools aren't necessarily ready to go to college, and they need some support in, in various classes 'cause the--like the opposite of AP classes [advanced placement], but that, that part of the curriculum exists often at HBCUs to make sure that even if students aren't ready, that they can get ready, so it becomes often a five year experience rather than a four year experience. When you were on the board [of United Negro College Fund]--that's the other side of it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How, how were you addressing that? Speaker 2: Well, remember, I was recruiting students in Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So I was seeing a lot of that, right, and I, I didn't mention this before, but a component of our scholarship program [New Jersey Advocates for Education] was that you could receive moneys to either attend a historically black college, or you could receive moneys to attend a college in New Jersey, so this--we're going to frame it as--sort of this, I call it grade thirteen. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: This remedial work that really--you're not college ready, but you're college acceptable. And college is acknowledging that, you know, there's some sort of shoring up and some sort of extra work that needs to be done, so one of the things that I would always say to people that would bring this up, "Oh, you know, they're taking the, the worst students and they're not prepared," is, I would say, you know, that's not an indictment on HBCUs. That's an indictment on our academic high school and pre system--I mean, you know, our preparatory system. HBCUs are actually taking students that if they came out of the system, where are they going? What are the options? So whether you--so the thing is, when you want to actually defund these institutions or restrict their loans, or, you know, take funding away from them or even shutter them, what you have to understand as a society is what you are doing is basically saying, we have failed you up until this point, and now we're, we're cutting off your opportunity for transformation. And so that's what I always tell people. And UNCF schools are not doing society, you know--you're not doing us a favor when you educate our students. You're actually making people who can be employable, and even if they don't aspire to the highest levels of the land, they're still going to make a contribution to society, and you can't have this conversation about what are we, what are we doing to educate people of color that come up out of the academic institutions that have not provided them the right foundation so that they can go to certain collegiate experiences, the colleges have adjusted. That's my point about the struggle. These are kids that don't have tutors. There's mental health issues. There's single parents. There's teachers that have just passed them on because they're not dealing with them, or there's other challenges. But the schools accept them and they still graduate them, and they still try to educate them, and so if, you know, to, to your point about Dr. Malveaux and Dr. Lomax saying that these institutions have adjusted, what I'm saying is that's not a bad thing. Because if you can't get a public school system--when you look at all the challenges that are happening with charter schools and public schools and how are we educating youth of color; especially, in inner city communities or poorer communities, do they not deserve an opportunity to continue that, to continue that journey, and sometimes maybe by the time they get to college, that's the first time they're actually going to have a teacher invested in them to be successful. I mean, and so, you know, that's kind of how I look at it. And the other thing that I've learned, too, is as, again, when I looked at the data around the area is, you're got to also look at all the other schools. This is not just endemic to HBCUs. This, this--I mean, you--and if you're in Kentucky, and you're going to an associate college, I think that there's a conversation and a shift that has to happen around education in this entire country because we have a lot of kids in colleges that are saying we're not going to accept you, but if you do two years in associate's college, then you'll be college ready. Well, what that means is you're not getting college ready in a college preparatory high school, so I think it's a much bigger policy, political conversation. And, yeah, I mean, HBCUs have that role, but that's part of the reason that I did what I did because, again, the 4.0 [grade point average] students of color, they're getting the scholarships to all of the top schools. What are the B students getting? The C students, you know, may have a chance, but if you're a B student with a solid reputation, solid grades and you might need a little bit more support in math or a little bit more support in English and essay writing, where are you getting that support? Story_ID: 670984 Speaker 1: I want to turn to what was happening in your life. So you, you had spent a number of years either not working or working with this advocacy that you created [New Jersey Advocates for Education], and then you get divorced. You said that you started to go to school for social work. But how are you managing your life in terms of--because you've been out of the work force for a long time. Speaker 2: So we had a lifestyle that was very successful. We, you know, obviously, we wouldn't have been able to do a lot of these things, so in the divorce journey, those--you know, that ability to live and, and move on in life with those type of resources was my journey. It's not for every- it's not every woman's journey, but that was my journey, so I was not in a position where, you know, I, I had to worry about basic fundamental things. I had the resources. We had the resources collectively as a family for me to pursue an education, and one of the things that I had to make a decision on, right, as a--my divorce, and I've shared this in other journeys, it was a very protracted process. Being able to live and have a lifestyle that was financed was not a challenge that I had to deal with agre- you know, I had to deal with, so it afforded me an opportunity to think about the next steps of my life and how I wanted to sort of take my next journey. But I knew, to your point, that my last corporate experience had been a long time ago, and my most recent experience was in this advocacy space. And one of the things that I was driving my desire to kind of figure out my next steps was that I had to retool, so I was doing this nonprofit work. I was--you know, I had the administrative capacity. I had the management capacity, but there was a component of what was going on that I was missing because I had the money, you know, we had the scholarship money. We had the mentoring, but we were still dealing with students that were struggling with a lot of mental health issues, and then I was going through any own journey and experiencing, you know, what life was like under that type of distress. And so one of the things that I said is that I, I knew I was always going to work. I just didn't know where. But, remember, I had young kids [Paige Robinson and Simone Robinson] when I was going through my journey, so they needed my time and attention, but I also needed to do something in this transition period. And working a full time job that forced me to travel would not have been in the best interest of my children. That was very clear. And so with that not being an option, and I knew I was going to be in a protracted, long term process, I took the decision to retool. And when I went back to school, I decided to pursue social work and public policy because after being in the advocacy space that I was in, I assumed at the time that what I was going to be focused on was child advocacy, some component of mental health, and because of my role on the board at UNCF [United Negro College Fund]--I was still on the board when I was at school, that I was going to be combining and intersecting all of those experiences to do something at the next level, maybe working in government, maybe for a non-profit, maybe for a foundation, a corporate foundation. I didn't know the direction yet, but I--that was sort of my thinking. Speaker 1: And you went to NYU Silver School of Social Work [Silver School of Social Work at NYU, New York, New York], correct? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That was in 2008? Speaker 2: Yeah, 2009. Speaker 1: Two thousand nine [2009], and then is--so what is NYU Robert F. Wagner Graduate School [New York University Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, New York, New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's their public policy school. Speaker 1: So you, you went to both. Speaker 2: I did a dual degree. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And they have a dual degree with the social work--you can either do social work-public policy, social work-law, or social work-public health. Speaker 1: And when did you come out of that school? How long was that program? Speaker 2: Well, it took a little while because of my journey, so there was a semester I had to take off. We had a--you know, it was a very protracted divorce process, so we had trials. We had a lot going on, so I--you know, I--that was my focus. I mean, it was a big, it was a big part of my, my life process, so I had to take a semester off, and, you know, with classes being as they are, it took a little while, but I, I graduated in 2012. And, and in addition to the classes, part of the reason I, I chose that social work process is because for the two years you're in the program, you have a clinical portion, so I had to work in two clinical mental health experiences, and so my first--both were in New Jersey 'cause I needed to be close to my kids, and the first one was at the Mental Health Association [Mental Health Association in New Jersey, Inc., Springfield, New Jersey] where I worked with family members who had ill--mentally ill family members. So I would support mothers, siblings, parents, who maybe had a son or a daughter who was bipolar or schizophrenic, so, you know, helping them advocate for them--their children but also for themselves, supporting the whole family system. And then I worked at a school where I worked with some of the students under the capacity of a supervisor. And then my second placement was at FamilyConnections [East Orange, New Jersey], which does a lot of mental health support in, in Essex County [New Jersey], and I worked, again, under supervision, but with, with clients in the community that had all kinds of--you know, I had people who were dealing with mental health challenges, people who were dealing with advocacy issues. I had mother--I supported--I was a co-supporter of a Hispanic women's group there where they would come in, and we would just talk, you know, just about issues they were dealing with, so it was a very wide ranging experience, but it took me back to school and, and to communities that were focused on the mental health piece that I was trying to understand, and I got, again, to work with very diverse groups, but, typically, under resourced, typically challenged and learning what mental health can do, that even if you have money and all these other resources, if you haven't taken care of your mental health, it can really affect your, your life. Story_ID: 670985 Speaker 1: And then in 2011, you create Haramat Group [Newark, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What's that? Speaker 2: So I was finishing up my, my degree [at New York University, New York, New York], and I, again, knew--yeah, I was still on the board at UNCF [United Negro College Fund], still very much engaged in that space and going to school and, and all of those things. I still--I think at that point, I still wasn't finished with my divorce, so the--it was--so what I had decided was that there was a space because people--I--between working on the UNCF board for almost, you know, close to--at that point--four years, three or four years, running the nonprofit that I ran [New Jersey Advocates for Education], having this mental health piece, having my business background, that, again, because I was constrained by family circumstances, you know, wanted to create a business where I could actually support people, support nonprofits that were focused on advocacy work, so whether it was board development--I didn't necessarily see it as coaching. I saw it really more as a consultant where I could help you with your board development if you needed support around fundraising. Those were all the expertise that I was bringing to the table, but it was all centered around, if you're advocating for children and families, I can bring this, this experience and expertise I have to support you in that, in that platform. And what was happening was, I was getting these--I was getting traction, but everyone wanted me to work for them pro bono, and, you know, I, I couldn't do that. I think, you know, when people see that you've got your sort of means of, of life, they sort of say, well, you don't--I don't need to pay you. Or could you do it for free? And ironically enough because you're in this sort of grant making capacity through my foundation [Robinson Harris Foundation, Inc.; Tamara L. Harris Foundation, Inc.], that's how people knew me was through like philanthropically, so even though I was trying to set up a business, I was being sort of evaluated as someone who could be approached in a pro bono capacity, and after going to school for all those years, I just wasn't--it was, it was--I was finding that, that was happening. And then in the meantime while that was going on, and I was trying to sort of pitch and, and get an- get opportunities, people kept sending friends to me who were going through these awful divorces, and they would ask me things like, "Can you call my friend and help them get an attorney? I know you, you know a ton of attorneys." Or, "You know, they just got served and they have to show up in mediation, and they have no idea what their financial situation is. Could you help them, you know, think this through? Could you help them strategize?" Or, "My girlfriend is going through this divorce, and she's extremely depressed. Could she just talk to you for a minute? Aren't you a coach? Isn't that what you do? Aren't you a social worker coach, you know, divorce coach?" Or--and so after about the third one, I, I started working with two people on a pro bono basis because I said, you know, I want to see if there's something here, and saw them through two successful divorces, you know, as successful as it can be. And I said, after the--after that journey, again, got sent a few people my way, and said, I'm going to set up business and, and see if this is an opportunity because I wasn't looking for that. I, I didn't want to even deal with anybody going through a divorce (laughter). I just finished mine, but, but I've, I've not looked back since I started that company [Tamara Harris LLC, Montclair, New Jersey] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when did-- Story_ID: 670986 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did you start coaching people through divorce (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, formally--I mean, I formally set up my company [Tamara Harris LLC, Montclair, New Jersey] in 2013, but, informally, 2012, 2011. Speaker 1: And how do you, how do you promote that this is what you're doing? How do people-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --learn about this? Speaker 2: So someone--a wise person once told me, when you decide to do something for a living that isn't in a corp [corporation], you tell everybody you know, everyone, so I tell everyone. I have had the most interesting referrals. I've had, I've had my massage therapist refer a client to me. I've had these very sort of--you wouldn't think the connection was there, but I--you know--I was at a party, and I had--someone pulled me aside and said, "I have someone for you, but she doesn't know she needs you yet, so can you help me--coach me to tell her what she needs to hear so she's willing to meet with you." So I sent her information. I gave her a script. I, I gave her some bullet points. She--after she called me back, she says, "She wants to meet with you." And I met with her, and that's how I got a client. You know, I've had a client who was overseas, lived overseas in between the U.S. and New York [New York]. I've had--I, I work with people in California, in Florida, all over, and people--someone found me on theroot.com, and then there's this--and then I work through the typical channels of attorneys and financial advisors, you know, people actually connected to the divorce process. Speaker 1: And why would an attorney be interested in working with you? Speaker 2: And, boy, (unclear) (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because, you know, the, the people who make all the money are the-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --are the attorneys; especially, when it's protracted (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. So that is a good question. And I will tell you this. I have talked to many attorneys that have said they would never work with a divorce coach because either they've gotten the attorney fired, or they're trying to engage their own resources, or they're bringing their own divorce baggage to the client, and then it just becomes--you, you know, you've got other people mixing in the, in the stew. The thing that I've had people--lawyers who have gotten it--and I've had referrals from lawyers who aren't matrimonial lawyers. They're other corporate attorneys or other types of attorneys, but they get it because they say, "Someone like you, who has the, the business background that you have, the financial understanding that you have, the lifestyle experience that you have, and the divorce experience that you have, when you sit with someone, you can actually, actually help them be a better client for me," because when they have--remember--when they have a client, sometimes their client is very emotional, very mistrustful, sometimes very stuck. So the goal is to be divorced. It's not to sit and spend money for two or three years. It's to get through a process where you and your spouse can negotiate, clean up what you have to clean up, come to a decision, get a judgment, and then move forward in your lives and parent, and, hopefully, do it in a way that's healthy for your children. A lot of people can't do that, and the more resources you have, the more unhealthiness there is, the more dysfunction there is, it can get extremely distressful for all parties. And what I do as a coach, is I have that very--I'm not showing up as your social worker. I'm not giving you therapy. I'm not your financial advisor, and I'm not your attorney. But what I am is your thought partner and your strategist, so when you want to move in certain directions--I mean, I've had people who've come to me and said, "I want to fire my attorney, and I need you to work with me," and I won't do that. I won't take on someone that wants to fire their attorney. What I do is I teach you how to talk to any attorney that you hire, so if you talk to them, and you have an outline as to why you're unhappy with their services, they either correct or they don't and then there's a consequence. But most people when they're in the midst of such an emotional, distressful process, can't think that strategically and that clearly. When your spouse is alienating your children against you, or you're just upset because there's a lover in the house now, and they're around your children. How do you now negotiate all the other things you have to do? How do you keep yourself healthy so that you're not, you know, stressing out your children with your distress? How do you show up as a professional when you have--when you do have a corporate job and you're going through this type of process and take care of yourself in addition? And then I have clients who are very unhappy in their marriages and are thinking, should I leave, or should I stay? And what does that look and feel like? So I work with a couple people going through that journey as well, and some of them end up filing, and some of them end up getting a postnup [postnuptial agreement] or coming to some new understanding in their marriage and they move forward. Speaker 1: What's a postnup? Speaker 2: So it's a conversation and a sort of a document that identifies assets or directions or divisions of assets or directions for assets and things in your marriage, so a postnup could be, you know, I had--you, you know, you didn't even have a job when I met you. Now you're worth millions of dollars or tens of millions of dollars. Well, we have three houses. Well, I want one of the houses in my name. You know, if we divorce, this is money that I get. You know, you can, you can--as long as you have two parties agreeing to something, you can write up anything you want. I think what's more challenging is having those--I call them like challenging conversations. And that's where the social work experience and the, and the personal experience comes in. You know, how do you have those conversations that are so scary, so painful, but you need to have them because the space that you're sitting in is so uncomfortable and so painful. But sometimes people can only hold onto what they know, and that unknown can sometimes terrify them, and sometimes you have those conversations, and then you find out things that make you realize, I can't, I can't stay in this situation. I thought it was untenable, but now I know it's untenable. Or, okay, that didn't go as badly. Or sometimes it takes a really severe fall in a marriage, a really hard bump in the road for both spouses to say, okay, you know what, I don't want to lose you. Let's figure out how we can do this so that you feel safe and happy and protected in this marriage and we can go on. We have kids. We have too many assets. Let's just figure this out. Story_ID: 670987 Speaker 1: Do you typically talk to both spouses? Speaker 2: Never, no. Speaker 1: Never. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not a mediator. I'm not a negotiator. I am one person's resource. And what tends to happen in divorces that tend to be high conflict, with or without children, is there's usually some level of dysfunctional communication, right. They're not talkers or somebody holds something in, or they let the other spouse dominate, so things sort of get down a road, and then it's hard to get out of that sort of cycle of engaging, right. And then the other piece of it is sometimes, there's a lot of conflict. Look, if you agree as a couple, we don't want to disrupt our children. Let's take care of school. Let's figure out a parenting agreement. We have a home. We have a vacation home. You have your IRA [individual retirement account]. I have what, you know, my 401(k). Let's map it out. Let's figure it out. Let's go to an attorney and get it reviewed and then take it to the judge, and let's do this, and let's get therapists for our children, and let's make--that's what a healthy thriving couple that says, you know what, we just don't belong together anymore, but we're not going to have our kids suffer and our, our wealth suffer. Most people can't do that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That sounds rare (laughter). Speaker 2: That's, that's very rare. And it happens but even then, in those best of circumstances, there's emotions, right. What happens when the one spouse is a substance abuser or bipolar or undiagnosed with some personality disorder or a narcissist or a physical abuser, or, you know, addicted to drugs or porn or gambling or some high level of dysfunction? And now they're spending the couple's money. There's lovers. There's multiple lovers. There's all kinds of stuff going on outside the marriage. Assets are being drained away. You know, work positions are fragile. The kids are seeing a level of unhealthiness. Those are the situations that I tend to get involved in. Speaker 1: And are, are most of your clients women, or do you, you have women and men? Speaker 2: Yeah. I've--what happens is they're the under resourced spouse, right. Because, again, if you've got the money and the power, you're dictating. You're dictating. So why--you don't--you know, you're not going to listen to someone advising you because you, you know, it's--you're in, you're in control. So what I have found is that what happens is most, most the people that get referred to me are women. I've had men referred to me, but the men who have tended to be the more resourced spouse, I put them in therapy, typically. And what I do with them is I kind of talk to them about legacy and their children. And, you know, do you want broken children as part of your legacy? You know, do you want your children to be able to go to the best schools and achieve what you've accomplished while taking care of this the right way and not abusing their, their parent is the right way, because you, you not only jeopardy--you might want your freedom, and you might want your money, but there's a price you pay for that. And sometimes it--but, most, most--and they're--and there's--and you also can't get to that place of negotiating respectfully if you don't address your anger. And the kids see it. And, and I say things like, you know, "Do you want your kids to be afraid of you? Do you want them to grow up feel- ," well, my--you know, and so it gets into a lot of these dynamics because the coaching work, the coaching work and the, the lifestyle allows the conversation because they feel that there's some connection there, but it's the therapy work that really digs deep with stuff that's happened in your life, you know, when you were in fifth grade or kindergarten that begins to tease out how you're showing up to the divorce process, and the, the patterns that you're going to repeat if you don't address and take care of yourself. Story_ID: 670988 Speaker 1: How do you charge for your services? Speaker 2: Every situation is unique. Sometimes it'll be hourly. I charge a minimum of coaching sessions because most of the time to get--and you'll find this in social work. It's the same sort of business model. You can't get someone to--by the first session, you don't know what you're trying to do. You're still assessing and you're still getting people to buy into the approach, whatever the right approach is, and, and also to build trust, and that just doesn't happen overnight. So it's the ability to have the conversation. Usually, I'll meet with someone, and that's a complimentary session when they're referred. I've, I've never solicited a client outside of my referral. I mean, everyone is sent to me. I'm very conscious about who I take on as a client because, again, this work is so stressful, and it--there is, there's a lot of unhealthiness going on sometimes, so if I feel that the chemistry is not right, that it's not going to work, I won't take you on as a client even if you've been referred to me, and that's happened before. And I work with people in a capacity where it's usually about eight sessions that they have to commit to, and, and that usually is enough to get the, the trust built, the buy in, and for them to begin to see success, I call them small wins, so that they can actually build on that and get to a goal, and, usually, by the end of eight--I would say eight to ten sessions, we're either at a stage where they can move onto the next level. They're--if the goal is to have the divorce end or get to a next step, which is potentially mediation. You know, it's usually I file--do I want to file? And then they file and they get to mediation or some court date where they have to present in front of the judge. Then it's a conversation of, okay, get through it, and then what's the next step? But in, in--usually, in that early stage, it's the kids. It's the parenting schedule. It's, it's collecting all of your data for the court. It's how are you dealing with your attorney? What type of attorney do you have? How do you need to communicate with that type of resource? Because every attorney is different, too, with their style. And some attorneys would never recommend someone like me because they want to be everything to their client. They're the coach. They're the leader. They don't want anyone in their process. And, you know, I'm usually good at spotting those type of attorneys, and it's fine. You know, and, usually, they work for their type of client, but the, the--some attorneys, they get it. They say, my client is really struggling. We're almost to settlement. It's, it's as good as they're going to get. It would be a waste of money for them to go to trial; they will refer me to a client. Story_ID: 670989 Speaker 1: This work is very personal-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --and strategic, and I'm just curious as to how do you scale it up? Because can anybody do this other than you? Do you work with a staff that any of the components can be farmed out to other people? Speaker 2: So that is the inflection point that I'm at right now. And I think that's, that's the journey for 2017 and beyond. I've had people that even a year before said to me, you've got to start teaching people how to do this because the work is so needed, and the way you approach it is very unique, and there's a lot to do. So that's, that's the journey. You know, I think--it's interesting because as a segue tying into what I do also--I think it's the Caribbean thing having multiple jobs, right, so ten jobs. So my other job is I'm an adjunct professor at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and I teach at the social work school [Silver School of Social Work at NYU], and I taught my first social work class in leadership September of last year, and I'm teaching-- Speaker 1: Of '15 [2015]? Speaker 2: --of '15 [2015], and I'm teaching again this semester coming up in January of '17 [2017], and so I laugh to myself because I sometimes wonder if the scalability is working through a social work school model, and maybe having a class there in, in that capacity. Right now, it's a leadership class, but these are things that I think about because I think this work is so powerful, and when I think about the foundational goal that I have, everything I do is about making a life better for a child. You know, I was the, the subject of a very contentious dynamic between parents [Theresita Shelburn Harris and Earl Harris], and, you know, it created a whole economic outcome and lifestyle change that, you know, changed everybody's trajectory, really, and when I think about where I've gone philanthropically and where I've gone professionally and the cycle of, you know, my journey, you know, having a situation where I had to go through my own divorce. Part of what drove me in my journey was really trying to keep myself as healthy as possible and grounded as possible so I could show my children [Paige Robinson and Simone Robinson] what it looks like to be resilient and come out on the other side happy, thriving, you know, successful. And, yes, you know, I know I've been very blessed because I know a lot of women in my situation would not have the same outcome and the same options and opportunities, but where I start from is, okay, but this is what I have. So what do I do with it? And, you know, to be able to make it through that journey in a space that would, you know, debilitate a lot of people, you know. Maybe it would have been easier to just stay home and take the kids to and from school and just kind of hang out. I, I chose to go back to school, and I chose to take something and create a profession and, and do something with it and take it to the next level, so I think for me what's going to be my next inflection point is getting through this sort of social work space and figuring out where I can touch people in engagement, and where I can have the most impact with respect to this piece of my work with the teaching piece of my work. And where can I have the most impact on child advocacy and families? Because I, you know, I've said this before, and you and I have interacted before that the one thing that literally--for families of color, we are, literally, a paycheck away and a generation away from wealth, our homes, our cars, our, our vacations homes, our lifestyle. You know, one thing goes wrong at work, and you can't find a job for a year or two, you've got to make some major strategic decisions. One thing goes on in your personal life, a divorce, it can literally devastate your finances and your economics and, and truly damage your children, so everything that you've built and acquired, your degrees, your home, you can't--you know, you can't--you--what are you creating for that next generation? So it's about legacy. And, you know, what are you showing your children? Because they, they replicate that cycle. I'm sure if you sat and looked at statistics of how many kids divorced, had divorced parents, and then the next generation. That's what I'm trying to work on, is how do you, how do you, you know, create safe spaces for our kids of color, our communities of color? But create paths for advancement and successful advancement for our youth and so that they can grow into committed adults, but also have healthy, happy, thriving relationships and, and impact the next generation. Story_ID: 670990 Speaker 1: How do you--and this is a question that's true for people in the mental health space--how do you take care of yourself when you are, you know, your--the work that you've chosen to do is working with people who are at one of the highest levels of stress-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in their lives. Speaker 2: Yeah, outside of the loss of a family member or death-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --or something. And it is a death, right. So the thing that I've learned, and this is from social work, my own journey, is that the best social workers, the best coaches, the best anything, they have their own, so, you know, even the best coaches for the athletes, they have their own coach. The best mental health social workers have their own social work space where they can take care of their life because the power of talking and just getting the things out of your head, out of your head, so that you can create the space for the new thing is, is very powerful, and when you're in this type of work, it's crucial. So I--you couldn't--I wouldn't advise anyone showing up to coach, life coach, you know, this type of high conflict coaching without having their own mental health support because you, you can't do it successfully if you don't because your life is happening to you as well, and you can bring that to your clients. There're needs to be some very tight boundaries, right. The other thing is the physical. I, I really took care of my physical health and wellness when I was going through my process. I got on an eating regimen. I worked out three times a week. You--I don't think you can show up to these type of protracted situations without taking care of yourself because the emotions are so intense, like you said, that if you're having an outlet and taking care of your physical wellness, your coping mechanism will kick in, and for many of us, especially women, it's eating, it's drinking, you know, and for a lot of people it's drugs. So, you know, if you're trying to stay away from the things that want--that--you know, and it depends on what your goal is. I, I've worked with clients who have been very depressed and getting them into therapy and explaining why, even though they have me as a coach, and I'm really good and I feel like a therapist, and I could be a therapist, it's not, it's not what I'm choosing to use my time on with them because the strategic work is much more important, but getting them--I've, I've gotten my clients into therapy, and they've seen a huge--because I always tell them, look, when you sit with me, you've got to make decisions about attorneys, judges, your strategic--your, your money, your finances, your kids. Where are all your emotions being handled? That's what, that's what the therapy is for, and so that's what I, that's what I focus on. Story_ID: 670991 Speaker 1: I want you to take a look now at your career, which has included a number of things-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and at your life. As you, as you take that look back and, and come forward, what do you hope that your legacy is? Speaker 2: So when I was at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I was a mentor. I had to do student support, study support strategies for kids, so we worked in the student academic counseling center. And one of the exercises they had us do when we were training to be mentors, is we had to write our obituary. It's hard to do this as like a teenager, and my obituary--of course, I was writing that I was married to the person I was dating at the time, which didn't happen, but what was very interesting was that in my obituary, I wrote that I was running a mass--a major communications corporation. I was running a communications firm that helped people with media, television, books. I, I wrote this. This was my obituary. And that I was a lifelong community servant, and I wrote about the things that I did in my community philanthropically and that I died surrounded by my children and my friends, and that's my goal for my life. I, I'm, I'm living it. I see--if I were to go tomorrow, that's the life I would, I would be surrounded by students I've touched. I would be surrounded by my children [Paige Robinson and Simone Robinson], by my family, by my friends. I--as I look forward, if I'm here for another ten, twenty years, one of the things that's happened for me philanthropically is, I'm shifting. You know, I, I'm on the board of Second Stage now, just recently joined the board of WNET [WNET-TV, New York, New York], and-- Speaker 1: Which is? Speaker 2: Is the public television station in, in New York [New York], the, the PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] station, and I think it owns two other stations-- Speaker 1: And, and say what is Second Stage. Speaker 2: Second Stage Theater [New York, New York] is a theater that basically helps promote narratives and, and plays and, and works of sort of aspiring playwrights, and they have an--I'm all about pipeline. They have a very interesting pipeline where they have a small uptown theater [McGinn/Cazale Theater, New York, New York], where if you're a new playwright, you can feature a work there that may not be as commercial. And then they have an off-Broadway theater [Tony Kiser Theater, New York, New York], which is on 43rd Street, which has shown plays like 'Jitney' [August Wilson], we just did 'Notes From the Field' with Anna Deavere Smith. [HistoryMaker] Lynn Nottage has done a couple of plays there, so, you know, it's a very interesting theater because it has, it has allowed very interesting voices to have a place on the stage. And they've also--and it's diverse. They, they featured 'Dear Evan Hansen' [Benj Pasek and Justin Paul], which was a musical. And I actually just--I was not a member of the board when it premiered on off- Broadway, but I had the opportunity to see the play. It just opened on Broadway, actually. Now they have a theater, the Helen Hayes Theater [New York, New York] that they just acquired, which is giving them now Broadway exposure. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So what I'm finding in this climate as I shift--you know, I'll be fifty next year, so the second half of my life, hopefully, if I live to be a hundred. You know, what are, what are the ways that I'm going to touch youth and community of color? And I need a bigger stage. So being on Second Stage, being at WNET that's focused on media with impact, cultural, the arts, you know, doing more in depth stories, presenting very different points of view, that's what I'm focused on right now. And I laugh because if you had told me years ago when I was focused on education and UNCF [United Negro College Fund] and charter schools that I would sort of be segueing into this space, I would have been very surprised. My legacy, I'm going to leave a book for my children, maybe more, a couple of books. I think I have a lot of stories to tell. I, I'm definitely going to leave a legacy where there will be people who have children and grandchildren that have graduated from college and thrived professionally because they had an NJAE scholarship [New Jersey Advocates for Education]. And, hopefully, being a board member and supporting playwrights and maybe supporting programming on WNET, I will have allowed a lot of people whose voices needed to be heard and stories needed to be told, a platform to do that, and I just want to be happy. I mean, you know, I think--I'll say this, when you see death, which is what I saw when I was with my dad [Earl Harris], it makes you run the race a little differently because you know what the finish line looks like, and so my goal is to just touch as many hearts and souls and minds and spirits as I can in my lifetime because, you know, when you talk about faith, there was a chance, a journey in my life where I said, you know, God has always been around me, and He was definitely most prominent in my divorce journey, and I think it was that journey that really reconnected me to my, my higher, my higher power, my faith in God, my belief in God, and, you know, that faith is with me in everything I do now, and all the work I do now, all the things I do now, so I just, you know, every day I wake up. I always say, direct me, lead me, channel me, focus me, and I'm--I will do, I will do the will. And, you know, I want happy, happy healthy children, and, hopefully happy, healthy grandchildren. Story_ID: 670992 Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Not a single one. Even my journeys to Asia, everything. Because I--it's funny, when I talk to my clients, they'll say, "God, if I hadn't done this." And I said, "Well, okay, we're not gonna call that a mistake. We're not going to." Because, again, it's all about how you frame things. I--the one regret I would say I have, and this is a silly regret, but I regret the fact that I was not as focused my freshman year in high school because it actually cost me opportunities. I--you know, I did not pay attention to my grades. I partied (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In high school? Speaker 2: In college [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. I had a great time in college my freshman year, too great a time. But it affected my grades, and when I went to apply for an academic program, Semester at Sea, to actually travel the world and go to Turkey and Egypt and Russia and all of these places, I didn't make the cut academically. It was a 3.0 [grade point average], and I think I was at a two point something. And I, I begged. I cried. And I couldn't do it. And that's one of the things I always tell my students. You know, your freshman year at college is grade thirteen. You bring the same level of energy you brought in high school because if you're trying to do anything advanced, it's cumulative, so what you do now has a cost, and I can't tell you how many students have told me that they actually held onto that advice and it made such a difference because if you, if you mess up freshman year--and I say when the communities we come from, the resources we come from, the fact that you've gotten this scholarship means without this money, you wouldn't be here, so if you don't treat this opportunity like it's an extended year of high school and bring that same level of dedication and passion and energy, you at least give your plat- yourself a platform to play your sophomore year, your junior year. But if you decide you're going to checkout, not show up, you can't do much from a 1.9 or a 2.0, but you can do a whole lot from a 2.8, 3.0, 3.2 and onward, and sometimes they listen. It make as big difference. But that's my--that would be my one regret. Story_ID: 670993 Speaker 1: You've been talking a lot about young people. What advice would you give to young people who may want to follow in your footsteps? Speaker 2: Oh, I get that a lot. My students actually ask me a lot. What I tell them, especially my, my social work students because they're M.S.W.'s, and they're coming into their careers afterwards--is I always say you've got to work in a corporate environment. You've gotta, you gotta work--just like I did. I went to Prudential [Prudential Financial Services; Prudential Financial, Inc.], I, I worked in investment banks. You need that experience. I mean, a lot of people sometimes, they go into social work, and they have this fantasy that they'll be a counselor, or they'll be doing private practice, and that's all well and good, and I'm in private practice as an entrepreneur right now, but it was on a platform and a foundation of a whole lot of experiences, and I tell them, you know, you can't relate to people who need support in pain if you haven't walked on journeys that they can relate to, and that is what a corporate, a professional work environment gives you. It gives you a platform to connect with people. The other thing that I tell students is that you already have--there's nothing that you don't have that, that prevents you from being a leader. There's not something that you have to go out and acquire. A lot of it is understanding who you are and what you bring to the table, so you have to know yourself. If you don't spend time getting to know yourself, it's going to be very hard to lead other people because they actually have to like you and believe in you and be inspired by you, so if you don't know what makes you tick, if you're not comfortable and confident in yourself in being able to speak truth to power or where you come from and be secure in that identity, it's going to be very hard to be a leader, a good leader. You're going to get responsibilities, but it might be hard to get people to follow you. Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I love to sing and dance and act, so-- Speaker 1: Very good. Speaker 2: --so when I finish this life of whatever I'm doing, if I have a minute, I'm going to be in the theater doing something fun and fabulous and sing. I was in choir when I was in high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I, I love music, and that's a part of me that I definitely want to express before, before I, before I leave. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you...