 Story_ID: 653466 Speaker 1: I'm Denise DeBurst Gines [Denise Gines], the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer and Derrick Richardson is an observer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please including middle, middle name? Speaker 2: Terri Andrea Sewell, T-E-R-R spell it. T-E-R-R-I, Andrea, A-N--. Actually Terri's really not my real name, my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] though will kill me. My really name is Terrycina, T-E-R-R-Y-C-I-N-A, Andrea A-N-D-R-E-A, Sewell S-E-W-E-L-L [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell]. Speaker 1: Your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Huntsville, Alabama, January 1st, 1965. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am currently the U.S. congresswoman from the 7th district of Alabama [7th Congressional District]. Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: We're currently being interviewed at, in my Birmingham [Alabama] office, congressional office (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is May 5th, 2017. Story_ID: 653467 Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask you some, just some fun questions to begin okay. Tell me your favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] will kill me but it's red. Even though I'm an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] (laughter). I look fierce in pink and green too, but red is my favorite color. Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Southern fried chicken probably, or smothered pork, my mother's smothered pork chops. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Any beautiful beach in the world. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite season or time of the year? Speaker 2: I love spring and fall. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite quote or saying? Speaker 2: I do: so a person thinks, so is he [Proverbs 23:7]. Speaker 1: Let's begin (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My second favorite. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That I say all the time (laughter), I love 'Mother to Son' by Langston Hughes, so, "Life for me ain't been no crystal stair." Story_ID: 653468 Speaker 1: We're gonna begin by talking about your ancestry, what you know about your ancestry. So let's start on your mother's side. Tell me your mother's name, spell it for me please, and, and tell where she was born, in what year? Well her date of birth, if you, if you know it? Speaker 2: Now, you're really testing me now aren't ya? Mother, my mother is Nancy Gardner Sewell. She was born September 16, 1935, in I want to say Lowndesboro, Alabama. She spent all of her formative years, as did her, the majority of her family, for three generations in Lowndes County, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, and did she share any stories about her growing up in Lowndes County? Speaker 2: She did my mom. My mom's side of the family can date their genealogy back four or five generations. And they were mostly sharecroppers, so farmers and preachers. I can tell you that my mom's father, Tom Gardner [Thomas Gardner III], was the third and so there was a Tom Gardner the second [Thomas Gardner II] and a Tom, and an original Tom Gardner [Thomas Gardner]. And all of them pastored the same church. Beulah Primitive Baptist Church in, in Havel, Alabama [sic. Hale Place; Hope Hull, Alabama]. And actually its Burke, Alabama [sic.], they'll kill me, Burke, Alabama. And so my grandfather died at ninety-two and my mother's father. And my big daddy, is what we called him even though he was a skinny man, we called him big daddy. He, he was the one who finally paid off the land, for the land. But, they were sharecroppers in Lowndes County. My mother comes from a family of eight children. And my grandfather prided himself on the fact that he was able to send all of them who wanted to go to college to college. They were first generation college. My mom was a bit of a smart butt and so she skipped some grades. And had to be, but when it came time to go to college she had to, they had to make sure that they did it in the order of birth from the oldest to the youngest. And so, I think that my mom having--had to sit out a year. And they were farmers so cotton and corn and I mean all of, sugarcane. I mean all of my memories my childhood memories of, are spending summers at my big daddy and big mother's [Nell Gardner] house, in, in Lowndes County, Alabama. And so, my mom, me being her only daughter I was burdened with all of things that she wanted to do that she didn't have a chance to do. And so, if I ever wanted to get out of any chores I just had to tell my mother. Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me. Speaker 2: That I was I just had to tell my mother that I was studying or writing a paper, or reading, or doing something academic. And I think that, that was because my mom you know, really felt that women of her generation didn't have the opportunities that I had. And that I should seize all those opportunities. She wanted to learn French, so I had to go to Paris [France]. And but I looking back on it, my mom's brilliance really was the reason why I think that she pushed me so hard. And she was a wonderful role model. Story_ID: 653469 Speaker 1: So tell me about your, your mom's education. You, she did go to college and tell me what was her profession afterwards? Speaker 2: So, my mom [Nancy Gardner Sewell] graduated from the Alabama State University [Alabama State College; Alabama State University] in Montgomery, Alabama. It was a teachers college back then and it still is a historically black college [HBCU]. I'm very proud that it's in my district [7th Congressional District] and that I get a chance to make sure that it is preserved for future generations. As a part of my job. And my mom was a library and a media specialist she and my father [Andrew Sewell] met at their first job. Both of them attended Alabama State University but as my mother likes to say she was a smart studious type in college. And my dad being the star athlete wouldn't have looked her way. So, they met at their first job which was, which was at Councill Training School in Huntsville, Alabama; it was the segregated all black high school. That was on the hill next to Alabama A and M University [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama]. So, my parents met there. Dad was the head basketball coach and my, and football coach and my mom was the head librarian. Story_ID: 653470 Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your grandmother? Speaker 2: Um-hm, so my mom's mother, all of the, the strong smells that I have of my childhood are from my time being cared for in the summers by my big daddy [Thomas Gardner III] and big mommy. Her name was Nell Gardner and she was a homemaker. She really helped run the family farm. And to take care of the children. And she had the biggest arms that expand really wide and that gave great hugs. My mom [Nancy Gardner Sewell] when I was three years old decide, and my brothers were twins [Andrew Sewell and Anthony Sewell], decided to go off to Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] to get her master's in library science, media specialist. And she, and so, we were taken care of that whole year and a half by my grandparents. And on that farm in Lowndes County, Alabama. They had a huge fig tree in the front of the yard. And so all of the smells are, are smells of preserves being made by my grandmother. She used to be an amazing cook and bake, bake the most amazing pies, egg custard pies and sweet potato pies. I mean you name it. She made amazing pound cake. And so my mother's mother was definitely the nurturer, and taught my mom well. My mom was exceptionally bright and was a great model for me. I think that having grown up on a farm in segregated Alabama and being limited in her ability to travel and to get an education, she took every opportunity to do that. So, mommy was a librarian and went on to get her master's degree and worked tow- towards her doctorate. And, and the kids we, we, my brothers and I stayed with my grandparents that summer, that year, year and half that she was off getting her master's at Purdue. Story_ID: 653471 Speaker 1: And you told us that your grandfather, Tom [Sewell's maternal grandfather, Thomas Gardner III], and there were three Toms. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you know any of their wives' names, your great-great-mothers? Speaker 2: I don't. My, the recollection that I have of the family history is that we origin--I think my mom's side of the family originally were slaves in the South Carolinas and how they migrated to Alabama I'm not sure of. But, they must have been amazing people. Because you can go to Lowndes County today and on those, that land that they sharecropped for generations. There's still that beautiful church; it now has a gorgeous facade that Tom Gardner, I guess he would have been the fifth [Thomas Gardner V], my, my, my uncle, my mother's brother, who is now the pastor of Beulah Primitive Baptist Church [Hope Hull, Alabama]. It has a beautiful big sign that says, "Beulah Land," and on that land are, is a beautiful church and a wonderful creek in the back that we were all baptized in. I remember early on, asking my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] the difference between a primitive Baptist and a regular Baptist, and my mother said, "Immersion you were immersed, immersed in water when you were baptized." And so, that is a wonderful memory for me (background noise) to have the creek in the backyard. And in the front of the church is a cemetery where generations of my ancestors are buried. And so, what a wonderful legacy to have. And every time we visit that church, which is still a big church today, it's, it's really great to- to, to know that for at least three generations I know that we were--my mom's side was Lowndes County, Alabama. Story_ID: 653472 Speaker 1: Can you tell me (background noise) your mother's siblings' names? Speaker 2: My mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] has an older sister by the name of Dorothy Jenkins Sanders. She has a sister Theresa Douglas. She has another, she has a brother, who I call Uncle Sunny, but he is Tom Gardner the fourth [Thomas Gardner IV]. She has another brother John Gardner, Johnny Mack, who lives in Cleveland [Ohio]. She has two more sisters Gloria, we call her Jean. Gloria Jean Humphrey [ph.] and Negatha Holt [ph.], is the youngest. And she lost her brother by the name of Willie Gardner. So, the rest of her sibling are still alive and are very, are all educators. My Uncle Sunny is a preacher. But my mother's four sisters are all educators, all retired from the Alabama state school system, mom working in Selma [Alabama] and they worked in schools both in Lowndes County [Alabama] and Montgomery County [Alabama]. Story_ID: 653473 Speaker 1: So let's move over to your father's side. And tell me your father's name, spell it if you, if you would? His date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: So my dad I know I just realized I got the years wrong for my mom [Nancy Gardner Sewell]. She's gonna kill me (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, you can correct it. Speaker 2: So, my dad, my dad's name is Andrew Anthony Sewell [Andrew Sewell]. Andrew A-N-D-R-E-W, Anthony A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, Sewell S-E-W-E-L-L. And he was born on April 25, 1935. So that means my mother was September 16, 1939. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now I've straightened that out (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Selma, Alabama. I get to be, I, I mean, I'm three generations of Selmians. And my dad's mother was Miss Admonia Accoff, A-D-M-O-N-I-A, Accoff, A-C-C-O-F-F. And my dad also had eight, eight, maybe nine, siblings. And he came, both came from very big families who are quite loving. My dad grew up in Dallas County [Alabama] in Selma. And his Selma was very different than my Selma. His Selma was a segregated Selma. His mother's Selma was a segregated Selma. My grandmother attended Morning Star Baptist Church [Selma, Alabama] and she worked in a cigar factory. I believe that cigar factory was located in Dallas County. It's no longer in existence today. But, she was a factory worker. And she now she, we called her big mama, but she was a little mama (laughter). And my mother's mama would make sense to call my grandmother Nell big mama [Nell Gardner]. But my dad's mother really you know, taught herself how to read and to write, and had to drop out of high school in order to take care of her family. And my dad was the oldest son, of that my grandmother has. And my grand- my dad was raised by his stepfather, Mose Accoff [ph.]. And his dad was, was George Sewell. I don't know much about my dad, my dad's real dad. But, I know a lot about my, my pop Mose, who raised my dad and is the grandfather that I know. And they for generations lived in Selma. And the women were either factory workers or many worked in the homes of white people in Selma, as domestic workers. And most of the men worked in factories. Story_ID: 653474 Speaker 1: My dad [Andrew Sewell], was the only one of his immediate family that went off to college. He was the oldest and (pause), oldest son, oldest son. And he was really influenced by a Jesuit priest by the name of Father Ziter [Nelson B. Ziter] who came to Selma [Alabama] in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]. He was the priest of, of the Our Lady of Queen of Peace in Selma. And he ran a boys club long before there was a modern day Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] there was, in Selma, the Don Bosco Boys Club. I don't know who Don Bosco was but he must have been pretty important. But, Father Ziter took under his wings fifteen African American boys, and this is a white English priest. I mean he was born in England, spoke the Queen's English. But, he had an amazing influence on my father and, and other African American boys in Selma at that time. He told those boys that the way out the way forward was through education and that they should use their athletic prowess to help them get full scholarships to go to college. And he made it his life mission to help those boys go to school and all of them went to school. All of them went to college. Most went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] which was a Catholic historically black college [HBCU] in Louisiana. Some went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and some went to Alabama State University [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama]. My dad went to Alabama State University. He said that Xavier was way too far from his mother [Admonia Accoff] to, to for him to attend so he attended Montgomery which was only an hour from Selma. But my dad--his family was extremely proud of him. That he went to college and he did use his athletic prowess to help him to get a full ride to Alabama State University. Dad was an amazing athlete. In high school, he was captain of the football--he lettered in four sports, like he did in college. It was basketball, football, track and golf. My dad learned how to play golf in Selma, Alabama in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] as a caddy. He was a caddy to a local business owner in Selma. And in fact, won his first set of clubs by winning the caddy tournament, which was played at midnight at the Selma Country Club [Selma, Alabama]. 'Cause god forb- forbid African American little black boys would be playing golf in the light of day. But they played--they had a caddy's tournament and my dad won it year after year. And in fact, got his first set of golf clubs from the, the gentleman that he caddied for. And dad was a scratch golfer. Way before there was Tiger Woods there was my dad. And he was amazing. And so, growing up he--we had our own golf cart, growing up we had our own set of golf clubs. Of course my brothers [Andrew Sewell and Anthony Sewell] and I didn't ever develop that same talent as my dad. But, we were very much exposed to the game of golf. My dad's career, he was a high school basketball coach and football coach. He was a legendary high school basketball coach. He attended high school in Selma at Hudson High School [R.B. Hudson High School]. It was a segregated high school it was my junior high school. By the time I went to school it was integrated and it was called Westside Junior High School [R.B. Hudson Middle School, Selma, Alabama]. But, back in the day, my dad's day, when there was segregated Selma. It was the black high school. My dad's yearbook, high school yearbook is full of pictures of him. He was the captain of the football team. He was captain of the track team. He was a student athlete. Well they would say that he was athlete. And they called him Bo Diddley and don't ask me how he got the nickname Bo Diddley. I know that Bo Diddley was a singer. But they called my dad Bo Diddley, was his nickname in high school. So even today they say, they talk about Bo and I know that those are people who know my dad from the early years in Selma, his formative childhood years. But, yes, so my dad was greatly influenced by Father Ziter and in fact went to catechism and converted to being a Catholic, because of his experience there. As I told you my grandmother spend many a Sundays, and my--and me with her at Morning Star Baptist Church [Selma, Alabama]. But, my dad was an--my dad converted in high school to Catholic, to being Catholic. Story_ID: 653475 Speaker 1: And while we're speaking ab- while you're speaking about your dad, would you just go ahead and, and tell us about his accomplishments as a, a, a coach? Speaker 2: Yes, so my dad [Andrew Sewell], who recently passed. He passed four weeks ago. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: On, on April 8th after battling for fifteen years a debilitating stroke, several strokes in fact. But fifteen years ago he had a massive stroke that left him in a wheelchair. But, he lived for fifteen years after that and--but, his accomplishments are legendary, I mean I, I have to tell you, running for [U.S.] Congress as a Sewell and having Selma [Alabama] as one of the cities in my district [7th Congressional District] was a plus (gesture). He was well known for his athleticism and as a co- he was, he started his coaching career at Councill Training School [Huntsville, Alabama]. But, when my [paternal] grandmother [Admonia Accoff] got ill, he moved my mom [Nancy Gardner Sewell] and I had been born, by that time I was about two I think. My parents left Huntsville. I was born in Huntsville, Alabama. My parents left Huntsville and moved back to Selma where my dad became the head coach of his alma mater Hudson High School [R.B. Hudson High School; R.B. Hudson Middle School]. And at Hudson High School he was there for, I think six years. And lead them to all county, all state, four the black division of high school athletics. And when Selma became integrated in the '70s [1970s], my dad was asked to the integrated--the newly integrated high school in Selma, Selma High School is what it was called. Used to be called Parrish High School, A.G. Parrish High School [Albert G. Parrish High School] and it was the all white school. And Hudson High School was the all black high school, back in my dad's day. So, my dad then goes to Selma High School and did not go as the head coach he went as the assistant coach. They were retained the head basketball, the white head basketball coach that was there at the all white school. And my parents, my dad sued the City of Selma, Selma's, Selma public schools, Selma City Schools, for the right to be head coach and while it took six or--six years he finally became head coach of Selma High School. And lead the Selma Saints to, to amazing records as 6A championship teams for the state. He was several times high school basketball coach of the year. My biggest regret was not getting my dad into the Alabama Sports Hall of Fame [Birmingham, Alabama] while he was alive. But, we're gonna do that next year. But, was an amazing teacher, he taught math, and he also was a coach. And you don't realize how your parents influence people as educators and as coaches. But, but my dad had an amazing influence on so many lives of so many of the young men and women in Selma. And came out to pay honor to him when he passed. At Selma High School at the auditorium, a thousand people, so. Very well loved and very well respected and it was an amazing legacy to leave to my brothers and myself as well as my niece, nieces' and nephew. Speaker 1: Well, I'm very sorry for your loss because I can see you were a daddy's girl. Speaker 2: Such a daddy's girl. I, I actually left my legal practice in New York City [New York, New York], to move to Alabama. It was one time to send money home after my dad had those strokes, but it was another thing to send myself. And frankly you're not, you don't realize how you're free to be who you are until there's a crisis in your family. And dad's major stroke fifteen years ago was a--a big crisis, a big turning point in our, our family life. Story_ID: 653476 Speaker 1: Would you name the br-, your father's siblings? Speaker 2: Um-hm, so my dad's oldest--well oldest sister is, we call her Mary Brown, but I think it's Mayrene Brown [ph.]. And she's my dad's oldest sister. And after Mayrene came Jodie [ph.], and then my uncle Emerson [Emerson Acoff], and my unc- my aunt Ann [Ann Woodard], my aunt Frances [Frances Canty]. And my Aunt Dawn, Pearlie [Pearlie Rowzee] is her real name. And my dad [Andrew Sewell], my dad's brothers and sisters all migrated, during the Great Migration to Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan] for work after high school. Dad was the only one who stayed home in Alabama. And all of the rest of them moved up to New York--I mean sorry to Detroit or Chicago, to join the automobile industry. And so, most of them retire from GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] and Ford [Ford Motor Company] and I can remember the, that I growing up always having these northern cousins that knew the latest dances. Who were much hipper or cooler than, than, than my brothers [Andrew Sewell and Anthony Sewell] and I. But, it made for a very interesting family reunion and family dynamic. Story_ID: 653477 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your early childhood. And earlier you were talking about smells that you remember of the cooking of your [maternal] grandmother [Nell Gardner]. So, one of my questions would have been what signs--sights, smells and sounds would take you back to your early childhood memory. So we know some of the smells, so tell me about the sights and sounds that would take you back? Speaker 2: You know, one of the great privileges I have of being a member of [U.S.] Congress that represents my hometown of Selma [Alabama] and, and these rural communities around it. Including my mother's home, home city and county of Lowndes [Lowndes County, Alabama] is that I get to travel those same back roads visiting constituents that I used to travel as a child. And so when I think about some of the sights of my childhood it is the--those dirt roads that lead off of the main road that you can drive for miles and not see anything but trees. And then all of a sudden see you know, a house and farmland. And, and so it never ceases to amaze me the beauty of what, what some would call the country. But, I would just really call come, you know, Selma is infamously known because of its, of the Civil Rights Movement. But, Selma's really a town of nineteen thousand and when I think about my childhood I am and the sights and sounds of my childhood. I'm always reminded of them when I am, when I'm around people who give me preserves or when I'm in--visiting country stores and there are you know pickled relishes and pickled okra. I mean all the things that my grandmother used to do and my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell], now do- does. And I hope that it doesn't die in my generation. I can't make those sweet potatoes pies like my grandmother. I, I know that's something that's on my bucket list. But, the sights and sounds and smells of my childhood are often brought to mind by the work that I currently do as a member of Congress. Because I get to travel those same back roads and visit and, and s- and see all those old sights and visit those smells. Story_ID: 653478 Speaker 1: You told us a story about how your mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] and father [Andrew Sewell] met. So, they--what date did they marry? Speaker 2: So, my parents married on June 15, 1963. And my dad loves to tell the story of how he asked for my mother's hand in marriage. My grandfather [Thomas Gardner III] being a Baptist preacher, Primitive Baptist preacher [at Beulah Primitive Baptist Church, Hope Hull, Alabama], was a little suspect of my father, who was a Catholic. And also was you know, quite the charmer. And my mom, well she can hold her own. But, my mom really came into her own as an adult like in the sense that my mom was a studious more studious and quiet type growing up I think. But anyway my, my dad loves to say that he literally walked into my mother's house. First of all he--he walking, drive up to my, my parents my, my mother's parents' home in Lowndes County [Alabama] he saw all this land, like all this land. And he, and he could not believe that, black people owned all this land. And as folklore would have it, dad you know, asked for my, my mother's hand in marriage when he walks into the house and you know, my mother, he wins over my grandmother [Nell Gardner] but my grandfather's not quite sold on him. And so, my grandfather's big questions was will she have to convert to Catholicism if she (laughter)--. How will the children be raised (laughter)? And he said, "Well my mother's [Admonia Accoff] Baptist and I'm fine by that." And, that, guess was a winning answer because they got married, after courting for two years. And, and I was born two years after they got married in Huntsville, Alabama. Story_ID: 653479 Speaker 1: And when were your, your siblings born? Speaker 2: My, my brothers were born July 20--21st, 1967. And they were twins. And I have to tell you I was a little spoiled as the oldest and the only girl. I'm such a daddy's girl. And I was promised that I was having a brother or a sister and I held my parents [Nancy Gardner Sewell and Andrew Sewell] to that promise. And so, when my parents came home with two of them I promptly looked at the smallest one and said, "I'll take that one. You can take the other one back," (laughter). My brothers never let me live that down actually (laughter). Speaker 1: And tell me their names? Speaker 2: My brothers Andrew, Andrew Dwight Sewell [Andrew Sewell], and Anthony Dwayne Sewell [Anthony Sewell]. Story_ID: 653480 Speaker 1: Your father [Andrew Sewell] had moved back to, to Selma [Alabama] is that right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To take care of my moth- my grandmother [Admonia Accoff]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By this time my grandmother had diabetes pretty badly actually. And that, they had to amputate her toes first. And then over the years they gradually amputated all the way up to her knees. And my dad being the eldest son, came home to Selma to, to take care of his mom. And that's where you know, coming back to home he was local boy done good. And so, it was really interesting to grow up in Selma. The Selma that I grew up in which was integrated and I, I, I there's there are parts of my hometown that I pass by and that I just can't imagine had two water fountains one colored and one white. And I can't imagine my father's 6'4" you know, drinking from the colored fountain. Maybe that's a tribute to the amazing people who fought and died for, for the right of all African Americans to live in this, this great country. Story_ID: 653481 Speaker 1: Would you describe the house that you lived in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Speaker 1: This is where, we're talking about your, once you moved back and, and you're getting ready to go to elementary school. Speaker 2: So, my parents own two homes, so the first house they lived in Selma [Alabama] was on Green Street. And it had a big porch and it, it remind it was had large rooms, not many rooms, but the rooms were large. And so, it was an older home and I just remember it having a large porch with a swing. And that our neighbors were the Kimbroughs [ph.]. I remember that. And I remember that my brothers [Andrew Sewell and Anthony Sewell] were very precocious twins, in fact they were voted the baddest twins in Selma. And growing up I was very much the daddy's girl and my brothers were very much the mommy's boys. And my mom [Nancy Gardner Sewell] to this day believes that every child has a talent. And the job of the parents is to find that talent and to nurture that talent. So, my brothers would have numerous interests and whatever they latched onto my mother would promote. So, it was catching bugs we were gonna be the best bug catcher. (Laughter) If it was wanted to be a fire chief we're gonna be the best fire chief. So, my brothers were very precocious so my memories of them are you know, just funny memories of me tattle telling on my brothers. I was good at that. And, and, and--and running around this house that was on Green Street. I don't remember my room. I know that my parents had, I know that they had three bedrooms I know that. But, I don't remember really the, the, that much about my room. I do remember though that porch and sitting on that porch, many a, many a days. Speaker 1: How long did you live in that house, on Green Street? Speaker 2: I'm not really sure I think we lived in that house. Well, I know we moved to movin' on up. We moved into the, a subdivision. We were the first black family to integrate a subdivision over by Cedar Park in off of Woodrow Avenue in Selma. And I, and it was so that I could attend Cedar Park High Sch- Cedar Park Elementary School [Selma, Alabama]. And I was the only African American student in that high school. I mean that, sorry, that elementary school. I apologize. So, my parents moved from Green Street to, to my current, the current house that my parents live in 705 King Lane drive, Selma. And we were the first African America family to move there. And my brothers and I integrated that elementary school Cedar Park. I remember our home being toilet papered. I think I was in the second grade when we moved into that house. My parents are still at that house today. But, I remember the, the--I remember vividly coming home, my dad [Andrew Sewell], I would--the routine was I would go to my--all of us would go with my dad to the, to the gymnasium where my dad would usually be practicing, the, the team would be practicing. And we would all come home; my mom and dad both worked at Selma High School [Selma, Alabama]. And so, I remember that, the, the, the front yard being toilet papered and I remember asking my parents why was it being to- toilet papered. And my mother I think wanted to skirt the issue. My dad is a plain talker and he said, "Because some of the people in the neighborhood don't want us here." I can remember thinking to myself but why would they not want us here. I think, I thought about the fact that two doors down was a friend of mine from school and that three doors down was another friend from school. And the other way two doors down, another friend from school. And I just couldn't imagine why they wouldn't want to welcome us to the neighborhood. I can also remember two years after that the--seeing another person's home being toilet papered and asking my parents. Oh and seeing a white woman and white man going, going into the house. And I remember asking my mom, "Well why are they, why is their house being toilet papered? They're not black?" And my mother said, "There's all kinds of ra- racisms, racisms and sometimes there're shades of grey." And my dad says, "That's a Jewish family." Didn't know what that meant. But, my brothers go to school the next day after they moved in. And there was a, a white kid that was being bullied in their class, because he wore a yarmulke. And my brothers were taller and, and then Eric, his name was Eric Benn. And Eric became my brothers' best friend. And the very next day after he was merc- really mercilessly teased by the kids because he wore a yarmulke, the next day all three walked into the classroom with a yarmulke and I think that they were fast friends every since. And so, it was my first lesson in shades of grey if you will. That the world is not just black and white. And that, that discrimination takes all forms. And I was so blessed to have ha-, grown up with Eric as my brothers' best friend. I, I call him my third brother. Story_ID: 653482 Speaker 1: And, my brothers were fraternal twins but everyone thought that they were identical twins. So, my, my dad [Andrew Sewell] would call them. Well, he would just say, "Boys." And there's great stories of how my brothers would trick my dad. 'Cause my dad, they swore that my dad didn't know which one was which and there're just great stories of daddy coming to get one son who's--because they, he was called, that that son was sick. And there was another son that was supposed to be taking a test. And but, but, but was in trouble with the principal's office and, and you know. The one who was in trouble saw my dad coming to pick up the one that was sick. And he proceeded to cough and my dad took him in the car and took him home. And then you know, twenty minutes later he gets a call from the superin- from the principal saying, "I thought you were coming to get the, your child Andrew [Andrew Sewell] who is sick." Anyway there's lots, lots of stories about that. But, Eric [Eric Benn] was like a brother to me. He grew up in the same household. And it was great to grow up learning about another faith. Remember I--my--I, I, just remember that I grew up, my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] was raised Baptist. My dad was raised Baptist became Catholic. I was christened Baptist and for my entire adult life, entire childhood we attended Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church [Selma, Alabama], yes African Methodist Episcopal church. So, I remember getting the form from school that said what is your, you know, what is your religion? And I said, "Mommy are we Baptist? Are we A.M.E.? Are we Chris- I mean are we Catholic?" And she said, "Baby, we're Christian, just put Christian." But, it was a great, great way to grow up in hindsight, to have such respect for various religions. And the, the infusion of Eric into our family life, when we were in elementary school [Cedar Park Elementary School, Selma, Alabama] and all the rest of our lives. Really gave me a great sense of respect and, and, and--of the various religions. And so, and, and so yeah. I know I'm rambling (laughter). Story_ID: 653483 Speaker 1: So 1970 is about the time that you go to school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Is that correct? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay and, Cedar Park Elementary School [Selma, Alabama], is the school you go to. Speaker 2: But, before that I was at the Fat Albert school is what I called it, but it was called St. Elizabeth [St. Elizabeth's School, Selma, Alabama] (laughter). And it was, it was Catholic school because I started school early. I was a little bit of a pro- precocious child who loved to talk. And my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] wanted to channel that energy in so positive way. So, the public schools wouldn't allow I, I was born in January and you had to be you know, six years old. And I, I missed the cut off, so I was either gonna be ol- younger than my peers or older than my peers. My mother so my first school was that St. Elizabeth was my first school. But, yes, 1971 is when I went to Cedar Park. Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into the school. I just want to go back to, to the neighborhood in which you live. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you said subdivision, and most subdivisions are all residential homes, is that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --correct? Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 653484 Speaker 1: When you went shopping you know to--where the commercial areas were, tell me about the experiences there. Who owned the businesses where your family shopped? Speaker 2: So my dad's [Andrew Sewell] best friend in high school [R.B. Hudson High School; R.B. Hudson Middle School] and, and until he, my dad's best friend owned his, his parents owned the black funeral home. And his parents, that's my Uncle Charles, who I didn't get to really know well because he died when I was very young. But, I'm telling you this because my growing up, the Williams and the Sewells, there was this bond. So, Charles Williams was my dad's best, best friend. And his, his parents owned Williams Funeral Home [J.H. Williams and Sons Funeral Home; Ashley's J. H. Williams and Sons Funeral Home, Selma Alabama] and, and so the, there were black businesses and white businesses in Selma [Alabama] growing up. And my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] was very active in her sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. And my dad was very active in the, in the community both of them were. And so the businesses that we tend to, tend to patronize were mixed, obviously. We had a black florist because my dad's best friend's brother Uncle Fred [Fred D. Williams III] owned the black florist, flower shop in Selma, Fred's florist [Fred's Flower and Gift Shop]. We, we, we wouldn't go to the mall very much because my brothers [Andrew Sewell and Anthony Sewell] had a reputation being the baddest twins in Selma (laughter). The people would literally move their stuff from, from the counter, not because they were gonna take it. But, because they were what? Knock it over (laughter). But, so, we I mean, Selma's a typical town we had, we shopped mostly on Broad Street. Broad Street is where the, Edmund Pettus Bridge is. But, Brad--Broad Street is the main drag in Selma. And growing up it was before we had a mall. Everybody went to Broad Street to do their commerce. And, and so we, we--the, the town over time became much more integrated. And I could remember my very first Easter dress that I got. And it was bought at, at Kayser's [Isadore Kayser and Company] which was the, really nice family owned store in Selma at the time. And it's a shame that, that these mom and pop stores are no longer there. I remember my first--getting my ears pierced and my first- buying my first earrings from, from Butlers [Butler Truax Jewelers, Selma Alabama], which was the local jewelry store. That was owned by one of my classmates from, from Cedar Park. And so look I, I think it was a normal childhood. I, I it's, it's hard for me to look at footages from Selma in the nineteen fifty--'40s [1940s], '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. Because, I really my formative years going up in Selma was in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s]. And while it took longer than, I mean, while Bro- Brown versus the Board of Education was in 1954 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], all deliberate speed in Alabama, in Selma anyway, came in 19--around 1970. And so, you know, the integration was really in high speed. Selma to this day, still has an all white private school. Back then and now it was Morgan, John Morgan Academy, John T. Morgan Academy, Morgan Academy, is what we called it. And over the course of my time at Cedar Park Elementary School [Selma, Alabama], you know, I have lots of pictures of me being the only black student in, you know, class pictures. I'm the only black student, there. I had lots of friends who lived on my street. Some of whose parents still live on that street. But, at--when they got of age, usually in junior high school, they would go to the all white school, private school if their parents could afford, could afford it, and most of them on our street could. And I went to the integrated junior high school [Westside Junior High School; R.B. Hudson Middle School, Selma, Alabama]. And so, that was really odd for me. 'Cause I went from being very popular in elementary school, that was one of maybe four African Americans in that elementary school. To going to a, a junior high school that was very integrated. It was maybe 55 percent African American, 45 percent white. But most of the kids from my elementary school went to the private academy for elementary--for junior high school and high school. And so, you know, I, I, can remember going to my first day in junior high school and being petrified 'cause I didn't know anyone, except for my mom's good friends' children. Thank god for Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] and thank god for my mom being so involved in African American sorority. I of course knew--had lots of friends, from, from there. Story_ID: 653485 Speaker 1: Before we go to junior high school [Westside Junior High School; R.B. Hudson Middle School, Selma, Alabama], let's talk about elementary school and some of the teachers. And what was your experience-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with the teachers there? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I want to know what type of student you were? Speaker 2: So, I was, I was a good student I loved to read. My mom's a librarian, we had a limited number of TVs in our house. We talked about sports and books around the dining, dining room table. I, my memories of Cedar Park Elementary School [Selma, Alabama] were, were really very positive. Miss Mainza [ph.] was my principal. I remember my first black teacher her name was Mrs. Mayfield [Elizabeth Mayfield] and she taught me in the third grade. And I, I, I would get straight A's in academics and I would get Cs and Ds in conduct. I would finish the work and I would then proceed to you know, (laughter) act up. Not so much badly I would just try help the other students learn it or I would try to help the teacher teach it. And so, that would get me in trouble. But, my, my, my, my memories of Cedar Park Elementary School were all positive. And I remember one of the first African American male joined our class, it was Marvin Reece [ph.]. And all of a sudden it had to be, "Terri [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell] and Marvin sitting in a tree K-I-S-S-I-N-G." I never understood why I had to be with Marvin when I really liked Scott [ph.] (laughter). But, I it was a normal childhood, I don't know what can I say? I, I, think that when I look back on it, it was obviously lessons about integration, lessons about learning that people are people and, and seeing my friends for my friends and not necessarily the color of their skill. I remember having slumber parties. Now mind you this was more fifth grade, sixth grade. I do remember how hard it was the very first day I went to Cedar Park. I remember that, I remember that because I remembered being sheltered by Mrs. Mayfield, who waited, with me 'til my parents [Nancy Gardner Sewell and Andrew Sewell] came to get me, from school that first day. And so she will always have a warm place in my heart, Miss Mayfield. Story_ID: 653486 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have any black friends? Speaker 2: I did. I had lots of black friends who were usually friends--they were usually children of my parents' friends. Remember my parents [Nancy Gardner Sewell and Andrew Sewell] were, my parents were educators in the school system. And, and I think middle class black Selma [Alabama] were educators, they were teachers, they were, they worked for the government. They were preachers. And, and so growing up I, I don't think I really realized how poor, or (pronunciation) poor my parents were until I went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]. I kind of grew up thinking that we were doing okay (laughter). And, because my parents were well respected in the community, I didn't feel like there were any limitations on my ability to do or be anything. That's a real credit to my parents. But, it's also a credit to the community that nurtured me, and that, that community re- consisted of blacks and whites. And so yeah, so I can remember when the Cedar Park [Cedar Park Elementary School, Selma, Alabama] was integrated. And I also--it's interesting to me, my, my sixth grade teacher was Miss Jackson [Richie Jean Sherrod Jackson]. Well, Miss Jackson I, I grow up to learn that Miss Jackson and her husband [Sullivan Jackson] would entertain Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in their house. And Miss Jackson's house was where they gathered to, to you know, to really map the march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama]. (Gesture) Miss Jackson mi- Jean Jackson my--Jean Jackson who taught me in sixth grade. It's interesting that you can live your life surrounded by people who are legendary in the Civil Rights Movement. I guess growing up in Selma that's, that's--I'm--it never ceases to amaze me to find out about the people who I saw as teachers and my preacher [at Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church, Selma, Alabama] or my you know, the, you know the grocery store owners. And to find out that they were iconic or, or very pivotal in the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 653487 Speaker 1: When did your parents--well, you said it was about what in the fifth or sixth grade when you're finding out this information, but did your mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] and father [Andrew Sewell] talk to you about--our mother being a librarian and the libraries were segregated at one time--did she ever talk to you about that and about the desegregation of the libraries in Selma? Speaker 2: She didn't talk to me about the desegregation of the libraries. Let me just say that my first job was a nonpaying job. But, my first job was working at the public library in Selma, Alabama with Miss Becky [Rebecca Cothran Nichols], who I think is still there, at Selma Public Library [Selma Dallas County Public Library, Selma, Alabama]. Like I, you know, my Selma was different than my dad's Selma or my grandmother's [Admonia Accoff] Selma. I mean three generations of Selmians and we all had very different experiences. I grew up in a integrated high school [Selma High School, Selma, Alabama], a elementary school [Cedar Park Elementary School, Selma, Alabama]. I freely went to the public library. And in fact, because I was so precocious and talkative my first job was story telling. I would be in the reading well, at the age of eight, telling stories to the younger kids. Reading stories to the younger kids. Well, making up stories too, to the younger kids. I, I, I, I loved drama and I loved I, I, I loved books. And so, I was always surrounded by libraries and so those, that was my formative years. But, but I know that I always thought it was odd that there was a black homecoming queen and white homecoming queen. And there was a black this and white this. And I, I understand now that they were--the community was trying to come into its own with integration and trying to figure out its way through integration. I, I, I, I had a healthy sense of self that was, that was really fostered and encouraged by my parents. I was a very, very curious child and my mom would, would, would really literally, you know, help me with that curiosity by you know, getting the book that was about that. Or you know encouraging me to do that and I think that that, that intellectual curiosity really helped me a lot. Story_ID: 653488 Speaker 1: That was gonna be my next question about what did you like to read? Speaker 2: So, I loved scary books and in Selma [Alabama] there was this wo- woman by the name of--a writer Kathryn Windham Tucker [sic. Kathryn Tucker Windham], and she would write ghost stories about Jeffrey, was the name of the (unclear) so '13 Alabama Ghost Stories' ['13 Alabama Ghosts and Jeffrey,' Kathryn Tucker Windham] was the book that I loved the most. And so, I would read 'til--in the, in the reading well about you know. And I would act out every part and, and so it was a real pr- privilege to get to know Kathryn Windham Tucker before she passed. And, to be able to talk to her about, about her book. I remember going to a, a folk story telling fe- festival as a young adult. I think I was in college [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] at that point and, and seeing her read, her stories about Jeffrey. But my story, I loved mysteries and I loved the whole collection of Nancy Drew. I loved, I loved mysteries and I loved intrigue and I was a really voracious reader. I, I, I, I never had was never lost for having a summer reading list. My mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] was very good at giving me one at the beginning of every summer. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I also love books that allowed me to travel. You know, I travel through books way before I got a passport. And, I think that it was that section of the public library that I found most fascinating. So, National Geographic and all of the stuff that talked about really interesting, far away places. That I remember thinking to myself I will go there one day. I didn't know how I was going to get there. Didn't know wo- you know, but I knew that in my heart that I could, could go there one day. And I remember saying that to my dad [Andrew Sewell], and my dad said, "Huh, you think you can go way over there to Africa?" I said, "Yeah dad I can go way over there to Africa." And you know, and my mother would say, "Sewell don't you limit that child's horizon. She can be and do and anything she wants to be." I think that my mom being isolated on a small farm in Lowndes County [Alabama], where yes she was surrounded by everybody black, but, she grew up with, she say black grocery store owners and black you know, she literal- literally was isolated, black small business owners because these farms, that's what they were, small business owners. So, I think that she, she, she counted by dad who grew up in city, in the City of Selma. And grew up in very my segregated Selma where white people lived on one side and black people lived on the other. And my dad literally through education and his job willed himself from one side of Selma to the other side of Selma. So, where I grew up on, on 705 King Lane drive was the other side Selma. It was not on the same side of Selma that my dad grew up and that my [paternal] grandparents lived. Story_ID: 653489 Speaker 1: Let's talk about some extracurricular activities. You mentioned Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --so tell me, what were your extracurricular activities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I was very fortune to grow up with lots of things to do in the summertime. And, and throughout the year, I was a, I was in ballet. Miss Dinkins [ph.] taught me piano. I did say that my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] loved--she believed that every child had a talent and gift that she was bound and determined to make sure that she figured out what mine was. And so, we kind of went through this series of I did baton twirling, gymnastics. Did I tell you about gymnastics? I was pretty good at gymnastics. I was actually really good on the balance beam. Ballet, tap, I, it--we figured out early on that I was not gonna be following my dad [Andrew Sewell] in the athletic department. In fact, I played high school, I mean junior high school, I was on the ninth grade girls' basketball team. And when I, when they finally put me in because my daddy came to that game. I, I, I thought I had did a tremendous layup. I but what I found out as I was you know, people were screaming as I was you know, bouncing, you know I was I, I, I--dribbling the ball down the court and I go up for the layup and it goes in and I'm, and I'm just, they're all just cheering for me. I went into the wrong team's hoop so my dad said, "Get her out," (laughter). I almost cried, like don't do me any favors (unclear) everybody in the gym started laughing. And my dad brought home that night pom poms and saddle ox [oxford] shoes and said, "Baby I think you are destined to be a cheerleader." And so I became a cheerleader. I was a cheerleader in elementary school for the Mustangs and their colors were gold and black. And I think my parents still have my cheerleading outfit from it was a city rec team, a city recreation team called Mus- the Mustangs. And it was their first experiment in Selma [Alabama] for integrated sports. And so, we kids didn't think much about it. Because you know, most of the kids that participated the white kids that participated in the summer recreational league, football league went to my high, you know, my, my elementary school, Cedar Park [Cedar Park Elementary School, Selma, Alabama]. And but the, the guys that were really good in football, they went, they, they were from the same side of the tracks that my daddy grew up in, on the Eastside. And, and so they went to Eastside Junior High School [Selma, Alabama]. And they were really good. So, I, I don't know, I, I, I mean over the years I've had, I've, I've traded in my Mustang I guess I was a, a ten years old. Eight, nine and ten the Mustang uniform cheerleading uniform I traded in to be a cheerleader at Westside Junior High School [R.B. Hudson Middle School, Selma, Alabama]. And then I traded that in to only one year of being cheerleader at Selma High School [Selma, Alabama] because I started debating. I was a debater in high school. And you couldn't do both. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, my extracurricular activities you know, spanned the gamut I was very involved in 4-H, and the first oratorical contest that I won was in 4-H. My, my 4-H extension director Harriet Ramsey Bates, articulated every word and enunciated every syllable and taught me to do the same. And so, that was my very first oratorical contest. But, in high school, I was a pretty good debater. Story_ID: 653490 Speaker 1: So what junior high school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to Westside Junior High School [R.B. Hudson Middle School, Selma, Alabama]. Speaker 1: And what, what year did you enter? Speaker 2: I entered in the seventh grade. I didn't know all of this middle school stuff that they have going on now. We had, first through sixth grade was elementary and seventh through ninth junior high. And tenth through twelfth was high school. And so I went to Westside Junior High School. Speaker 1: Okay and of course you're an excellent student in junior high school, correct? Speaker 2: I was, you know, I later learned, you know, when you're a child, I don't think you really--. You understand the impact of it, you don't understand the reason for it. But, integration in Selma [Alabama] brought about a tracking system. In, in for at least from junior high to high school, where you would if you were a gifted child would be in level one; this was before AP classes or advanced placement classes. They just said--called it level one. Level two was for average students. Level three was for below average students. And then you had special ed [special education]. It was a tracking system I la- later learned, a way to put white kids in classrooms by themselves and black kids in classrooms by themselves. Needless to say I had parents who were educators and a part of that public system, who fought for little black and brown children, mostly black children to be who, you know, to be able to test into those, into the level one classes. And so I tested into only two subjects to get into level one. My mother insisted that I be in all level one. And those classes were predominately white. So, here I was in an integrated junior high school. Much more integrated than my elementary school [Cedar Park Elementary School, Selma, Alabama], in fact 55 percent African American. And when the bell rang and we were in class, my classrooms were predominantly white with me and maybe one other person being the only black students in those classes. And then when the bell rang again and we'd go out into the hall as in between classes. You would see lots of black people. And, because I wasn't in the same classroom with, with as many of those children. I got called names Oreo, I was black on the outside, white on the inside. And it was really, really, I didn't, I didn't realize how, how, how it would, it would affect me, but it did it, affected me really. I had gone from being very popular in the junior high--in the elementary school that I was in. To going to a hig- a junior high school and being ostracized because I was smart. And I think it was then that I made up my mind that I was going to (pause) I was gonna really try my best to be liked. And that, that it was not as important that I got good grades. But, it was more important that I be liked. I can remember that my mother dressed me in these little preppy outfits that had your initials going down them. And the kids on the Eastside [Selma, Alabama], they didn't dress like that. So, they had really cool jeans that had little rips in them and I'm. So, I went to the Goodwill store and I bought a pair of jeans and a jeans jacket. And my mother would drop my off early because she had to go and open the library at the high school [Selma High School, Selma, Alabama]. So, I would rush to my locker and I would quickly change clothes in the, in the bathroom. And I, to my cool leather je- I mean my cool jean jacket and my really cool Levi jeans. And I was, I wanted to be cool. So, what I didn't remember was that half the teachers in, the junior high school, my mom, you know, all of them knew my mom and daddy [Andrew Sewell]. And many of them were AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], my mother's sorority. And so, when my, when Miss Bryant [ph.] saw me in the same outfit for the third week in a row, she stopped me in the hall and said, "Now I know Nancy [Nancy Gardner Sewell] didn't put you in that same outfit every day. I know you have something else." I said, "Please don't tell her, please don't tell her. They don't like me, they call me names." And Miss Bryant, I'll never forget what she said to me, she said, "You have to be yourself. You have to be who you are, and if you're, you're happy with who you are and confident in who you are, they will be confident in who you, you know, they'll start liking you." I said, "No it doesn't work like that. They call me names," (laughter). And so, she said, "Now Terri [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell], you know, the way you're going about it is not the right way." But, it was really interesting to me that psychologically I wanted be liked, more than I wanted to have good grades. Now, I made straight A's, but it didn't matter to me, that I wasn't listed in the straight A honor roll in the newspaper. To be listed in the straight A honor roll in the newspaper you had to have good grades in conduct and in academics. And I decided that people thought I was funny, I became the class clown, that was the way I was gonna be liked. And it was, I ran for student government, eight- eighth grade, eighth grade, class president, and ninth grade class president. And, they had to see me as one of them. I thought that that's what I was trying to do with the changing of the clothes and, and changing the way I spoke. Story_ID: 653491 Speaker 1: And it was the ninth grade assembly at Westside Junior High School [R.B. Hudson Middle School, Selma, Alabama] that was a formative, pivotal moment in my life. The ninth grade, so I wasn't in the, so you can go back and look at The Selma Times-Journal while I was in junior high school. And you will not see that Terri Sewell [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell] even though I made straight A's. You would never see me in the A, B honor rolls. Because I made some Cs in conducts. We get to the ninth grade assembly and the ninth grade assembly is an honors assembly, was to award, you were going off to high school, to award the highest--the person with the highest GPA [grade point average] in the various subjects. While I knew I had the highest GPA in math, in science, in English and social studies, I knew that. And so, I told my daddy [Andrew Sewell] the day, that day, my dad you know, "Dad you have to leave the gym and come on over to, you know, to Westside Junior High School, for our midday honors program. 'Cause I'm surely gonna rack up in awards." My dad comes over, my mother comes over. I remember sitting in that seat and watching another person get those awards. "And the highest GPA in math goes to--," and I'm sitting there ready to, and they say, "Heather Hester [ph.]." "And the highest GPA (unclear)--," goes to Heather. I was like Heather's getting all my awards (laughter). I got one award that day and it was for best attendance, for showing up. I cried, I held it together in school. It's all I could do, but, when my parents came to pick me up, I, I mean, I boo hooed, I cried, I could--I uncontrollably cried. And my mother's like, "I'm gonna go talk to that superintendent. How dare they not give my child the award that she--." I mean, dad says this, my dad is taking--so normally my mom is the one who's like you know, all about the grace. My mom sat quiet, my dad was like, "Now Nancy [Nancy Gardner Sewell], we've gotta go fight for Terri, she did this and she did that. And why didn't she get those grades?" My mom looks at me and she looks at my dad and she looks at me again. She goes, "Now Terri you know why you didn't get those awards don't you?" I said, "No I made those grades (unclear)." "It's because you made Cs and Ds in conduct trying to be funny, cute, be liked." She goes, "If I worked as hard as you worked in junior high school. I wouldn't let someone else get those awards. I would want my proper due. And I would keep my mouth shut long enough to get them." I cried and cried, and cried, and cried, my mother was calm as a cucumber never ever--. That's all she said about it. My dad would bring it up, my mom would just (gesture). And that night I remember I was on my bended knees praying my, my room was across the hall from my parents' room. I remember going, "God bless mommy and daddy and Andrew [Andrew Sewell] and Anthony [Anthony Sewell], and God please let me keep my mouth shut in high school so that I can be valedictorian," (laughter). But, it was that moment sitting there watching other people get awards for academic achievement and knowing that I had earned those awards and didn't get them. That really set me on the path, the trajectory to become the valedictorian of my high school [Selma High School, Selma, Alabama]. I don't think that, you know, I, I thought it was a formative experience. And, and the way my mother handled it was perfect, because she, you know, it's a lesson that you have to learn for yourself. Your parents can't teach it to you, right? And, so. Story_ID: 653492 Speaker 1: Now I go off to high school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, you go to high school and what high school do you attend? Speaker 1: I attend Selma High School [Selma, Alabama] where my mom [Nancy Gardner Sewell] and dad [Andrew Sewell] are both there. My mother is the head librarian. My daddy is the head basketball coach. It's a good thing that I was smart, because I sure didn't get dates, at Selma High School. When your dad is the, the, the, the coach (laughter). Speaker 2: Was the experience better for you there? Speaker 1: It was, well see by this time I, by this time, I, I thin- I was a cheerleader in at the junior high school [Westside Junior High School; R.B. Hudson Middle School, Selma, Alabama]. And, and look my seventh grade year was my roughest year. By the ninth grade I had sort of gotten a whole cadre of friends, and you know, I was in, in the mix. And, and there was a cute football player by the name of John King [ph.] who really liked me. And he made everybody else like me. So, John was my high school boyfriend, tenth through twelfth grade, John King. And he was also captain of the football team and a star athlete at Selma High School. And I was student--I was tenth grade class president. I was the eleventh grade class president and then I was SGA [Student Government Association] president of the school my senior year. My entire high school experience was overwhelmingly spent debating. I was a high school debater. And the Mr. Tate, Mr. Billy Tate [William Woods Tate, Jr.] was our coach. And he was known not only statewide but nationally, for being a really good coach. And here he was at Selma High School. And he only chose people were, who were--who could win, who could be debaters. And there had only been one other debater before me, no two others before me that were black. He never chose black kids to de- to be on his debate team. First of all the criteria to be on the debate team was not only that you have X GPA [grade point average], but that you, your parents had to make a commitment to spend money to send you to summer camps, debate camps. And to--they signed an agreement that you had no, compete in no less than twenty tournaments throughout the year. And he was serious about this NFL, National Forensic League [National Speech and Debate Association], which was the high school debate league. And he was serious about us being winners. Well my mom, I had grown up with my mother being the, the librarian at Selma High School. And I had grown up seeing these debate trophies surround the library walls, from great debate teams that he had coached. And so, it, you know, really encouraged by that award, that I received in the oratorical contest. I tried out for the debate team and I made the debate team. And my parents you know, the whole, the whole community really rallied around, by participation, debate. I went off to the first tournament and I won my very first time out. I got to the semifinal round. And the second tournament I got to the final round and came in second. And the third tournament I went on, I got to the final round and I won. My debate partner was Lesley Looper, her parents [LaNelle Edwards Looper and Charles Looper] owned the local candy store, a candy factory actually, American Candy [American Candy Company], it's no longer there in Selma [Alabama], and Lesley and I were, were partners in this debate thing. And I was known as a cleaner. I was a person who gave the last speech (unclear). And the more trophies I won, the more encouraged my, my par- I became and my parents became. So, that's why I stopped cheerleading. I thought well maybe this debate--there's something to this debate stuff. And my dad, who had been a championship golfer, had built in our den this trophy case where--that held all of his golfing trophies. And, trophies that he had won in college [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] and high school [R.B. Hudson High School; R.B. Hudson Middle School, Selma, Alabama] in athletics, right. And it was, I mean, and it was filled wall to wall with this golfing trop--I mean my dad had like ninety I don't know lots of golfing trophies. And so, my goal was to surpl- sur- surpass my daddy in trophies such that when I became senior that we would you know, that those golfing trophies would be in the background and the debate trophies would be in the foreground. And I, I came close. So, I, I love a good competition even today, I love a good competition. Best way to get me to m-, to motivate me is to--is to tell me that I'm not in the top this, or the in the pack of that. Story_ID: 653493 Speaker 1: So, high school was awesome, I loved high school. I graduated valedictorian, the first black valedictorian of Selma High School [Selma, Alabama]. I was the homecoming queen. I dated the homecoming king. I was student government president. I loved high school. And I was all set to get a presidential scholarship to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], full ride. My mom [Nancy Gardner Sewell], during these years, my mom while I was in junior high school [Westside Junior High School; R.B. Hudson Middle School, Selma, Alabama] runs for the city council in Selma [Alabama]. And becomes the first African American woman to sit on the Selma City Council. And she sat on that city council for I don't know I think four terms. And mommy was the second woman and the, and the first African American woman to sit on the city council. And so, my mom at, by time was very much involved in politics. She was she also was very engaged in her sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. And, had moved up the ranks in her sorority. To the point that she was gonna run for regional director, to be over all the chapters in Alabama and Mississippi and Tennessee, regional director. And so, mom, and my mom took every opportunity when she traveled to, to bring us along. She believed in exposure. In fact my famous--the quote that I, that I--my favorite quote I get from my mom, so a person thinks so is he [Proverbs 23:7]. So, if you think you can be that lawyer and you think you can be that championship debater and you study and prepare to be that championship debater and you carry yourself like that championship debater. You will become that championship debater. And she would say that to me, for any and everything that I went on to. So, so a person thinks so is he, so you have to believe in yourself before you can actually accomplish things basically, is what I think that she was--she meant by that. And so, I, I, I loved high school (laughter). And I think that how I got to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], I don't know if you believe in divine intervention, I do. My high school experience lead me to receive scholarship opportunities to a lot of the leading universities and colleges. I had gone to Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] one summer for a debate camp. And had placed in the semifinal round. I can remember when I learned to lose my southern accent. It was my, the summer before my junior year in high school. And I was at that debate workshop at Georgetown. And I go to the quarterfinal round and I, I remember standing up and the by this time the auditorium is filled with people, right. Because you know, all the people had, hadn't won up to that point. And I remember standing up and saying, "I thank," and everyone laughed. No one could hear what I was saying because it was so focused on how I sounded. And if I don't have a real thick southern accent it's because I was a debater and I was a championship debater. And I learned an important lesson that day, that day, I learned that having a regional natural voice not, you know, being able to talk and enunciate your words and talk quickly so that you can get your, your points in--during the time limit was key. And I never got out thanked again (laughter). And I ended my career, my high school debating career with over seventy trophies. I did individual events, both oratorical contests and dramatic interp [dramatic interpretation]. I was in high school play, 'South Pacific' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II]. Story_ID: 653494 Speaker 1: I remember posing for a high school, for a picture for the Montgomery Advertiser. And, that article was the article that really changed my life. The article was written I--by Alvin Benn, yes Eric Benn's dad. Eric Benn who, my brothers' best friend, his--they moved to Selma, Alabama because his dad was a journalist. And he was a journalist for the Montgomery Advertiser. I think he still is, to this day. But that article was viewed by Princeton alum and that Princeton alum was Julian McPhillips; he was a lawyer in Montgomery [Alabama]. And my divine intervention story, well this is, I mean, the fact that he saw that article buried very deep in the lifestyle section of the Montgomery Advertiser that he remembered to cut it out. That he remembered to bring it to his office the next day. That he remembered to give it to his assistant, Regina [ph.] at the time. And, to tell her to call my guidance counselor and invite me to his home in Montgomery, to hear about his alma mater, Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey]. And his assistant called and lo and behold, my mother's very best friend was Otillia Moss [ph.] who was the guidance counselor at Selma High School [Selma, Alabama]. And so when Mr. McPhillips said, "I want to invite Terri Sewell [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell]. Do you know this student? I want to invite her to my house." "Do I know Terri Sewell?" And the rest is history. He literally, that changed my life. So, I go to his house two weeks later. Story_ID: 653495 Speaker 1: Luckily, Montgomery [Alabama] is where my mother's sisters and brother live. And so, we're frequently in Montgomery, we got to his house early, when I think about the serendipity of this exper- you know, of, of this antidote [sic.] it's kind of chilling. But, I was at his house, loved pimento cheese. So, I was at the--in the line (laughter), had the pimento cheese spread and there was a woman behind who introduced herself as Debbie. And I said, "I'm Terri Sewell [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell]," and she says--she was an adult, so I thought maybe she was a Princeton alum or something. So, she said, "Are you interested in Princeton?" I said, "No, not real- I mean I have a full ride, I have a full ride to, to Alabama [University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama] and to Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama] and to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] and to Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.]," and I started naming all the. I said, "You know this Princeton thing well my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] just, my mother wa- wanted me to come just you know, listen to it." (Laughter) And I said, "And this old guy, who is a lawyer, he called my guidance counselor [Otillia Moss (ph.)] and (unclear) and I mean I, I had to come." And so she smiled and she said, "Well, tell me about yourself." And never at a loss for words, I proceeded to talk about what I was. She said, "Well wha- what, you know, wha- what are your, what are your extracurricular activities in school? Tell me about yourself." And I told her I was a debater, I told her I was getting ready for a debate workshop, and I mean debate tournament and that I was--that it was--I was going to state, to the state tournament to defend my championship. I had won that championship trophy my tenth grade year, eleventh grade year and (unclear) I was going into my senior year. Lo and behold the person that I was talking to was what? The Princeton recruiter. Yeah, I think I even sang 'Bali Ha'i' to this lady, or who--'cause she also told me that she played the same part in 'Annie Get Your Gun' [sic.] when she was in high school. So, turns out that, that's the recruiter. And she becomes fixated on making sure that I apply to Princeton. And, making sure that I turn in all the paperwork. And she asked me what I scored on the AC- the SAT, and I said, "Oh SAT, well we in the South take ACT. I didn't the SAT," and she said, "So what did you do," so I scored thirty out of at that time I think the highest you could get was thirty-two, and I scored a thirty. And she said, "Hm, would you be interested in taking the SAT because Ivy League schools like Princeton only accept the SAT." And I said, "Now when do they--?" And she said you know, there're several dates and I said, "Well, you know, I have a very busy debate schedule. I'm sure I don't have time to take," (laughter), "to take the SAT." And to make a long story short Debbie Nelson [Deborah Nelson], is her name. Debbie Nelson hounded Julian McPhillips who hounded me to, you know, fill out my application to apply to Princeton to, you know, write an essay to turn it into, to give to Princeton. And I, over the course of several weeks, did do that. And, and Julian, to this day I believe Julian paid my application fee. 'Cause I don't remember ever applying formally. I remember do- putting all the paperwork together and giving his secretary stuff to type up. But, I don't remember actually filling out the application. But lo and behold come April I get a, an envelope a, letter in the mail that I'm accepted to Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey] conditioned upon me taking the SAT. I told Julian that I couldn't go to a school I had never seen. And this man, I wanted to be a lawyer; he was a lawyer. He and his lovely wife Leslie [Leslie McPhillips] took me to Princeton so I could see it. I fell in love with the campus. Fell in love with thi- the infectious love that Julian had for the university. And thought why not? When I look back on my life, the steps that I have taken, it was a step from Selma High School [Selma, Alabama] to Princeton University. That was the big step. The step from Selma, I mean from Princeton to Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] Oxford to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Harvard Law School to being a partner in a law firm, to a member of [U.S.] Congress, those were minor steps. I had to literally and figuratively take a big leap of faith in going to Princeton University from Selma High School. No one in my school had ever gone to an Ivy League school. No African American, no black person had ever graduated valedictorian. And I had a lot of, I had a, I had a big monkey on my back. Everybody was counting on me to prove that, that, that Selma High School graduates could do it too. Story_ID: 653496 Speaker 1: Tell me, when did you decide that you wanted to become a lawyer? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if I ever decided myself that I wanted to become a lawyer. I just grew up with everyone talking about how talkative I was, and how expressive I was. And I'd make a great lawyer. And my mother's aspiration and dream was to be a lawyer. And so, I don't know if it was my dream, my mom's dream, other people's dream but for as far back as I can remember I was I, I wanted to be a lawyer. And I can tell you when I, when I knew in my heart that that was the profession for me. My mom I cou- I was about eleven years old and my mom was going to the Dallas County Courthouse [Selma, Alabama] to pay for her tag, to renew the tag. And I'd gone along with her and like most courthouses and tags, long line. And I proceeded to tell my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] I had to use the bathroom. And I wandered upstairs at the courthouse in Dallas County [Alabama]. And I, I being precocious peeked into the there was a big door and I peeked into it and there in that room was a court, it was a court, courtroom, was this black man pontificating, I mean he was orating. And the white people in the box, the jury were like on their ed- like on, on edge, listening to him. And he was mesmerizing and for those five minutes I was totally caught up in what he was talking about. I can't remember what it was now. But, it turns out that that was J.L. Chestnut [J.L. Chestnut, Jr.], who is a very famous civil rights lawyer in Selma [Alabama], who's deceased now. But J.L. and his--J.L. Chestnut, Attorney Chestnut in his day no better orator, no better closer. And I remember thinking to myself, this black man can command that kind of attention, I want to do what he does. And so then I, that's when I knew that I could be a lawyer and I wanted to be a lawyer, was from that experience. So, my aspirations frankly changed, I. I went to see my first Broadway play at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]. And it was 'Dreamgirls' and I remember seeing, seeing the actress Sheryl Lee Ralph play Deena [Deena Jones]. And I said, "I could play that role." And so then I wanted to be a Broadway actress. My mother said, "We are not spending all of this money for you to go to Princeton University to act." To which I said, "Well you know Jimmy Stewart, James Stewart, the famous actor, he went to Princeton." Mother goes, "Yeah, Jimmy Stewart also inherited a trust fund, so he could go to Princeton." Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Story_ID: 653497 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, tell me about h- how you paid to go to college. Did they give you--'cause you had a full ride for the other schools, so tell me about scholarships for Princeton. Speaker 2: So, I have to say that I was so--when I think about the fact that my parents [Nancy Gardner Sewell and Andrew Sewell]--that Princeton University scholarship, it paid for everything. But, it also came with it a requirement that the parents pay what they could afford. And my parents' contribution towards my education at Princeton was three thousand dollars a mo- a year. My dad says it was the best twelve thousand dollars he ever paid. But, I have to tell you, my dad was very proud to write that check. Once a month he would write his check to Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey]. I think that the, the folks at Princeton had it, had it right that, that, that every student, even scholarship students, need to have some skin in the game. And so, I had, so had I not gone and studied abroad my junior year, I probably would have gotten out of Princeton with owing nothing. But, because I studied abroad and wanted to travel I took out a student loan that allowed me to have money to travel during my, my, my semester at the London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did win lots of scholarships fr- when I was in high school. So, I to go to Princeton I had a scholarship from the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. I had a scholarship from the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.]. I had a scholarship from the US News and World Report. I had a scholarship from yeah, from the, from the national debate forensic league [National Forensic League; National Speech and Debate Association]. I, so I, I did have a nice, a nice sum of money to carry with me to, to, to live in, to you know to be a student a Princeton. But I think the most shocking thing for me at Princeton was, was just the, the sheer volume of information of people who had studied things that I had never even heard of. I felt like I was playing a fierce game of catch up. While Selma High School [Selma, Alabama] had prepared me the best that they could prepare me. I had just not been exposed to the classics. I had not read 'Anna Karenina' [Leo Tolstoy] and Crime and ['Crime and Punishment,' Fyodor Dostoyevsky], I just had never read these books. And here I was taking a freshman English class where I had to not only read these books but take an exam on Friday and turn in a paper on Friday, about those books. And I remember getting the syllabus and it was a yearlong class. And it was called the classics. And the only book that I had read on that whole syllabus was 'To Kill a Mockingbird' [Harper Lee]. So, it was a fierce game of catch up at Princeton. I, I but what I knew is that Miss Hobbs [ph.] had taught me how to write and she told me I was a good writer. And I believed her. I knew that my debate coach [William Woods Tate, Jr.] told me that I had cri- great critical thinking, and, and analytic skills. And I had to just take a deep breath and take it one day at a time. One page at a time and, and get through Princeton. You know, I, I do realize that Princeton took a big chance on recruiting a person from Selma High School. I, I'd like to think that while affirmative action helped me get into Princeton 'cause they affirmatively sought out people of different backgrounds, and tried to create a campus that was diverse. I know that the 3.8 [grade point average] that I got at Princeton, that's Terri Sewell [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell]. It was a lot of long hours, but it was a very good experience. Story_ID: 653498 Speaker 1: Where were some of the students coming from? What schools were they coming from? Speaker 2: So my roommate at, at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] my freshman roommate, had gone to Choate [Choate School; Choate Rosemary Hall, Wallingford, Connecticut]. Of course I didn't pronounce it as Choate I, I didn't know what Choate was (laughter). But, I could remember my fr- my, my, my, my, my freshman week, because I decided having been class president since I was in the seventh grade that surely I was gonna run for class president at Princeton. No one told me that I shouldn't have done that. No one told me that I couldn't do it. No one told me that it was a big, big deal. I just, I just, I don't know where the confidence came from but I, I decided I was gonna do that. And my slogan was "Mouth of the South." And I remember passing out literature, "Mouth of the South, Vote for Mouth of the South." And I this kid who named Doug Platte [Douglas Platte] convince me because he was from an up--he had gone to a prep school, a New England prep school. I can't remember if it was Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] or Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]. But he convinced me that if we ran on a ticket we'd be a sure thing. I'm not sure how he convinced me to be the vice president on that ticket and not the president but he did. That ticket won. And Doug and I are, are good friends today. Back when I ran for [U.S.] Congress he wrote a nice check, thank you Doug. And but I think that it was the confidence that I had gotten in a, in small town like Selma [Alabama]. Nurtured by a whole town really, that really helped me believe that I could be and do anything. Even though, I was at a--at a university like Princeton. And I was woefully unprepared. But, when I left Princeton I was not only prepared, I was really prepared. I think that the high- one of the highlights was being, was working for a member of Congress in the, in the summertime. I, I got a chance to work for Richard Shelby who is now the U.S. senator from Alabama. And is a Republican, but back then he was a Democratic. And he was a congressman that, who held this exact seat. So, one of the highlights of my summers at Princeton I summered on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.]. Not one summer but three summers, the summer after my freshman year, sophomore year and junior year. And I think it was that experience that really, really made me believe that I could be a member of Congress. Story_ID: 653499 Speaker 1: They also, at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], paired you with a big sister. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, tell us about your big sister. Speaker 2: So, at Princeton, because there were so few minority students in the '80s [1980s], I arrived at Princeton's campus in 1982. And they had a program a big sister, big brother program, where they would pair an upperclassman with a freshman, an upperclassman minority student with a freshman minority student. And I thought for sure that I would be paired with [HistoryMaker] Susan Price, Judge Price's [Charles Price] daughter in Montgomery, Alabama, who was a year ahead of me. And who had over the summer written me and she was from Montgomery, Alabama. So, I just knew that Susan and I would be paired. But, in walks this very tall, very elegant woman. And she introduces, introduces herself as Michelle Robinson from the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], having gone to Whitney Young High School [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Michelle Robinson Obama [Michelle Obama] was my big sister at Princeton. And really was a, a joy to know her back then. She was literally in the shadows of her older brother at Princeton, because he was the senior and was a basketball star. And so, we all got to know her nickname, because he would yell her nickname across the campus. I'm not gonna tell you what that is (laughter). And it was because of Michelle I, that I was able to take a more balanced load my second semester. My, my, my, my junior year and my, my senior year, watching her really migrate the, the academic world of Princeton was--and her advice and counsel was really just you know, it was awesome. And, and was really an instrumental part of my, of my, of my time at Princeton. Speaker 1: So, actually you, you got to know Craig [Craig Robinson] and Michelle before she even met (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]? Speaker 2: Yes, I think I have the distinction of, of being the only member of [U.S.] Congress that knew Michelle or, Michelle and Barack before they knew each other. I, had Michelle as a big sister at Princeton. And I was in the class at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] with Barack Obama. Story_ID: 653500 Speaker 1: So you talked about your summers working on the Hill. Was there anything that you wanted to share about--was there any particular event that might have happened during those summers working on the Hill? Speaker 2: So, I think that working on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] for three summers in a row taught me a lot of things. The first thing it taught me is that, hm, I could do that job. But, the second thing it taught me was that government has a lot of bureaucracy, it's a lot of hoops you gotta jump through in order to get things done in Washington [D.C.]. It takes a long time. And I know I remember distinctly thinking that my last summer there. And I didn't go back to Washington [D.C.] to work and live, until thirty years later as a member of [U.S.] Congress. And now having been in Congress for six years boy am I reminded of the fact that it takes a long time to get things done in Washington, there's a lot of bureaucracy and a lot of dysfunction. Story_ID: 653501 Speaker 1: Anything else that you want to share about Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] before we move on, to your next step? Speaker 2: I, I, I loved Princeton like I, I know, I know it was college and many people come in their own in college. And, and many people explore and learn so much about themselves in college for me it was Princeton. And so I never thought about art, for art's sake. I never thought about music, for music's sake. It was Princeton that really, you know, I got--went to my first Broadway play at Princeton. I got a chance to, to work on a Wall Street--I won a scholarship from Sponsors for Educational Opportunity, and got a chance at Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management], for a summer. I, I traveled abroad through Princeton. I, I there was no, I walked out of Princeton knowing there was no so- stone unturned. There was nothing I wanted to do that I didn't do at Princeton. I even joined an eating club at Princeton. And a selective eating club at that. I started an Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority at Princeton, because they didn't have AKAs, at Princeton. And you know, my mother was not going to let me get out of college without being an AKA. I, I got a job, my jo- my, my work study job at Princeton was working in the recruitment office with Debbie Nelson [Deborah Nelson]. The woman who helped me get into Princeton. And she, with her help I created and started a minority recruitment unit within the, the admissions office at Princeton. And it's still there today, where minority students could come and stay with minority students during, during early admissions. When people are you know, touring schools and visiting schools. And that was my, that was my work study job. My other work study job was working at the library, Firestone Library [Harvey S. Firestone Memorial Library], didn't get any better than that. Like I, you know, I love libraries, my mom's a librarian. It was a great awakening for me. I didn't realize all of the opportunities the thing that one can do. I also didn't realize how, how my parents [Nancy Gardner Sewell and Andrew Sewell] made ends meet. I don't, I didn't, I had a, I got a healthy appreciation for the fact that I was being given a wonderful opportunity. What I did with that opportunity was up to me. But, what a great and fantastic opportunity? I made tons of great friends. I was in the eating club with Brooke Shields. I interviewed her to get into the eating club, because she was a year behind me. There, I mean th- it was just it was an amazing experience. And I not only studied hard but I played hard. And, and it really, it set the stage for me to do many of the things that I'm currently doing today. Story_ID: 653502 Speaker 1: When you graduate you receive lots of accolades and, and recognition. And, talk to me about being featured, why were you featured on NBC in, on 'The Today Show' ['Today'] in one of the top college woman. Tell me about all-- Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) all the excitement about women? Speaker 2: --(laughter), so my senior year at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], I was asked by the, well let me, let me, let me back up. You know how we- when you're, when you're a freshman, you're moving in, move in day freshman year. And the president of the university is walking around meeting all the parents and handing out his cards. And blah, blah, blah, blah. Well my freshman day, Bill Bowen [William G. Bowen] was the president of Princeton University when I was there. And he gave me his card and he, and I told him where I was from, Selma, Alabama and blah, blah, blah. And he, he said, "If you ever need anything let me know." Let's flash forward to my second semester freshman year and I ha- and I'm, I'm taking economics. I had never heard of a supply curve and a demand curve. I was so in over my head, and there was no one in my, in my high school [Selma High School, Selma, Alabama] who could help me on that. Like no teacher or no. So, I remember not getting a good grade on my midterm and freaking out. And I remember looking up from my desk to the little pegboard and there was stuck with a little pin was the president of university's card. So, I decide that Bill Bowen needed to know that I needed a little help. So, I remember t- going to his office hours and being in his--waiting for him to come to his student office hours. And he walked in, I had been sitting there for about an hour, because he was running a little late. And I was pretending like I was working or studying. But, when he asked me to come into his room I closed the door of his office. And I started to cry. He goes, "What's the problem?" I said, "I'm failing." He goes, "Your failing?" "I'm failing yes I'm failing." He goes, "What?" I said, "It's economics, I never heard of supply curve or demand curve." He said, "Well let, let me see your paper." I given him his paper my paper. And he looks over his glasses and he goes, "You do know that an eighty-seven is a B?" And I look up at him with all candor and I'm--through all of the blubber and I'm saying, "I don't make Bs." Little girl from Selma, Alabama, (unclear) at Princeton. But, he realized that this little girl was gonna make Bs in her life. But, this semester wasn't gonna be the semester. And he was gracious enough to, to help me find a tutor and I remember pulling out my green American Express card that my dad [Andrew Sewell] gave me for emergencies. And I go, "My parents will pay for it." He goes, "I think I have a little bit of a budget here that I can help," (laughter), "pay for you a tutor in, in, in economics." I did make a, eventually make a B in, at Princeton, but it was my second semester sophomore year, not freshman year that I did so. When I flash forward to my senior year, President Bowen suggested that I apply to be a Rhodes scholar [Rhodes Scholarship]. Never thought about it, wouldn't have, wouldn't have dreamed about it if hadn't been for President Bowen and Nancy Weiss who was wonderful professor of history at Princeton, perhaps one of my favorite professors Nancy Weiss. And now Nancy Weiss Malkiel, she's married. So, I applied to be a Rhodes scholar, I applied for a Marshall Scholarship. And I, my senior year also applied for internships at four of the top investment banks. And I applied to law school, two law schools Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] (laughter). I had a little folder go, life after Princeton question mark. And I put it all in there and I just didn't know what I was gonna do but I figured I'd cover my bases. A job you know, graduate school, study abroad, I had covered my bases. And I ended up getting a scholarship to go to Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] and study at Oxford for free for two years. And Oxford was an amazing experience for me. And I, I am so grateful that Bill Bowen not only got me a tutor but encouraged me to applied to study abroad, to apply to these amazing programs. And needless to say I flash toward twenty-five years and I'm running for [U.S.] Congress. By this time Bill Bowen is retired. But, my finance director finds a number for him. And we call him up and we call him up and I hadn't spoken or seen or talked to Bill Bowen in twenty something years. And he picked--and so his assistant answers the phone, they said, "It's Terri Sewell [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell], Princeton, class of '86 [1986]." He literally picks up the phone and he goes, "Is this Terri "I Don't Make Bs" Sewell," (Laughter), "from Selma, Alabama." I said, "Yes," and he said, "I understand that you are running to represent Selma, Alabama? How much of a check can I write to you?" You just never know how people influence your lives. And he was another person who really was a major influencer and connector in my life. And it was Nancy Weiss that wrote all of my references. And Senator Shelby [Richard Shelby] who was my congressman then, he wrote a lot of references too. Because I had worked for him for two summers, three summers. So, you never know how your paths cross with people. But, my Princeton experience was invaluable. Story_ID: 653503 Speaker 1: My next chapter was Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England]. Speaker 2: Okay, but before we get to Oxford. Your senior thesis? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, okay. So, at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] everyone has to write a thesis in order to graduate. By this time I'm in the Woodrow Wilson School of International and Public Affairs [sic. Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton, New Jersey]. It's a selective major. Only fifty students per class get to be a Woodrow Wilson scholar. I was chosen my end of my sophomore year to major in it. And I decided that I was gonna write my thesis on black women in politics, our time has come. After all this was the summer when the battle for apartheid was waging and there was this amazing state assemblywoman by the name of [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters who was giving them hell and talking about how colleges' and universities' endowments must divest from South Africa until they get rid of apartheid. And black women were doing amazing things from [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height to the fact that there were black women in [U.S.] Congress. And so, I decided to write my thesis on black women in politics, our time has come. And I, I also applied and won a three thousand dollar scholarship from an alumni class, to go off and do oral histories, oral representations of my thesis. So, to meet these African American women. And so, I wrote my thesis on black women in politics and I set my sights on interviewing Shirley Chisholm by this time she had retired from Congress. But she was teaching at Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts]. So, I took the first part of money and I bought, well I called and I begged her assistant to let me interview her for my senior thesis. And here I am I'm not a New York Times journalist [The New York Times]. I'm not, I'm just a little girl from Selma [Alabama] who's trying to write a senior thesis in college, and I wanna interview Shirley Chisholm. Well I, after my tenth call I would literally call this lady during student office hours. Trying to get on Shirley Chisholm's calendar week after week after week, I finally get on her calendar for thirty minutes on a, on a, on a random Friday. Could I be there, like absolutely so I get on a train to go to Massachusetts to interview her. And this second time, divine intervention interceded. I walked into her--when, when Shirley Chisholm opened her door to, to welcome me in. I had my tape recorder, I had my questions, I'm ready for my thirty minutes. And it begins to snow and it snows for four hours. And I got to sit at the feet of Shirley Chisholm for four hours and interview her for my senior thesis. And you know I find myself giving answers that she gave me twenty-five, you know, thirty years ago to journalists who ask me those questions. I asked her the question as between race and gender which has been the biggest barrier to being an elected official, to getting into Congress? And she looked at me and she said, "Without a doubt being a woman." I don't know what commentary it is on our society that I give that exact same answer when asked by journalists and students today. And thirty years have gone by. It was an amazing experience. I got to fly to California and meet that very dynamic state assemblywoman, Maxine Waters. I got to interview a very young Donna Brazile who at the time was an executive director of the, under Dorothy Height for the, the Na- national Negro women [National Council of Negro Women]. And it was just an amazing experience. I wrote the senior thesis about what it is wo- black women need to do to become effective, effective in politics, to get elected into politics, and to become effective policymakers. What a full circle moment for me, to twenty plus years after I graduate from Princeton to run for Congress. And for my finance director Craig Auster, who when, every time he would say, "You have to raise money, you have to raise money." I'm going, "I don't wanna raise money I don't wanna raise money." He asked my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] for a copy of my senior thesis, read my senior thesis and proceeded to quote lines from my senior thesis to me as a candidate running for Congress. "Black women must learn that their network is the network that is not only good to effectuate change but also to help them get elected. Black woman must ask, ask their peers for money. Women must not be afraid to ask for money in politics. We raise money for our, our you know, our children's bat mitzvah, we raise money for the PTA [Parent Teacher Association]. We raise money for all kinds of worthwhile organizations that we are in. What bigger, more important platform than to be a representative of the people for the people. And shouldn't people invest in people who want to bring about social change?" And that was what I said in my thesis. And so, it was so weird, a twenty-one year old Terri [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell], talking to a forty year old Terri, who was running for Congress. But it was quite effective. And Craig was pretty smart to quote my own words back to me. Story_ID: 653504 Speaker 1: So now we go on to, to Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England]. So, you have a, you got the Marshall Scholarship? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So, tell me now about this exciting journey over to England? Speaker 2: So, had done my junior year, a junior semester abroad my spring semester junior year at Princeton at the London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England]. So, I had been to London [England] before, and had done a lot of traveling. You know you get this piece of paper that's telling you to rank the colleges that you would like to be in at Oxford. I'm like I jut wanna be at Oxford college. I didn't realize that they had you know, within Oxford it was divided into these various colleges. Well lo and behold I get into St. Hilda's College which I didn't, had never heard of. I put Christ Church is my first, first choice because that's where all the lords and prime ministers of England had gone to Christ Church. I put Balliol College as my second choice because I understood that lots of elected, lots of diplomats in, in the, in the English foreign service ha- had gone to Balliol. And I get in St. Hilda's College, was an all women's college. It was an awesome experience. You know the best part about Oxford was what I learned not inside the classroom but over a pint of beer at a pub. Talking to the most eclectic mix of people. It was sort of a continuation of Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] but on steroids. Because the people were from Sri Lanka and Singapore and Hong Kong, and India, and Africa, all kinds of very interesting places. And, were converging on this place called Oxford to study. And the class of Rhodes scholars [Rhodes Scholarship] and Marshall scholars at Oxford were amazing. My best friend became [HistoryMaker] Bonnie St. John, who was a Rhodes scholar from California. [HistoryMaker] Susan Rice, who was a Rhodes scholar from, from Washington, D.C. Maurice Jones, a Rhodes scholar from Virginia. Lisa Cook, the first African American woman to be a Marshall scholar from a historical black college [HBCU], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was an awesome experience. Now before we left to go to Oxford, Bill Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] spoke to our class. And he told us this was our reward for doing well in college. And that we should that a page from his book of when he was a Rhodes scholar. And we should do all the things that we couldn't do in college. Or felt like we wanted to do in college but couldn't do. So, start that intramural sports team, do that you know, start that gospel choir, do the, and he just encouraged us to be really creative. And so, at Oxford, I decided that the actress in me would come out. And I put on 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf' [Ntozake Shange] at Oxford University, a play, at Oxford University. Story_ID: 653505 Speaker 1: Okay so, you produce this place, and you talk about your friends that you meet and, and bond with. And, and tell me how you, how you met every week. And how you cast your play? Speaker 2: So, like I said 'Dreamgirls' had a formative impression on me. So, I, I didn't have an opportunity to do theatre at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]. So, I thought that surely there were a lot, if were one of these folks dying to do drama, surely there would be other African American, I mean Afro Carib [Afro Caribbean], Afr- black people, people of color from the diaspora who also wanted to be in drama. So, I chose a play, 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow Is Enuf' [Ntozake Shange]. I actual went before the Oxford Student Union [Oxford University Student Union] and got three thousand pounds [currency] to put on this play. And then became the task of trying to recruit the seven women. And you know, if you know the play, it's the lady in red, the lady in blue, the lady in green, the lady in yellow, the lady in orange. All right so, all I need was a cast of seven people. And surely in all of Oxford [England] there were seven people of color, women of color who would want to be in this play. I put up signs everywhere. I held auditions for a whole week. And literally one person came. Thank you Josie [ph.], she was the lady in yellow, who was, was a, you had, was a Scottish, a black person from Scotland. So, she had this Scottish accent, she was really cool. But, she and I couldn't do a play when it needs seven characters. Well, at Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] because we're all scattered out, my very interesting collection of girl friends would always meet on Friday at The Nosebag for lunch. And it was a, a cute little pub slash a sandwich shop. And we would meet there at one o'clock every Friday for the two years that we were at Oxford together. And so, I'm sitting around lamenting to these ladies that I have you know, can't recruit anyone to be in my play and I look around and I--my, my table and I'm like, Lisa Cook you should be lady in yellow. [HistoryMaker] Susan Rice you should be the lady in blue, and those same ladies became, who weren't necessarily actresses, but helped me fulfill a lifelong dream of mine to put on a play, a professional play. They became my, the cast members and our friends, the various folks who had supported us like Michael Sarbanes who had gone to Princeton with me and was studying at Oxford. And he did lights and someone else Shawn [ph.] did marketing. And Robyn Hadley put signs and, and she also did the spotlight, controlled the music during the play. And so, it was just an amazing community of, of American scholars that really helped each other realize their dreams. So, somebody else wanted to do a gospel choir, and I'm not a singer, but Terri Sewell [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell] had a solo in "Trouble in my way, I gotta cry sometimes" ["Trouble in My Way"]. That's me, I did that. "Wade in the Water" that was me (laughter). So, we put on Oxford's first gospel choir at Oxford University. Susan Rice was an amazing basketball player. And she started the women's basketball intramural team, at Oxford. And me knowing my lane I stayed as a cheerleader, I was the cheerleader and coach and not a player on that team. But, those were great bonding experiences that will, and fond memories that will, li- lau- you know, la- last a life time. Story_ID: 653506 Speaker 1: After Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England], we're moving on to the next step, the next chapter. So, let's turn the page and, and what happens after Oxford? Speaker 2: So, I, for me after Oxford what I--remember I had that folder called, life after Princeton question mark. So, I had applied to law schools and had gotten into both Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut]. And deferred them to go to Oxford. So, then became the moment of truth. And I remember going to visit Yale and thinking this would be a really great place to, to be, to become a lawyer. 'Cause here is where I could really become a professor, to teach civil rights law and it was just (unclear). But, my mom [Nancy Gardner Sewell], remember my mom really wanted me to go to Harvard. She wanted me to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] even for, for, for, for college. Having drug me along to an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] convention in Boston [Massachusetts] just so I could see it's campus when I was in the eleventh grade [at Selma High School, Selma, Alabama]. So, my mother ne- never let me live it down and really, really wanted me to go to Harvard. And so, I go to Harvard and I have to tell you after two years at Oxford, I wrote my thesis at Oxford on black, on the election of the first black members of Parliament. There's a theme here I guess in my scholarship as well as in my life. So, my thesis at Oxford, I, I got a master's degree at Oxford. And my thesis was called, 'Black Tribunes: Race and Representation in, in British Politics' ['Black Tribunes: Race and Representation in British Politics,' Terri Sewell]. I had the opportunity to not only interview but work for the four Afro Caribbeans that became the first black members of Parliament on the House of Commons. I was there when Paul Boateng said, "Soweto today," and, and he says, "Wembley, Soweto yesterday, Wembley today," [sic.] and that was capturing the fact that he was going to walk through those halls as a black British person. And I never understood why England, it took 'em 'til 1987 to have black elected members of Parliament when they hadn't, when they didn't, when they didn't have legalized segregation like America. And they didn't--and they had abolished slavery a century before the United States had. And so that was, that became the premise, that sort of intellectual question that I, the quest that became my master's thesis. And so, when I got, when I, when I finished Oxford, I kind of, I, I came in my own, I realized I didn't have to study as much. That I was kind of smart, that I could, that there was life beyond the books. And I traveled a lot. It was just a great experience, Oxford was. And in a, in a different way I think I really academically you know, came into my own, as well as sort of personally. And I had an opportunity to publish my master's thesis into a book ['Black Tribunes: Black Political Participation in Britain,' Terri Sewell]. Story_ID: 653507 Speaker 1: But, I go off to Harvard became there's only a two year deferment. So, I go to Harvard and lo and behold my first or second day of class, the black law students repose on the steps of Pound Hall for our BLSA class picture, the Black Law Students Association [National Black Law Students Association]. And I still have that picture today, it's a classic, circa 1988, fall of 1988. And on that picture there is Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], there's Terri Sewell [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell], there's Hill Harper, there's four or five federal judges that were made during his administration. There's a professor, Ken Mack [Kenneth W. Mack], who's now a tenured professor at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. It was an amazing class, the class of '91 [1991] at Harvard Law School. And my Harvard Law School experience of all of the institutions I attended, I hated Harvard the most (laughter). Here's why. I, I just didn't get why people hid books, this was way before, you know, this is before online and everybody had laptops and taking with the laptop, you didn't, you didn't have all that. But, literally people would go into the law library and take books off the shelf so other people couldn't get the books, so that they could get a better score, or a better grade. I just didn't understand that because this is Harvard Law School. Everybody was gonna get a job. And I didn't get it, and I had also calmed down tremendously. I--when I think about my time at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], I was a closet studier. I don't think people really knew how much I--really knew how much I studied because I was a social butterfly. I was you know, class president and class vice president and social secretary of the class so, no one--but at Harvard Law School, I found myself back into that drudgery. At Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England], it was--we didn't take a test until the end of our two years. And you turn in your thesis and--so it was just a very different way to study and--and to learn. So, I'm back to Harvard Law School, I'm back into the states and I hated Harvard Law School. In fact, I was in this, the Gropius dorms [Gropius Complex], those who know the famous architect Gropius [Walter Gropius], he literally built these dorms where the hallways were bigger than the dorm rooms, and the person next to me was in my, my--we all had our own room so, I was in my own room, but, my next door--next neighbor was also in my section. And this is the--during the date of--I'm now dating myself. But, these printers that go (makes sound), you know, the, the jet printers, okay? She would finish outlining all of her cases and be done with the day's reading at six p.m. the, the night before our class. And when I am in the bathroom brushing my teeth settling down for the night to read and learn the next day's work. She was finishing hers was in her pajamas brushing her teeth to go to bed. And you would hear for literally two hours (making sound) the printing of her notes. It was crazy. I didn't, I didn't understand how at Harvard Law School, why people didn't calm down. I didn't get it, like I d- didn't get it. Nevertheless Harvard Law School was a wonderful experience because I met Professor Charles Ogletree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree]. Because, I had met and had as my thesis advisor Dr. Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], Professor Bell. Because I met and I just became fascinated with the study of corporate law, because I had my first opportunity to work on Wall Street. I mean we never talked about stocks and bonds you sort of think, think to yourself. How did a little girl from Selma [Alabama] get to be a securities lawyer, let alone a partner, in a big--a firm doing securities transactional work? And it was because of the experience at, at Harvard Law School and the experi- the summer experiences that I had working on Wall Street. It was a whole new, it opened a whole new world to me that I had never thought about. And I was encouraged to, if I was going to be involved in Wall Street, to be invested in Wall Street. So, I bought my first stock that summer, the summer. And they told us to buy what we know and anyway I was just fascinated by the, that whole world. And, and it became my profession. Now, I also incurred a heck of a lot of debt, so up until Harvard Law School I really didn't have any loans, except for the loan that I had taken out to travel during my junior year at, at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], which I guess by the time I started paying off my loans (laughter) was probably a lot more than what I borrowed. I learned the importance of compound, compounding interest (laughter), as, as an adult. Story_ID: 653508 Speaker 1: Nevertheless, Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] was a, a very good experience. It wasn't my most formative experience. But, it, it was classic that first year. We were fighting tooth and nail for a black, an African American professor. We wanted a black women professor. We had a, you know, pr- Professor Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] who was the first tenured Harvard Law School professor. And alone came [HistoryMaker] Randall Kennedy and [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree. But, we didn't have any black women. And so, the cause of our day in our day at Harvard Law School was getting an African American woman to come. And we wanted [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier, we wanted Anita Hill, we were fighting, we were protesting. We did a sit in, in which- there's a classic tape of, then student, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] giving this great oration about why it was we were fighting tooth and nail for the, the wom- the African American woman's voice to be heard. And I will never forget we took over the dean's office. We chanted songs that I led because I was, I, they called me Alabama. I was from Alabama (laughter), and they knew I was from Selma [Alabama], and they were like we, we know you know how to march. I'm like, I know how to march (laughter). Good for a good song, so we're, we're, we're holding hands, we're marching, we're, we're protesting. And we take over the dean's office for the whole day. Then that night comes and it's about ten o'clock that night. And the campus police comes up and they say, "If you do not disperse, we're gonna call the police, the Boston police [Boston Police Department]. And you will be removed from (unclear). This is gone on for, for almost twenty-four hours, it's time like you know, you know, time for you to go. We've gotta go," you know, "you, you either have to, to leave or be arrested." And so, I'm still sitting there right, we're all doing our homework, it's late at night. We're doing whatever we had to that, for the next day's class. And we're protesting. By this time, we're not singing any songs, 'We Shall Overcome,' no, no songs. And then, one of the professors comes and says, "Now if," you know, "if you're arrested it will go on your, your--you will have a record. And you will have to explain that record when you take the bar and pass the bar in order to be a, become a, a lawyer in that state, in any state. You'll have to explain your arrest." And so, that person leaves and there were, there was a lot of talk among all of us about what that meant. And who was really down with it (unclear) really fight for this. And I started packing my stuff up. Everybody looks at me, I'm like, "Yeah Alabama, my mama and dad people fought and died for us to have the right to be up here at Harvard Law School. We have to be able to pass the bar and be admitted to the bar. They would not want us to have this mar on our record. And my--besides my mother [Nancy Gardner Sewell] would kill me if (laughter) I, if I, if I get arrested." And everybody laughed, there were a lot of us that, that left, actually most of us left that night. But, we'd like to think it was our efforts not just that night but really the collective efforts of, of working for over a year, that we finally got an African American woman professor at Harvard Law School. Now she didn't come when we were there. But, she did come along and her name was Lani Guinier. Story_ID: 653509 Speaker 1: So you did open the door-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) anyway. Okay, you said that Harvard was not your favorite but, you must talk about some of your classes, professors? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You just want me to talk about my classmates (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) No I mean because isn't this when you clerked for-- Speaker 2: Judge Clemon [HistoryMaker U.W. Clemon] Speaker 1: --Judge Clemon? Speaker 2: No, it was, I clerked for Judge Clemon after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After? Speaker 2: --after Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: After law, okay so, but what about moot courts and things like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: During? Speaker 2: Look I think that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not exciting? Speaker 2: Harvard was very--it was not my great awakening. My great awakening was at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], it was at Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England]. Harvard, Harvard Law School was a trade school. Now, the best part about Harvard Law School is all the folks that graduated from Harvard Law School. And, and, and, and I, you know, I made my best friend there, my, my best friends there, Tara Griffin. Shout out to Tara. I made really lifelong friends I mean Anthony Brown, who's now a congressman from Maryland, was, was a schoolmate at, at, at Oxford, I mean at Harvard Law School. It was a, it was a great time for me. And I loved moot court competition I thrived in, in, in working in the legal aid bureau [Harvard Legal Aid Bureau, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You know, I had a real dec- big decision to make the summer, the summer after my freshm- my first, my 1L year. So, I am working at Milbank, Tweed, Hadley and McCloy [Milbank, Tweed, Hadley and McCloy, LLP] on Wall Street and I get a call from my professor, my Oxford don who I hadn't spoke to in a year. And she said, "There's a publishing company that published my first book that wants to turn you thesis ['Black Tribunes: Race and Representation in British Politics,' Terri Sewell] into a book. But, you gotta come back to England and you gotta take out all this academic stuff. They really won't understand how was it that 1986-7 [1987] the first time African Caribbeans and Brit- black Britain, Brits- British folks could, could formulate or get the political power in order to elect members of Parliament. And they really want you to do this." And I thought to myself, hm to be published at twenty-six that could become fun. I also didn't, I wasn't in love with Harvard Law School, frankly. So, I remembered talking to my mom [Nancy Gardner Sewell] and dad [Andrew Sewell] about taking a year leave of absence from Harvard Law School to go back to Oxford to rework my thesis and turn it into a publishable book. I got a small stipend from the publishing company. My mom and dad freaked out, my mom, "What will people think? People will think that you failed out of law school." I said, "Mama you and I know differently." I wrote on the law review [Harvard Civil Rights Civil Liberties Law Review]. They weren't gonna hold my place or any of that, but, you know, what a great opportunity for me to go back to England and spend a year and publish a book. So, how I became very close to both Professor Ogletree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree] and Professor Kennedy [HistoryMaker Randall Kennedy] both of whom had to call my mother and talk her off the ledge, to let me take a leave of absence, to take a one year leave from Harvard Law School. It meant that I wouldn't graduate with my class. And so, I would have to graduate a year later. But you know, your bonding experience is with your class your first year. And it was a great opportunity and so I was very grateful to the law school professors for talking to my mom about it. So, Professor Ogletree called my mom and said, "If," said, "if Terri Sewell [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell] does not get a job because she took a leave of absences to go publish a book in England, you know, I, I will pay for her, her Harvard Law School education. I, I will personally pay for it." And so, I go off publish a book ['Black Tribunes: Black Political Participation in Britain,' Terri Sewell]. It was awesome I come back to Harvard Law School and I graduate class of '92 [1992]. And I don't regret it at all. I mean at some point you have to stop collecting things and start really worrying about your own personal growth and development. I think that, so much of my academic career I was, I had a lot to prove to myself to others. That year writing that book that was about me. I got to do and while I will never become a talking head on British American politics, I could. While I will never, I never really used that book as--parlay that into something academic or something in the diplomatic world. I'm a published author. And it was an amazing experience and a wonderful journey for me to do that. It was very personal. Story_ID: 653510 Speaker 1: You served as the editor for the civil-- Speaker 2: I sure did. Speaker 1: --civil rights, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can't tell everything. Speaker 1: --law review, okay. Speaker 2: I did (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I served as, I served as an editor for the Civil Rights Civil Liberties Law journal [Harvard Civil Rights Civil Liberties Law Review] and I wrote about my hometown Selma [Alabama] in the Blackletter Journal [Harvard Blackletter Journal]. That was a really great experience. It was, it was good, it was good. I you know, I befriended Hill Harper who at the time was a law student with me. And he was in my section and he was trying out to be this actor. And all of us were like, "Well why are you in law school? Why are you trying to be an actor?" And now look at him. He's now a great actor. And, and I think if he's truthful he'll tell you that he took my notes (laughter) for almost all of the first year we were in law school. To study for exams because he was very busy trying to be that MTV veejay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I think that the best part about Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] was that it gave me my profession, my avocation. And it also was a place where I met Professor Charles Ogletree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree] who was my favorite professor. And not surprisingly Michelle [Michelle Obama] and Barack's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] favorite. He was, he was a lot of our favorite professor. He was just a wonderful professor. And while I knew I was never gonna practice criminal law to have the opportunity to take a class from him. I, I, I just jumped at the chance. And, and after law school I had the great honor of clerking for, for the first African American federal judge in the State of Alabama, Judge U.W. Clemon [HistoryMaker U.W. Clemon]. Story_ID: 653511 Speaker 1: All right, so we're gonna just continue about Judge U.W. Clemon [HistoryMaker U.W. Clemon]. And clerking for, for him. So, tell me what the experience was like? Speaker 2: Oh my god you know, even to date I have to say the most my most interesting most amazing professional legal experience was clerking for Judge Clemon, to have the opportunity to work for the first black federal judge in Alabama, on a person of his statute. I mean he had been state senator. He knew politics. He had been an amazing civil rights activist and lawyer. He you know, had served as local council with the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. And I had received a scholarship while I was in law school from LDF. So, he the, the, the, the thought of Judge Clemon was you know, the opportunity to work for him was bigger than, you know, it, it was bigger than life, he was bigger than life. And so, he lived up to that reputation. He was an amazing mentor. So brilliant, willing to help, his law clerks. I mean, he, he, he served as a mentor to all of us. But, I think what I loved most about Judge Clemon you know, we had been drilled into us, at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], that justice is blind. That you know, there's two sides of every coin. That and what I learned from being a federal law clerk for Judge Clemon is that justice is seen through the eyes of the person administering justice. And there's great power in being both a lawyer, prosecutor, defender and being a judge. And he taught me about compassion for the law, compassion for people. How law can be a, has been and can be an instrument of, of, of, of, of, of, of great discrimination and, and fear. It, it can be that it's a, it is a powerful tool, that can be used for good and for evil. The law (pause) and I, if he were here I'm sure he would tell you that perhaps the most memorable day I had clerking for him, I had just started clerking for him. And my co-clerk was Alesia Hilliard [Alesia Hilliard Smith] and at the time her father [Earl Hilliard] held this seat. He was a member of [U.S.] Congress from the 7th Congressional District. Alesia and I and everyone said that they, that the, the, the judge had chosen a work horse and a, and a show horse. And the Harvard Law School student was not the show horse. She was the work horse (laughter). That Alesia was the big plum, because she was the congressman's daughter, and also I think his goddaughter, and so anyway. And so I felt like I had a little something to prove. Story_ID: 653512 Speaker 1: And I took serious when he said, "We're the judge," and he said, "I want you all to brief, brief me on the trials that are coming up." And one of the things that the federal judges have to do, they have to review the social security cases that are on appeals. And so, it's mostly about disability. And I will never forget spending a whole weekend on the first case that I had to brief him on. I concluded that the person who was the plaintiff could walk. That the person did not deserve to have disab- disability insurance. Because, because this, while the doctors all said it in favor of her, I found this special piece of evidence and 'cause I had spent all weekend long trying to. And you know, Judge Clemon [HistoryMaker U.W. Clemon] just, he was awesome. I come in with this you know, twenty page opinion about a social security case, that I had worked all weekend long. And my conclusion was that the lower court, the, had was, you know, the administrative court had--findings were true and that she should be denied social security benefits, disability benefits. So, he looks at me he says, "Sewell [HistoryMaker Terri A. Sewell]," he looks, peers over his glass he says, "I have three questions for you. First, did you go to medical school? What medical degree do you have? Second question, in all of this evidence that you poured over was there medical proof that she had had a disability? That she was disabled?" I said, "Well yes, her doctor said this, but this doctor said that and this nurse said that. This doctor--," so I'm trying to make up. And he says he stops me and he says, "And my final question, how many years did she work for this company? Twenty-three." He closed his book, he closed my, he took my paper and put it in his file, closed the file and he said, "Give the woman her money." The lesson I learned, aside from that I didn't need to spend a whole weekend on a social security case, the lesson I learned was that tremendous power in being a judge and we see evidence, facts through the lenses of our own experience. And that it matters who's, who our judges are. Diversity on the bench is important, diversity not only in gender and race, but in experience. Having someone who's been a public defender as a federal judge or as a [U.S.] Supreme Court justice is important. We see, we see and review facts and evidence I mean, through the lens by which we live our life. So, having judges and having lawyers and having them with different backgrounds and experiences matters. There's a lot that Judge Clemon taught me but I learned a lot that day. And I'm very blessed my dad [Andrew Sewell] had a series of strokes that left him in a wheelchair and I can truly say for the fifteen years that my dad was unable to put up curtains or hang pictures that Judge Clemon really stood, stood in the gap. And I'm very grateful to him for that. And so, when I decided to run for [U.S.] Congress there were two people that I talked to about it before I made my mind up and Judge Clemon was one of them. And he stood by me even thought that I was--that I was raising way too much money and not shaking enough hands. Very--he was very old school politician shaking enough hands, and meeting enough people, knocking on enough doors. Not--I didn't have a big enough sign out there. And he hung in there with me. And I'm a member of Congress today because my mentor believed in me and didn't leave me, didn't leave me all those thirty years ago when I was a law intern, and he hasn't left me now, and I feel very blessed to have him as a, as a, as a mentor and as a, as a, a real father figure...