 Story_ID: 482166 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Wayman, W-A-Y-M-A-N, Flynn, F-L-Y-N-N, Smith, S-M-I-T-H, III [HistoryMaker Wayman Smith]. Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in St. Louis, Missouri on the 18th of June 1940. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were also a politician, right? Speaker 2: I was on the city council [Board of Aldermen] for twelve years. I was on the police force for four or five years. I was a city court judge for about five years. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So I guess I qualify as a politician and I know I qualify as a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay, and I've read that you were the king of the black businessmen-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --of St. Louis. I actually read it on the congressional record here, so that's-- Speaker 2: That's more than flattering and probably less than true but-- Speaker 1: Okay. And sir what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the 18th I believe it is of December 2006. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my office at 3910 Lindell Boulevard, St. Louis, Missouri. Story_ID: 482167 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask by management. They only require a short answer. The first question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: It would probably be barbequed spare ribs. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, and it would probably be red. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Florida. Speaker 1: And the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Getting it done. Story_ID: 482168 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Wayman Smith, Jr.] side but we'll start with your mother's side of the family first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Edythe, E-D-Y-T-H-E, Meaux, M-E-A-U-X, Smith [Edythe Meaux Smith]. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: The 30th of November 1917, St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: You know, I can't trace the family back very far on either side, but I can go back to my great-grandparents on, on both sides. Speaker 1: Okay. Who were the great-grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side of the family, I'm not even sure, I may have misspoken. I can't even go back to my great-grandparents on her side. I can go back to my grandparents. My grandfather was a letter carrier and worked for the United States Post Office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], one of the first African Americans hired in that capacity back around the time of the World's Fair in St. Louis [St. Louis World's Fair, Louisiana Purchase Exposition, St. Louis, Missouri], which would have been around 1904. Speaker 1: Okay. His name was Meaux? Speaker 2: M-E-A-U-X, Fred C. Meaux [Fredrick C. Meaux]. Speaker 1: Okay, Fred C. Meaux. The--Meaux is a French name, right? Speaker 2: I believe so. Speaker 1: Yeah, so is there any tradition of--is there any--have you ever been told about any French tradition in your family, or--? Speaker 2: I can go back to a gentleman on the family tree whose name was Colonel Meaux, and I don't even remember his first name but he was gentleman who was known in the Kentucky community and that is the lineage from which the Meaux name came. I believe he was white, and, but the Meaux name came down that way, and-- Speaker 1: From Kentucky? Speaker 2: From Kentucky and I guess it ended because my grandfather, Fred Meaux, had, had five daughters. So all of them married somebody else and produced children with last names other than Meaux, and so that was the end of the Meaux. Story_ID: 482169 Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family about the--or St. Louis [Missouri] at the turn of the century or, or even life in Kentucky or, or--? Speaker 2: They were from Lebanon, Kentucky, which is a little, kind of backwoods Kentucky. And when I was a kid I was told about life in Lebanon, and it's a little country town, which probably didn't have many paved roads even at that time. Horse and buggies were the way of transportation. So it's kind of interesting to hear someone talk about their childhood, and I'm talking about my mother [Edythe Meaux Smith] and my [maternal] grandmother [Bertha Meaux] who talked about how, how they got around, what the transportation was like, et cetera. But it was--I was fascinated by the ability to go that far back in history, and at a time before cars were a main form of transportation. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: I think a lot of people tend to forget that Kentucky at one time and Illinois and Missouri was French territory (laughter) a lot of this was French territory (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: So when I heard Meaux I tended to think of Louisiana you know but it took us to Kentucky. Speaker 1: Yeah. Kentucky was where the family was. My grandmother and my grandfather [Fredrick C. Meaux] were both from Kentucky. Kentucky had opportunities at the time but not as much opportunity as they felt St. Louis had. St. Louis was a thriving metropolis much bigger than the towns they came from. So there were places that they could come into and get jobs with the government which weren't available in Kentucky. Speaker 2: All right, I heard at one time that St. Louis just missed being a Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) if it had done one thing, it could've-- Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right with transportation or it was their planes, or-- Speaker 2: Trains-- Speaker 1: Yeah, trains, it was trains-- Speaker 2: --in those days it was something they should have done in regards to railroad lines that they didn't do. They created a bridge, yeah the bridge. Speaker 1: Or something like that and as a result Chicago grew much, much more than St. Louis did. Speaker 2: Yeah but St. Louis was quite a metropolis at the turn of the century with the World's Fair [St. Louis World's Fair, Louisiana Purchase Exposition, St. Louis, Missouri] and all that. Did your grandfather have stories about the World's Fair that he shared with you? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Or your grandmother, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah I'm trying to remember now since they've both been dead since I was in my mid-twenties or earlier than that, so but. Yeah I remember them discussing what I thought were very colorful communities. I mean they would talk about people and their little carriages and their horse-drawn carriages and how life was--which was a lot simpler life than a metropolis, any metropolis. So I thought it was fascinating to hear these stories about the things that they did as children and you know making ice cream and playing, very simple. The kind of--it gave me the impression of being kind of like the Amish are today. I mean it's a very low key kind of existence with good strong family life, lives; it used to be fun to listen to. Story_ID: 482170 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Edythe Meaux Smith] talk about growing up in St. Louis [Missouri] and--? Speaker 2: Yeah she was--her growth, her growth period was--I identify it as closer to my own almost. I mean she--my mother and my father [Wayman Smith, Jr.] and I went to many of the same schools and in some instances there were even some teachers who were left over from teaching one of my parents who taught me. There were certainly a number of friends of theirs in St. Louis in those days. There were only a couple of public high schools for African Americans. A bunch of high schools if you combine all of the high schools for the white kids and the African American kids, you probably have a dozen high schools, but for African Americans specifically there were two if not three. There was Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] there was Vashon [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri] and then there was Washington Technical High School [Booker T. Washington Technical High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. That's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was on the north side of town? Speaker 2: All of those were on the north side of town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we all knew each other from those schools 'cause there were only so many schools. So we played football against each other, we knew the kids from different schools. It was--. But why I got into that conversation was by saying that as you get older, I'm now sixty-six years old and my mother is eighty-nine, we're a lot closer in age than when she was tw- in her twenties and I was just born. The distance was significant but today as we look back, and look back over some of the same teachers, some of the same buildings and places and people, it's amazing how compressed that becomes in terms of time. So her life story is not a whole lot different than mine in terms of you know she went to Sumner High School in the late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s]. I went to Sumner High School in the '50s [1950s], my father went to Sumner High. Let's see, my mother graduated from college [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] in '37 [1937] so I guess she would have graduated from high school in '33 [1933] so in the early '30s [1930s]. And then twenty years later I'm in the same high school. My father graduated from high school probably in '31 [1931] or '32 [1932], twenty years later I'm in the same high school and so life was not a whole lot different. I mean, when my parents grew up you know car was kind of getting to be a stable form of transportation. She didn't live in a time when nobody had thought that anybody would ever have a car, she lived at the time when her parents [Bertha Meaux and Fredrick C. Meaux] drove her around in cars and my parents drove me around in cars. And so she went to the same school I went to and we experienced some of the same, same kinds of conditions, so, I mean it was not--and the school system was segregated. Her school system was segregated, my school system was segregated. Now it happened that I went to high school in 1953 and the schools were integrated in '55 [1955] after the '54 [1954] Brown versus Board of Education case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. So I experienced a little--by the time I got to be fifteen years old there were some differences. If you compared our lives up until we were both fifteen they were probably very similar. By the time you get to be fifteen and now the schools are integrating and things are moving a little faster and vehicular transportation is a little different, transportation in general was a little different. Now people are flying back and forth to Los Angeles [California] on airplanes, you know the Wright brothers [Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright] hadn't even invented an airplane when she was born. So there were certain things that moved kind of quickly for my generation, and even more quickly for my daughter's [Kymberly Smith Jackson] generation. Now there are spaceships going to the moon. It was kind of interesting to--and all--just those comparisons alone, the similarities were interesting and the differences were interesting that we might have done a lot of the same things with some of the same teachers, I thought that was interesting. But the fact that I can get on an airplane and fly to California was--never would have occurred to her as she went back and forth to school in the '30s [1930s]. Nobody took an airplane anyplace in the '30s [1930s], so. It was, it was, there were--in many ways our lives closely paralleled, but the differences were significant. Story_ID: 482171 Speaker 1: Now she went to college in, at-- Speaker 2: California-- Speaker 1: California. Speaker 2: --University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) University of Southern California. Speaker 2: My mother [Edythe Meaux Smith] was a, was a very--is a very bright lady, she's eighty-nine years old and she was one of the first if not the first African American Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society] west of the Mississippi. So she was a good student I mean in the sense that she had the highest honors from a significant school like the University of Southern California and that was well respected in her day and well, well trumpeted that she was you know bright, attractive, and smart, you know and she's--. And today that is still the case even though she's close to ninety years old, pretty independent by today's standards. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what did she get her degree in? Speaker 2: Journalism, she's a writer and ended up working for Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] and some of the local papers, became at a relatively early period a stay-at-home mom, and the family was spread out in terms of ages. I was born in 1940, and my brother was born in 1949, almost 1950, my sister was born in 1954, pretty wide spread and she graduated from college around 1938 or '39 [1939] and became a mom at forty and was still a mom in the mid-'50s [1950s] when her--when my sister was born. Then when my sister was a kid until almost 1960 and by that time I was graduating from law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I graduated law school in '65 [1965] and then my brother graduated from law school [St. Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] in the '70s [1970s]. My sister became a full-time anchor with CBS [KMOV-TV, St. Louis, Missouri] in the '80s [1980s] so things were, were moving. All this time mom was a stay-at-home mom, so. Speaker 1: Now what's your sister's name? Speaker 2: Robin Smith [Robin Smith Patel]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and sh- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your brother? Speaker 2: Christopher Smith [Christopher Smith, Sr.]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: His of- I'm looking at his office right now, his office is right next to mine-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in this building and he's my law partner. Story_ID: 482172 Speaker 1: So let, let me go to your father's side of the family. Let, let me-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Well it's exactly the same as mine except he's junior-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so it's Wayman Flynn Smith, Jr. [Wayman Smith, Jr.], same spelling as I gave you earlier. I'll be glad to repeat it. Speaker 1: No, it's fine. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: October 17, 1915. Speaker 1: And was he born in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about his side of the family and how far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: About--maybe a little further, I do remember my great-grandmother on my, my--two great-grandmothers on my father's side. One of them was called Granny Cannon [ph.] the other one was Granny Taylor [ph.], and I'm not sure what their first names were. One of them was--I really don't remember the names of them but I remember the last names were Cannon and Taylor and so that's how we referred to them, Granny Cannon, Granny Taylor. My grandmother was--last name on my father's side--last name was Richardson and as far as I know she's from the St. Louis area but I don't know where she was before St. Louis. Story_ID: 482173 Speaker 1: I almost want to become like Alex Haley and go, go look that up because I don't have anybody to ask the question anymore. None of us know the answer, and all the folks who, who would know the answer are dead. So we'll probably do a little searching and at this point in my life I'm sixty-six as I said, if I don't do it soon to capture it and to find out I mean you never know who you're related to, you don't know what your family tree looks like on that side. I know a little bit more about the family tree on my mother's [Edythe Meaux Smith] side only because there were some people who were interested enough to capture it. So I found out I was related to Whitney Young, for instance, who used to head the Urban League [National Urban League]. Speaker 2: From, from the Kentucky (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah he shows up in the family tree where it hints that his great-great-grandfather and my great-great-grandfather, same person. I can produce that family tree for you if that is of any interest. Speaker 2: So Whitney Young is related on your father's [Wayman Smith, Jr.] side or your mother's side? Speaker 1: My mother's side. Speaker 2: Your mother's side, that's what I thought (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Through the Meaux side. Speaker 2: Through Kentucky, right. Speaker 1: Through that Meaux side, um-hm. Speaker 2: Because I know Whitney Young's father [Whitney Young, Sr.] had a school in Kentucky [Lincoln Institute, Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. That's all part of that--and what happened, it's interesting but maybe, it's an interesting tradition about, I'm trying to think, in the last ten years maybe, the family started having family reunions. It was the shortest lived tradition in history but it made about four or five revolutions. They had a family reunion in Kentucky, they had one in Chicago [Illinois], and they had one in St. Louis [Missouri]. They'd planned to have one in Los Angeles [California] but it didn't happen, I think because of lack of interest and the fifth year the tradition died (laughter) so, so it didn't last long. But one of the things that happened during that five year period and that was probably from around 1995 to 2000, I think. I'm not too far off with that but when that was going on there was great interest in who you were related to and what your family tree looked like. So there were people who actually drew the family tree and here's where you are, there's where Whitney is, that's where Colonel Meaux was, et cetera. And it really is something that I would like to do from my father's side of the family for no other reason than just to know a little bit more about who I am. Story_ID: 482174 Speaker 1: You had two [paternal] great-grandmothers, did they have any stories about St. Louis [Missouri], were they both from St. Louis or did they--were they from other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know where they were from and the problem was that they did not--one of them was blind and she was not very vocal. I mean these were uneducated women who didn't tell me much. I mean they were glad to see the grandbabies come and they would, "Come here baby." When they died--I was still pretty young when they died--when my great-grandparents died. When my grandparents died I was fairly old but it was interesting because they were more about what goes on now--it's a lot of history that, that I really think black people run away from and I really do believe that we ran away from that to some extent. And when you-- Speaker 1: Things that we just don't want to talk about because they are not pleasant. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I mean if you say okay Colonel Meaux was white, well now let's--how do you explain that? Once you start explaining that, it's not pleasant. I mean it's not--I don't look like this 'cause Colonel Meaux married a black woman and they lived happily ever after (laughter). So, so I mean that's generally not discussed 'cause that involves a whole kind of social interaction that black people or in my family's case, I won't try to speak for everybody but my family's case, they weren't particularly proud of well not ashamed of it, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) I think we can say that in most black families that's the case and you know there may be a couple that it is not the case but in most of them that's the case. Speaker 2: You don't look the way you do because there was no white in your background, I mean that it's there someplace and in most cases it's not 'cause there was a proper marriage and everybody lived happily ever after. I mean it's not what the explanation was in my case at least. So that's kind of why, I believe, you don't hear a lot-- Speaker 1: Yes sir. Speaker 2: --about that period of time I mean 'cause (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's usually a story somewhere that we can you know, if we're lucky, we've got a good story about what happened anyway at least that we can share. Speaker 2: Well, in my case my mother [Edythe Meaux Smith] was not forthcoming with that kind of information. That was, that was left behind. Story_ID: 482175 Speaker 1: So in terms of your father's [Wayman Smith, Jr.] family though, so did your father talk about growing up in St. Louis [Missouri], was, was his experience any different than yours (unclear)? Speaker 2: Dad, Mom [Edythe Meaux Smith] and I grew up in the same kind of environment and it was a pleasant enough experience. We live in a proper community and a lot of happily married people or at least a lot of married people with families and I grew up at a time when neighborhoods were popular and family values were important. And it's interesting because as I think about it and I've never even given this any thought but as I think about it there was kind of a brief period of time in our history where family values were important. Leading up to this whole miscegenation, miscegenation experience was not a really good primer for family values and if you look around at what's going on now it's not a good primer for family values with the number of people who are having children and not married, et cetera. But there was a brief kind of a period in there and if I had to give you dates it would probably be someplace from the turn of the century, 1900s until--you know there was about a hundred year period in there that values were kind of important and so it was kind of interesting. And my parents now lived in that same period of time and grew up that same period of time and by the time I was graduating from law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] in '65 [1965]. So if you go from s- that period in my life back to my parents' birth in the 1900s there is maybe a sixty-five, seventy year period that I felt things were really pretty, pretty tight. Story_ID: 482176 Speaker 1: What did your father's parents [Julia Smith and Wayman Smith, Sr.] do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother's [Edythe Meaux Smith] parents and father's parents did the same thing (laughter) the, the women were stay-at-home moms and the men were postal employees, which, which in those days, I mean I'm going back now to 1900s--1904, 1905, 1906, a federal job--'cause African Americans, they either had menial jobs, there were no corporate jobs so you couldn't be an engineer or you couldn't be an accountant or you couldn't be anything in any business. So you either had some menial job as a porter or something of that sort. So to have a job that paid federal money and provided whatever benefits they provided both in terms of the amount that was paid as well as just a job that allowed you some form of independence was a fabulous thing. I mean it's interesting 'cause if you look back now--my father's father was a per- was a clerk so he worked inside and my mother's father [Fredrick C. Meaux] was a letter carrier; he worked outside and delivered mail. The interesting part about both of those jobs, I mean the outside letter carrier was almost like an independent contractor. I mean there was nobody--there was no supervisor, there was nobody standing over them telling them they've got to do this and the one that was a postal clerk you know dressed up, wore a white shirt every day and so he had a good j- both considered themselves to have good jobs. S- sometimes I'm reminded of Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] saying that during slavery everybody had a job so there wasn't nothing great about having jobs but from where I was--from my, from my view point a job was a wonderful thing and it afforded my--they had five girls. All five of them went to college on my mother's side and, and, and my (background noise) other side there were two children, my, my father [Wayman Smith, Jr.] and his sister [Marvelle Smith], and they all went to college--they both went to college. And again, both on the salaries of postal employees, which, which in today's world, I guess nobody would, would aspire to but, but in that day that was about as good as it got. Story_ID: 482177 Speaker 1: Did your father [Wayman Smith, Jr.] have any stories of growing up in St. Louis [Missouri]? Now what--I mean, (unclear) I mean I suppose it's probably some intergenerational transmission of what the neighborhood is like and who's who in the neighborhood and what, you know--some changes I would guess in the north side, right? Speaker 2: First of all, the concept of neighborhood existed in that day in a way that it did not--has not existed since and that was, I mean you hear people talk about oh I got--if I didn't do right if my mama didn't whip me Ms. Ellie [ph.] would whip me or something, but there was a real neighborhood type concept and so everybody's home was everybody's home. Kids went in and out of everybody's home up and down the street. I mean if you went into those same communities today you are afraid to have your kid running up and down the street, and, and if you went into the better white suburban communities it wouldn't happen you because even today you don't have that kind of social interaction of running in and out of everybody's house. And houses are removed in most (unclear), et cetera. So there was a concept of neighborhood that kind of, again I'm talking about in the 1900s, early 1900s there was a concept of neighborhood that I believe has been lost, and, and so if you look back on it, you don't get a--there was nothing unique about it, or it didn't seem unique. Seemed that's the way my mother [Edythe Meaux Smith] and father grew up and I knew where that neighborhood was. It was the way I grew up and I knew where that neighborhood was. So when you ask me things like what are the stories, I come u- I don't come up with a lot 'cause we didn't consider it unique. Now if you ask me from this vantage point to look back at the uniqueness of the neighborhood experience, I mean you know it was a great experience. It's not a good experience today and if I go into some of the same neighborhoods I would not, I would not recommend it that that's the best way to raise your kids. Story_ID: 482178 Speaker 1: Now your father [Wayman Smith, Jr.] had a chance to matriculate through the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I believe, right? Speaker 2: That is true the University of Illinois-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I don't remember if my mother [Edythe Meaux Smith] or father took advantage of it but the fact was that the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] was segregated so y- they couldn't go there, the University of Illinois wasn't segregated so they could go there and the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] wasn't segregated so my mother could go there. And so, a lot of these young people had out- out-of-state college experiences like no other time in the history. It was one of the few things that benefited from segregation 'cause what happened was if you were--if you lived in Missouri and you couldn't--and Missouri politicians were kind of smart in those days so if you couldn't go to a Missouri school and you wanted the college experience they were prepared to pay for it and so-- Speaker 1: The state paid (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The state would pay your way to the University of Southern California, the University of Illinois and so there were a lot of people who lived in Missouri who had some wonderful--if you, if you talk to people my parents ages, it would blow your mind 'cause you know if you talk to people my age--Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] was, I attended Washington University, great school but I lived two doors from Washington U it's not--now I do in fact. Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri], great school but you know no excitement going there if you lived in St. Louis [Missouri] all your life. I'm chairman of the board of Harris-Stowe State College [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri]; it used to be Harris-Stowe Teachers College [sic.]. It's where people went if they couldn't afford to go anyplace else. But if you sit around and talk to these eighty or ninety year old people in this community they will tell you I went to the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] and another will tell you I went to the University of Illinois and another one would tell you I went to the University of California and I went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and all, all these different wonderful schools. They had great school experiences and were well-educated and well- well-trained. Story_ID: 482179 Speaker 1: I've heard stories about University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] in those days, but did your father [Wayman Smith, Jr.] have a good experience at the University of Illinois? Speaker 2: I think so, I think so. The--(pause) segregation was a way of life. My father attended the University of Illinois in a segregated lifestyle. It was such a way of life almost like apartheid in Africa, it was such a way of life that nobody expected anything differently. So if you say, well how was your experience at the University of Illinois he said it was great, you say, what did you like about it? Well you know had good teachers and oh where did you live? Oh I lived at the Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] house. All right. The white kids lived at the--he lived at the Kappa Alpha Psi house and the white kids lived at the Kappa Alpha [Pi Kappa Alpha Fraternity] house but they were both having fraternity like experiences living in whatever fraternity house they lived in. Now the fact that his house was all-black was not unusual. I mean his neighborhood was all-black, his high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] was all-black and frankly I don't know about where you grew up but if you grew up in--I grew up in a segregated community. Grade school was all-black, high school--it never occurred to me that there was anything unusual about that. School was a block away, made sense, all the neighborhood kids went to the same school, made sense, what's wrong with that? So there was never--we did not feel that there was anything wrong with segregation. He lived in this fraternity house. It was never I lived in that fraternity house 'cause they wouldn't let me live in the white fraternity house. I mean it just never--that didn't even come to mind. I mean, you--so, so I think he really enjoyed the experience, I think he enjoyed living--he's a Ka- member of Kappa Alpha Psi, I think he enjoyed that experience living in the Kappa house. My mother [Edythe Meaux Smith] lived with her family who lived in California; I know she enjoyed that experience. It didn't bother her that she couldn't live in the sorority house out there [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]; I don't think she had any desire to. Speaker 1: Now your father majored in accounting? Speaker 2: Actually I think he majored in education, accounting was later in life. He went to Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri] and picked up some--he graduated from the University of Illinois and I think it was in education and then he did some graduate work at Saint Louis University and I think ultimately acquired the accounting subjects he needed in order to sit for the ce- he was the first African American certified public accountant in the State of Missouri. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so he was able to sit for that exam--he had to take certain courses in order to sit for that exam. Story_ID: 482180 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Edythe Meaux Smith and Wayman Smith, Jr.] met? Speaker 2: No, I don't really think so. 'Cause they met--they knew each other all the time. I mean they're two years apart; they went to the same schools and as they came through school I mean kind of got smitten with each other someplace in that high school era or at least, I (unclear) my father really interacted probably more with my mother's older sisters. And when they, when my mother went off to Southern California [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] and came back she became an item and he went off to Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and came back and he became an item. They were two years apart. I mean--one of the things about segregation, my mother is a very interesting lady and one of the things that she has said is that certain things that have happened as the schools have integrated and the neighborhood integrated and things that happened and my mother said you know integration wasn't all that good. There are certain things that have deteriorated. I'm not sure that I can lay it all on integration but there was a different kind of lifestyle when we all went to the same high school and we all knew each other, totally different, totally different. And so you knew all the black kids your age. I know every black kid my age, I know the ones who went to college, I know the ones who did well, I know the Dick Gregorys [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], I know the Grace Bumbrys--we were all in school together; I know them all. And also know all of them that didn't do well. I mean it's the most, it used to be the most interesting experience in the world. When I first started practicing law and I would go to visit clients who were in prison, it was interesting 'cause it was like hey dude where you been. I mean you know--I'm doing a nickel, I'm doing a dime, I'm here for five years, I'm here for ten years. Oh, I didn't know you (laughter) I didn't know you were up here. Oh yeah, yeah I've been--this is my second time around, I've been here two, three times. So you knew all of that, I mean you, you, you were really well grounded and you knew the folks who had done very well and I also know the people who went away and were, became famous, knew them too. Story_ID: 482181 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I guess if, if going back maybe during the time I was three years old. I don't know what the memories would be but I just remember living or spending a lot of time in my grandparents' community. (Pause) Developing friendships, I remember people, I remember kids, I remember learning how to talk and learning how to--I can almost remember wanting to learn how to talk. I can't remember when I learned how to walk that was a little too far back. But I remember kids who in my earliest experiences involved me with and I remember knowing and remember playing with them so I guess I can remember back to three or four years old. By the time I was five, six years old riding a bicycle? My earliest independent experience is probably getting on a big bicycle and riding it. Learning how to ride a bicycle without killing myself, I thought that was the most wonderful thing in the world. If you get on a bicycle and pedal that sucker, and--it was almost like having a car but not quite (laughter). I mean (unclear), but that's, you know, my school, earliest school experiences, I hated school. (Unclear) (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Now wha- where did you initially go to school? Speaker 2: My first school was probably Washington Elementary School in, in north St. Louis [Missouri]. Story_ID: 482182 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: (Pause) The growing up experience was really my first neighborhood experience; you didn't know anything outside the neighborhood. I mean you--with one or two exceptions and those were specialized, maybe (unclear)--. We couldn't eat in all of the restaurants all we could eat in was local restaurants. But you go out in the neighborhood and you could eat at Fred Harvey's [Harvey House], which used to be in Union Station [St. Louis Union Station, St. Louis, Missouri] and (unclear) and early in life people who had those kind of (unclear) hotels--I mean those kind of restaurants would serve you otherwise you didn't get served, you didn't get served in any other restaurants, you didn't get served in any of the other hotels but they kind of knew--I'm not sure why it happened no one ever discussed it with me but they kind of knew that anything involved in interstate commerce had to feed everybody, so (unclear) restaurants at all the train stations--well at the train station, there was only one--and the restaurant at the airport served black people. Well I was never confronted with this, I didn't realize I wasn't eating (laughter) the other restaurants 'cause I didn't know they existed. So we left the neighborhood to eat maybe in one of these nice restaurants but for the most part, life--you went to the school, neighborhood school, you went to the neighborhood grocery store, I mean you went to everything. Life was a neighborhood experience and so if you ask me about my growing up all of it becomes a neighborhood experience. If you ask me about my friends it was the neighbors down the street, the neighbors around the corner. If you ask me about my, my smells it was the homes with the good food in it and if you ask me about--I mean it's--and today I still--same smells I still like barbecue (laughter) I still, still enjoy watermelon, I still enjoy the, the smells that I remember as a, as a kid. Story_ID: 482183 Speaker 1: What was your personality like? What did you like to do? Speaker 2: I had--again, again I mean I hate to sound like a broken record 'cause it goes back to the neighborhood but--baseball team, neighborhood sandlot. Every day after school we played--and if I wasn't close enough to the neighborhood sandlot, we'd play baseball in the alleys. So you learn how to hit a baseball right straight down the alley 'cause (laughter) 'cause if you went (gesture) and sprayed off you'd be in somebody's backyard. You ran the bases in the alleys or in the streets. We enjoyed doing those kinds of things. We didn't know much about anything else. St. Louis [Missouri] didn't have football team so I never even knew what football was all about. I was a graduate of law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] before I knew what a professional football game looked like. Speaker 1: Yeah the Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals; Arizona Cardinals] didn't move to St. Louis until what-- Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960]--? Speaker 2: Yeah '60 [1960] something and I was, that was when I came out of law school. So hockey teams, never knew what that was. I mean all we knew about was, we knew about baseball, we knew about basketball that was it and you could always find a hoop, somebody always had a basketball. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: --I'll say this about my childhood; it's interesting what segregation does. The most unique thing about my childhood was that I was in a strongly racially segregated community and had no idea that segregation existed. I have no memory of segregation; I have no memory of anything that even smacked of segregation. Well you say how can you live in a totally segregated environment? I mean I never knew a white person, never knew a white kid, never knew a white parent. Ne- I mean maybe in a grocery store was white or something. Speaker 1: Were your teachers black? (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, I mean I was in a totally--but there was nothing unusual about it. I mean it was just life in America. I imagine it wasn't too different for white kids who grew up in a white community. I mean I don't think they grow up saying damn I never saw a black kid today. (Laughter) I mean you know it's just not--it just doesn't (gesture) doesn't intersect. Speaker 1: Were you aware at all--so you weren't aware at all of the north side being the black side of town, or, or (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head). Story_ID: 482184 Speaker 1: Did you watch tel- television and that sort of thing when you were growing up? Oh, TV didn't come until four years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you were about ten I guess, ten before there was television was around, right? Speaker 2: When I was ten, television came on at four o'clock in the afternoon (laughter) 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'] or whatever it was. But it's kind of funny because you're right I mean once TV came along--I mean TV--as the old folks used to say certain things (unclear) the ruination of us. Ruination I'm not even sure that's a word but that was the term that they used and it was one of those kinds of terms that when you heard it you knew what it meant and, and TV has been the ruination. I don't think there would be as much crime today. It never occurred to me where was I going to see a picture of a house in Beverly Hills [California] and think I've got to steal something to get that. What was I going to see, I mean not very many people had cars, television didn't exist, I mean you had to use your imagination. I used to go listen to 'Sergeant Preston of the Yukon' and Batman and Superman ['Adventures of Superman'] and all that kind of stuff. But I mean you just never knew, it wasn't, it di- as I said it seems improbable and you are younger enough than I am that, that and grew up in a different area so I don't know what it's like. Speaker 1: I grew up right at the popularity of TV-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know TV was on all of the time. Speaker 2: Right, so you wouldn't--(unclear) I mean when I grew up by the time I was ten, eleven years old--twelve years old just to have a TV, a small TV with the big magnifier in front of it was, was, a great thing, was a great thing. We had a TV that was five feet tall but the screen was ten inches and you needed a magnifier in order to see a big picture. So I mean and it didn't come on until literally 3:30, 4:00 in the afternoon. 'Howdy Doody,' 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie' and the, and 'Huntley-Brinkley Report' ['The Huntley-Brinkley Report']. As a matter of fact, when I went to high school [Soldan High School; Soldan International Studies High School, St. Louis, Missouri], David Brinkley came down to interview us. We didn't understand that either, it was like what's the big deal? Nobody spent too t- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he come down to interview you about? Speaker 2: Integration-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was in a white school at that point, there were--I was about fifteen and it was Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] had impacted St. Louis [Missouri]. There were a whole bunch of communities that were not impacted by Brown versus Board of Education: California, New York the East Coast, West Coast, Midwest--you know, Nevada, Mex- New Mexico weren't really impacted so much but there were core cities, Midwest, Southeast that were impacted. So it was a news story, it wasn't a news story to us. I mean, we found out we were going to these schools and ultimately well--it was like they want us to get along with the white kids across town, fine, it wasn't a big deal. But it was a big deal to the rest of country to try to figure out what they're going to do when they get together (shakes head) (laughter). Story_ID: 482185 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in high school? Speaker 2: I was generally a science, mathematics student. I couldn't--I didn't like to read, I didn't like to write even today I've never made a decent grade in the English literature or American literature course, that I didn't like. What I liked--I knew enough about racism to believe that the only way I was going to make it is if I went into fields which were totally objective that had math tests, science, et cetera. I did not believe that if I had a subjective--if I wrote an English comp [composition] that I'd get a fair grade or a fair shake. I mean I just didn't, I didn't want to risk that. So it seemed to me at an early part in my life that the best thing for me to do is go to something totally objective. So, so I preferred everything that you could quantify and that's the way I am today. I still prefer to quantify. Now I'm a lawyer and of course you have to do things in a certain way but, but, but I kind of even look at the law in terms that I can quantify the weight of the evidence, I still quantify things and I still prefer that. So my preference--I didn't like English lit, and I didn't like reading 'Beowulf,' I didn't like--none of that appealed to me. Speaker 1: Okay now did you have any favorite teachers or mentors in high school, either in school or out of school? Speaker 2: (Pause) I was a straight A student in high school. I liked all my teachers, I really did, I mean I had few that I may have liked better than others but I was--I did well in high school. College [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] was a challenge for me, big challenge. Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school were you a member of--or did you run for student government or anything, you were a straight A student, did you--? Speaker 2: Yeah I was active in student government, student council, president and stuff. I mean I was, I enjoyed--actually college was where I was--I'm trying to think--(pause) high school I began to get active politically and I remember running for student president, not--I didn't win it. In college I became much more active in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--even, even more active. So politics kind of with a small P, I guess politics was always with a small P but small--politics became something I became interested in after school although I was very active politically in school. Story_ID: 482186 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating, now did you graduate in '58 [1958], is that? Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957]-- Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957]? Speaker 2: --um-hm, yeah, from high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And by that time I was really kind of young, I think I was sixteen when I graduated turning seventeen shortly after that. So it was--I got to college I was seventeen and young and stupid and did everything but study. Speaker 1: Now this was at Washington-- Speaker 2: Washington, yeah. Speaker 1: --University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Yeah I thought the college experience was great if, if it wasn't for all that academic stuff (laughter) I was--. If it weren't for those books and those classes, college would have really been a lot of fun. But I did not do well in the classes because I focused on everything but the classes and the books. So I was--my grades were horrible. And, and (pause) I had a counselor who said to my mother [Edythe Meaux Smith] once said, you know this boy may be in the wrong place, college may not be in his future (laughter) he's not, he might be better as an automobile mechanic or a trade of some kind. College doesn't seem to be (unclear). Speaker 1: You graduated with honors from high school. Speaker 2: Yeah but--I graduated--didn't graduate with honors, I graduated--I s- had a straight A average in, in, early in my high school career then I changed high schools when they became integrated, the competition was a little tougher and I went to a predominantly Jewish high school at the time and the competition was tough. I became a straight B student. Speaker 1: So, which--so you didn't come out of Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]-- Speaker 2: No I graduated-- Speaker 1: --started at Sumner. Speaker 2: --I started at Sumner in '53 [1953] and graduated from Sol- and stayed at Sumner until '55 [1955] and then transferred in '55 [1955] as a result of Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] experience. So I went to high school in '55 [1955] to Soldan [Soldan High School; Soldan International Studies High School, St. Louis, Missouri], which was at that time was an all-white high school. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: S-O-L-D-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then--as a matter of fact at that time it was Soldan-Blewett [Soldan-Blewett High School]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and stayed there for two years and then I went to college. Story_ID: 482187 Speaker 1: So well how did you choose Monmouth [Monmouth College; Monmouth University, West Long Branch, New Jersey]? I mean-- Speaker 2: Monmouth was, was just-- Speaker 1: After Washington [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: After, after a disastrous couple of years of Washington University and then I was on my last--I never got suspended or expelled but it was clear to me that I was on my last legs. I was not doing well, my grades weren't well and Monmouth was a little school it was almost open enrollment and I went there for summer school and I happened to have had a relative we call her Snooky [ph.] and I happened--and she lived in New Jersey where Monmouth was located and she encouraged my parents [Edythe Meaux Smith and Wayman Smith, Jr.] to send me up there with her and I would try anew at this little school that had just started called Monmouth College. It's now called Monmouth University, it's grown and it's a fine little school. But in those days it was--it would take almost anybody who applied although even there--I did, I became a better student there. And (unclear) being a better student I went to Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and I became a good law student. My academic career began to improve. Speaker 1: Now did you--at Monmouth College were you involved in social life at all or did you try to stick to the books? Speaker 2: Well that was interesting, again now by this time I'm in a community now that there's still segregation, '55 [1955], '56 [1956] I'm sorry--yeah, yeah--it was actually '59 [1959], '60 [1960]. It was before the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed, (background noise) social integration was not big nor was it favored. So not a lot of social activities at Monmouth but I enjoyed it, I had a good time at Monmouth. But because I knew the town people not because I had a good experience with the other people. Speaker 1: College people? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So you got good grades I take it at Monmouth? Speaker 2: My grades improved, I became, I became a better student. Story_ID: 482188 Speaker 1: Now how did you decide to become a lawyer? Speaker 2: It was kind of opportunistic, I graduated from college [Monmouth College; Monmouth University, West Long Branch, New Jersey] and there was a senator who was in Washington, D.C., a United States senator whose name was Stuart Symington. And Symington gave me some options that I hadn't been aware of. He said, "If you come here you can work in the United States Senate and go to law school." It turns out my job was as an elevator operator and I ran the elevators from three until eleven at night. Well the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.] emptied by five o'clock every day. And so, so I ran the elevators for a couple of hours and the rest of the time you could study. I had better grades working every day than I ever had when I wasn't working 'cause, 'cause I was able to--you know you're sitting there with nothing else to do so you study and so I became a good student, became a good student. Speaker 1: That's an interesting story. Okay. So Stuart Symington he ended up running against Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in '60 [1960] didn't he, for president? Speaker 2: He was, he was-- Speaker 1: One of the-- Speaker 2: --one of those people in the '60s [1960s] you're absolutely right and I mean people remember him. Speaker 1: Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II], Kennedy, Symington-- Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: --Lyndon Johnson [Lyndon Baines Johnson], they were all running. Speaker 2: That's amazing that you would remember that. 'Cause again, I didn't think--you look to me like a man who wouldn't be old enough to remember that. Speaker 1: I'm not. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Stuart--now that's interesting, Stuart Symington--now how did you--did the family know him, did your family know Stuart Symington? Speaker 2: Yes, my father [Wayman Smith, Jr.] was in politics. I was an alderman, but my father was an alderman before I was. Speaker 1: Now we get to the core of this. Now your father, he was a postal clerk last time we talked about him. Speaker 2: That was my [paternal] grandfather [Wayman Smith, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Grandfather, right-- Speaker 2: My father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Father went to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: --University of Illinois. Speaker 1: --first CPA [certified public accountant] in the City of St. Louis [Missouri]-- Speaker 2: In the State of Missouri, State of Missouri. Speaker 1: The State of Missouri, okay, and when was he elected to city council [Board of Aldermen]? Speaker 2: In--(pause) (unclear) in the '50s [1950s] in the late '50s [1950s] '56 [1956], '58 [1958]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --someplace in there. Speaker 1: By that time you were in high school. Speaker 2: I was just about on my way to high school and he was--yeah I was just about ready to graduate from high school [Soldan High School; Soldan International Studies High School, St. Louis, Missouri] when he beca- he ran for [U.S.] Congress and lost and then he ran for the alderman and won. Speaker 1: Okay. Now he was elected as a Republican? Speaker 2: No he was Democrat. Speaker 1: Democrat, okay. Speaker 2: He ran against a Republican, a guy named Sidney Redmond who--Sidney was the descendant of Hiram Revels [Hiram Rhodes Revels] who was the first black senat- senator from Mississippi after Reconstruction and Sidney was a Republican. And in those days a lot of black people were Republicans 'cause [President] Abraham Lincoln who freed the slaves. Speaker 1: That's right there was still a transition going on-- Speaker 2: There was a transition-- Speaker 1: --it wasn't like it is today. Speaker 2: Right, right so all the, all the black people were Republicans and then along came Franklin Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] and it started to--Democrat- blacks started to move to the Democratic Party and it's been that way almost ever since. Story_ID: 482189 Speaker 1: So Stuart Symington was a friend of your father's [Wayman Smith, Jr.] through the political connections (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Through politics-- Speaker 1: --yeah, politics. Speaker 2: --through politics, and, and, and we had two friends, and there was a committeeman, one by the name of Fred Weathers [Frederick N Weathers], and Fred had all the really strong political connections. So Fred called dad and said hey Symington has got a place in there building, and he wants to put an Afri- he wants to put a Negro--in those days 'cause we weren't black yet and we weren't African Americans, we were Negroes. And he wanted a Negro to work in Washington, D.C. Sounds almost funny to say--the word Negro sounds funny to me now. Speaker 1: A Negro, yes. Speaker 2: A Negro--but that was--Symington was very progressive and so he was looking so I came on his staff. And in those days those kinds of jobs were held for people who wanted to go to college. And so, I was in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] so that was even better but we had dental students, a lot of students. And today I mean a fellow who replaced me was a guy named [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold, big entertainment lawyer in Los Angeles [California]. As a matter of fact, I would suggest that he be interviewed. Speaker 1: His name is Arnold what's the first name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) L-A-R-K-I-N Arnold, A-R-N-O-L-D, and the reason I suggest it is because he's been involved with the development of entertainment law and so people like Michael Jackson and Teddy Pendergrass and the fellow who shot and killed--whose father [Marvin Gay, Sr.] shot and killed him-- Speaker 1: Marvin Gaye? Speaker 2: --Marvin Gaye and (unclear), yeah, those kind of people were his clients at a time when it was a little rough world for them as you know. Speaker 1: Tell me now this sounds like--now you're on this night shift and everything but you probably ran into some of the Washington powerbrokers around in the [U.S.] Senate being an elevator operator maybe they had late night meetings. I don't know but did you ever meet Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] or Lyndon Johnson [Lyndon Baines Johnson] or any of those people? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, and they were kind to me. Strom Thurmond, I didn't know Lyndon Johnson, he was not there or as I said I just didn't know him 'cause he would have been there. Speaker 1: 'Cause you came at--you graduated from Monmouth [Monmouth College; Monmouth University, West Long Branch, New Jersey] in what year was it-- Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]-- Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962] so the Kennedy administration-- Speaker 2: The degree says '63 [1963]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I left there and went to H- law school in '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay so the-- Speaker 2: That was during the Kennedys (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Kennedy administration yeah you were right in the middle of it. Speaker 2: I never met John Kennedy, but, but, but Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy], who I, who I don't know, I don't know very well but Ted Kennedy was a young guy in those days; one of the youngest members of the Senate, a young handsome guy. I used to run the elevator right on his corner so I used to see him. He was a very serious senator, I mean he was, he was about business and so I enjoyed--. But yeah Hubert Humphrey was active in those days. Speaker 1: Everett Dirksen. Speaker 2: Everett Dirksen, I never met Everett Dirksen-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but Hubert Humphrey I met, he used to get on my elevator. It was interesting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah he was known as Mr. Civil Rights. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, um-hm, and very, very liberal from, from Minnesota. Story_ID: 482190 Speaker 1: What about those Mississippi guys, Eastland [James Eastland] and Stennis [John C. Stennis], and--they were-- Speaker 2: I didn't meet them but it was interesting when I, the ones I met 'cause you know it was just a matter of luck and I worked at night so I missed a lot of action. And in the daytimes, the elevators were so busy that you never really--one of your jobs was to know when a senator got on your elevator. So you had to know 'em all 'cause I mean if you didn't and one got on your elevator 'cause when he got on your elevator your job was to go directly to the floor he wanted to go to. I mean the clerks and the employees and other people who were on the elevator really didn't matter. When a senator got on your elevator you went right to that floor and you're going to be in big trouble if you didn't know who the senator was and he didn't go to that floor. So I found you know you got to know who the heavy hitters were. But it was interesting, the southern senators, the ones who you would believe were most prejudiced, most hostile to civil rights people like Strom Thurmond and others. Of course Strom turned out to have had a, so- had some relationships with the African American community that weren't well known in those days. But, but--and there was an old saying that in the South, white people didn't care how close black people got as long as they didn't get too big, and in the North, the saying was, white people didn't care how big black people got as long as they didn't get too close, and so what happened was, was that there was, there was a more positive relationship black to white in the South that I observed, even though it was, it was a patronizing relationship and therefore unhealthy. But it was, it was interesting, in the North, white people were not very friendly, but, but you could get jobs in their countries--in their companies and, and, and then they viewed you as a peer and they would fight for your right to be a professional and whatever. So s- and the southern white people were very close even to their maids and butlers, but it was in a patronizing relationship and if you translate that to the experience in the [U.S.] Senate the guys like Jacob Javits [Jacob K. Javits] from New York couldn't have been colder, I mean (unclear). The guys who were from the states that I considered bigoted states couldn't have been friendlier. So there was just a different, a different, a different relationship kind of. Speaker 1: Okay. So how long did you work that job? Through- throughout law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], or did--? Speaker 2: A couple of years, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, 'cause law school's three years so I probably worked it for at least two years. Speaker 1: So you were there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They made me quit it. I know they made me quit it the last year, the law school did. The law school had a lot of money and a lot of scholarships and they said well how much money do you need not to have to go to work? Well I told them and they said fine you got it; you don't have to go to work anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I didn't but, but I mean the fact was that my grades were every bit as good when I was working 'cause, 'cause work was study time for me. Matter of fact, work was probably better study time once I didn't have to--once I was able to be completely free, I could be a little frivolous but, but when I was at work and couldn't do much, I mean I had to, had to read something, might as well read the law book. Story_ID: 482191 Speaker 1: Who were the, some of the faculty members at Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] then and did you--I mean who were some of the notable ones that you remember? Speaker 2: There was a guy named Red Morris [ph.] who is still alive, around who was fantastic. There was a guy named Herbert Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] lawyer he's dead now but Herb was a fantastic lawyer. He used to represent the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry and, and Herb was an incredible mentor for me as well as Red Morris who as I said is still around. Pat Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] was the first secretary, a black woman head of the [U.S.] Department of Housing and Urban Development. Speaker 1: Patricia Harris, yeah. Speaker 2: Patricia Harris, I'm trying to think of some of the others that were there Genos Parks [ph.] who I believe is still alive who is, was a business professor. There was the--Dugas, Julian Dugas [Julian R. Dugas]. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay now, did you have--well we were talking about who was there at the time, thinking of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was interesting but, but you had--first of all law school is a very small place. My class--compared to today--the class that I started with was probably at fifty, sixty people in it, had about fifteen when we graduated, so-- Speaker 2: Why the large attrition rate? Speaker 1: That's just the way life is. They tell you when you show up, they said--and this is the first year, they say look at the guy on your right and look at the guy on your left, this time next year one of you won't be here. So you get about a 33 and a third percent attrition rate right off the bat and during the second and third year you lose another third over both years, I mean by 15 percent each year. So by the time you lose two thirds of a class in a three year period, you don't have but maybe fifteen, twenty people left. But the class didn't start off with more as opposed to Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] on the other side of town. But my daughter [Kymberly Smith Jackson] went there, and she's--my daughter's forty now, she graduated maybe ten, twelve years ago. I mean she had so many people in the class, law school at Georgetown; she was in the class with Dee Dee Danforth, who was Danforth's [John Danforth] daughter. They spent three years in law school together and met at bar review school. They even knew they were in the same school. When you think about that kind of size comparing to us with maybe sixty to start with and we knew all sixty but ending with twenty, very small, very small school. And so the faculty was there for a limited--I mean it was small in terms of size but I'll tell you that it was a wonderful faculty. And the nice part about a small, intimate law school and if you're going to be a lawyer for the rest of your life then you get to know the lawyers on the faculty who were the senior lawyers in the profession and in the community, it was a spectacular opportunity to meld and blend and grow in an environment where you really did know what law was all about. If you've got a class with a thousand, two thousand young people, I'm not sure you ever really know your professors. We knew our professor and they knew us. I mean we helped them build bookcases on the weekends and hung out with us, it was just a close intimate relationship that, that existed, wonderful it was absolutely wonderful. I don't know that it can be duplicated. Story_ID: 482192 Speaker 1: There certain, certain aspect of the law that attracted you the most, or was it more (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I really went there and ultimately it's what I have followed throughout my career but I went there because in those days I was a civil rights crusader of sorts. I was at demonstrations around here and they had civil rights law and we didn't go there--I mean the kids today are a lot smarter than I was. I mean they, they want to go there so they can discuss mergers and acquisitions and make millions of dollars on the percentage of the cut on consolidation. We didn't have any thought of that kind. What we were most interested in--what I was most interested in was being a part of the civil rights law. I helped draft, for instance, I helped draft the Civil Rights Act of 1964. I was in law school at the time and so they came to Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] 'cause we were known for our civil rights activities and our studies. A lot of our professors were involved. The Bobby Seale case and in the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and all that stuff we were all involved in that. So when it came time to--who do we get to help us draft this civil rights bill, let's go over to Howard and ask one of those guys over there. So they asked somebody like Herb Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.] and Herb would say, "Well let me get my students involved in this." We were a free service (laughter) we were like slave labor but we enjoyed it and so we got involved in it and it was an honor, I mean you know. John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] who is probably a senior congressman now--African American congressman, Conyers came over to Howard in those days and helped. Shortly before Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] got there--there were a whole bunch of them that came in the late '60s [1960s]. Bill Clay, Carl Stokes--I said Carl Stokes I meant Lou Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] and they all came through. But right before them there were guys like Diggs [Charles Diggs], Conyers. And, and, and Howard is one of the few federal universities other than West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and Annapolis [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland], Howard is completely funded by the federal government therefore the congressmen felt very comfortable coming to Howard where they had friends and said what can you do to help us draft this Civil Rights Act, which we were going to try to get through [U.S.] Congress 'cause it had to get introduced as a bill around the time that I first went to law school. They came to us and we drafted the bill in '62 [1962], '63 [1963]. We were helping them draft that kind of legislation which was another experience that you can never duplicate. I mean you know so we were, yeah, involved in things that were very important in, in the nation and in the world. Story_ID: 482193 Speaker 1: Did you encounter Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] when you--in those days? Speaker 2: No, I wish I--there were some people that I never got to meet Adam Clayton Powell, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. King was assassinated right after I graduated from school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], as a matter of fact I was arguing a case--not arguing I was--'cause I didn't even get admitted to the [U.S.] Supreme Court until recently but I was at the United States Supreme Court and I filed a brief amicus curiae for a civil rights case the day that King was shot. So I was always a lawyer so I missed King and Powell got himself in a bind in terms of residency. He got into a lawsuit with someone he called a bagwoman or something who sued him for liable slander and Powell ended up retiring and not--in the Dominican Republic--not the Dominican Republic but it was one of those islands and he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, Bimini. Speaker 2: Bimini, Bimini, and he evaded service of process. He liked Bimini anyway and so when they started putting the screws to him to make him responsive to this lawsuit by this woman he called a bagwoman, he just disappeared down in Bimini and they weren't able to serve him, and so, then he--. But he was so popular that he ran for office and won and then, and then they refused to seat him (laughter) 'cause he wouldn't come home to be seated. Speaker 1: They censored him or something didn't they somewhere, or--? Speaker 2: They censored him and then they wouldn't seat him and he refused 'cause the people in our law school who were representing him, Herb Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.] was one of those people, said well you've got to show up so that they can arrest you and you can raise the issue of governmental immunity which then raises the issue of ceding et cetera. But if you don't come back home and raise the issue you're just going to be a fugitive. There is no way to raise that issue without you coming back and creating a physical presence. Speaker 1: But he never came--he didn't come back? Speaker 2: No I think around that time if I remember history correctly a guy who is now a friend of mine, I didn't know him at the time but a guy named Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] ran for that seat and got the seat. And, and then I think one of Adam's kids [Adam Clayton Powell IV] ended up running against Charlie recently, I'm not sure about that. Story_ID: 482194 Speaker 1: So you helped write part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head) Um-hm. Speaker 1: How did that make you feel that was a big deal in 1964; Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] signing the Civil Rights Act. Speaker 2: Well the p- the pride grew I mean nobody knew whether it would pass or not. That was very controversial legislation so it was really part of the battle. I mean you didn't think I'm a part of some successful legislation that's going to lead to a lot of social change. You kind of felt the same way you did when you went into a lunch counter and you knew you weren't going to get served. I mean you just--that was a--it was a constant fight. Speaker 1: Sounds just as (unclear) I guess for you all you didn't know what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't figure the significance after then, it was--. Plus if I asked you today if you knew what states have those kinds of laws and which states don't have them you wouldn't know. I mean probably most of them have them now because there is an economic incentive. But originally Pennsylvania had it, New York had one, California had one. Speaker 1: A civil rights act? Speaker 2: Civil rights act, yeah, California had (unclear), Fair Employment Practices Act [California Fair Employment Practices Act of 1959], New York, Pennsylvania places that were considered liberal, liberal states. But, so I mean it was another piece of liberal legislation that we hoped would pass but we didn't have any assurance that it would pass. So it was another (unclear), it was another shot across the bow and ultimately we got enough shots across the bow that we changed the course of history. But you don't go into it thinking that you might change the course of history. As matter of--you don't even go into it believing that you'll be successful. Story_ID: 482195 Speaker 1: Well when you graduated from Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] now what year did you come out in, was it '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 1: --and you went to, right to Wall Street [New York, New York] as I understand. Speaker 2: Went--yeah, went directly there and worked for an accounting firm 'cause I had this accounting background too and so I went to-- Speaker 1: Was that for Peatmont? Speaker 2: Peat, P-E-A-T in that, in those days it was called Peat comma Marwick comma and Mitchell, Peat, Marwick, Mitchell [Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell] today it's K- KPMG Peat Marwick [sic. KPMG] I think it is, or KMG. It was acquired by a European firm called KPMG and so then it became KPMG Peat Marwick and then I stayed there for maybe a year or two, and-- Speaker 1: Were there any other blacks on Wall Street when you were there? I mean (unclear) folks that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not many, not many. I was a first at Peat Marwick and Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen and Company] tried to hire me that year too and I would have been a first at Arthur Andersen. As a matter of fact, they had a fight, "You stole our Negro" (laughter) so, so--. But yeah there weren't many and the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] had just passed in '64 [1964]. It was--went into effect in '65 [1965] and I graduated in '65 [1965]. Affirmative action--as a matter of fact, affirmative action was coined in my graduation by Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] who spoke at Howard's graduation that year. Then Lyndon--Lyndon--President Johnson said you cannot--blacks--white people stand on history's mountains, black people stand in history's holes; you can never have fairness for black people until they stand on the same level and in order for them to stand on the same level since they are in history's holes and white people are on history's mountains in order to get them in the same playing field they will have to be some kind of affirmative act to get them there hence affirmative action. And I mean I watched that concept being coined right in front of me at my graduation. So--and from that point they started African Americans in Wall Street operations. But yeah I was--it was just by happenstance but I was there f- there first probably. Story_ID: 482196 Speaker 1: I was asked to ask you, when did you join Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], was that in Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], or at--? Speaker 2: No but s- around that time or right after that I became an Alpha in '66 [1966] or '67 [1967]. I graduated from law school without a fraternity (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) the grad chapter-- Speaker 2: --I joined the grad chapter-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as a lawyer in Jeff City grad chapter [Jefferson City Alumni Chapter]--Jeff City, Missouri [Jefferson City, Missouri] where Lincoln University is located, it's the state capital. And I went there to work for the human rights commission, which ties back into the civil rights nature of my being at that time. I mean I was, I was now having an opportunity to do some of the things that I was trained to do. Speaker 1: Okay now what year is this is it like sixty-- Speaker 2: This is now, this is now '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], okay so this is Missouri Commission on Human Rights? Speaker 2: July of '66 [1966]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I came there and took the bar in '66 [1966] and passed it going to work for the human rights commission. Speaker 1: Okay. Now during that time was Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] elected during that time? Or was he already--? Speaker 2: Bill Clay was elected in '68 [1968] I believe-- Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], okay. Speaker 2: --which would have been two years later. He at that time was an alderman I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Interesting story once after I became a lawyer and started working in Bill Clay's organization and he had an alderman--he had been the alderman, he was replaced by an alderman whose name was Bruce Oren [ph.] who was by that time in his eighties and I moved into that organization and I was a young kind of lawyer--budding lawyer. When they looked around for somebody to replace the guy who had replaced Bill Clay they selected me, so. Speaker 1: Who is the other guy? Speaker 2: C.B. Clo- C.B. Broussard was his name. Speaker 1: C.B. Broussard? Speaker 2: B-R-O-U-S-S-A-R-D, Broussard. Speaker 1: Broussard, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Another, another Creole gentleman with a New Orleans [Louisiana] background, he was an educator and Broussard was--Broussard is a big name in New Orleans. But Broussard was instrumental in helping me to get what used to be Bill Clay's Board of Aldermen seat, the twenty si- alderman of the 26th Ward. He was the alderman of the 26th Ward; Broussard was the alderman of the 26th Ward; I was the alderman of the 26th Ward. Speaker 1: Now which ward was your father [Wayman Smith, Jr.] in? Speaker 2: Eighteen-- Speaker 1: Eighteen? Speaker 2: --18th Ward. Speaker 1: So at this time was your father still in city council? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --no, my father died in '68 [1968] and I was elected to the Board of Aldermen in '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was nice though because one of the other aldermen, who had his desk, relinquished when I came on the board and so I was able to sit in my father's old desk. That alderman died and his son became an alderman and I hope someone was as kind to his son, who is presently an alderman today. Story_ID: 482197 Speaker 1: I'm probably moving too fast, now I've gotten you--but let's go back to the Missouri commission on civil rights, I guess. Speaker 2: Missouri Commission on Human Rights, MCHR (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Human Rights, right. Yeah, so what were some of the highlights of your activities with them? Speaker 2: One--I guess the biggest and I was only there a couple of years, but, but I helped to draft the legislation--open housing legislation in Columbia, Missouri which I was proud to be able to claim. The other thing was that there was a civil rights case before the [U.S.] Supreme Court called Jones versus Mayer [Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co., 1968], I referred to it earlier but not by name but that was a case that established that you could--that, that, that a real estate office was a place of public accommodations and therefore brought the housing industry in under 'cause there were a lot of places that had public accommodations but not housing. As a matter of fact, I'm trying to remember if the federal government today has a housing legislation, I should know that. But I don't believe--I can't remember if it is a federal law that prohibits discrimination in housing. I think--there must be, there must be--but there was when the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] passed which concerned employment and public accommodations it didn't include housing and I don't know if there is a federal housing discrimination law today. The more I think about it, the more I think there isn't and so there was an attempt to figure out from an academic perspective how you attack the housing industry when there is no fair housing legislation, federally. So what they did was they drug it in through the backdoor by calling a real estate office a place of public accommodation just as a lunch counter was and therefore they had the same obligation to serve you on a non-discriminatory basis. I think that's the way we got-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah that would make sense. Speaker 2: --got to the housing issue 'cause I don't think there was subsequently a federal housing law that never passed. I'm not sure--I shouldn't have forgotten that but Jesus, give me a break I'm twenty, thirty years past that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah I know there are several local fair housing organizations, or something, yeah. Speaker 2: A bunch of them, a bunch of them, state, state and local municipalities also-- Speaker 1: That may not be a federal-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) federal. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. What else? Speaker 2: So, you say what did I do I mean as I said I was only there for a couple of years but two things I remember is drafting of the fair housing legislation and arguing, and being there for the argument of that case which was a historical case and a landmark case in the state. Now we did other things you know because we were right on the cutting edge, and we integrated the whole school system in Missouri. We made sure that happened although there wasn't much resistance to it. When Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was rendered most intelligent people would say that's it, it's over, the fight's over, move forward, so--but there was resistance to that and so part of my job in those days was to help overcome that resistance and keep the pressure on. Story_ID: 482198 Speaker 1: Where did you go after the Missouri Commission on Human Rights? Speaker 2: I came out and started practicing law, started this practice (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, private practice. Speaker 2: And I, and I--that was around '68 [1968] or '69 [1969] and I stayed in the private practice and my brother [Christopher Smith, Sr.] came out and joined me after that and some other young lawyers were in this community also joined me, Michael Roberts [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and Steve Roberts [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and Georgia Gosling [ph.] and some others who worked for me, Linwood Evans [ph.] and others, and [HistoryMaker] Anne-Marie Clarke. And we all became--came through my office and worked for me and I was working with another lawyer by the name of [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson. And Margaret and I had a partnership and all these other young people came through us, Donald McCullin, who is now a circuit judge. So that practice continued. I picked up Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] as a client and ultimately represented them in their employment discrimination, which again gets back into that civil rights thing and, and, and once I got involved with that Anheuser-Busch ultimately hired me as a vice president in 1980. I represented them from about 1968 to 1980 and after about twelve years they said you just probably need to come on in here and be one of our vice presidents and I said okay. Story_ID: 482199 Speaker 1: Now you're in city council [Board of Aldermen] from '75 [1975] to what time? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I was a city court judge from '70 [1970] to '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: City court judge? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from 1970 to 1975 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you won an election or were you appointed? Speaker 2: I ran for election-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in '75 [1975], March primary, April general in '75 [1975] and stayed there until '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975] to '87 [1987]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --okay, all right, as court, as city court judge? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: No, that's alderman-- Speaker 2: --as alderman-- Speaker 1: --that's alderman--city court judge you were elected--? Speaker 2: Seventy [1970] to '75 [1975]-- Speaker 1: Okay from '70 [1970] to '75 [1975]-- Speaker 2: --that was an appointed position. Speaker 1: That's an appointed position? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's what I thought. Okay. Speaker 2: I was provisional for a couple of years and then I was full time from '72 [1972] to '75 [1975] so I had about five years of that experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was city council like in those days when you were appointed alderman? I mean (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Elected alderman, I was never appointed alderman--I was elected alderman. Speaker 1: Elected alderman, yeah, elected alderman, I'm sorry, the--I was wondering what distinctive features it has. How many black--how many aldermen are there altogether in St. Louis [Missouri]? And are they elected at-large or are they voted-- Speaker 2: Twenty-eight-- Speaker 1: --by district-- Speaker 2: --aldermanic districts and the president of the board. Pres- as a matter of fact, the president of the board just called me today he is now a court of appeals judge, but--name is Paul Simon. But, the aldermen--there are twenty-eight aldermen, and Paul was the president, twenty-ninth, all voting, all had votes and of the twenty-eight, ten were black when I was an alderman. So we had a minority of the board but a black caucus, which was very effective. I chaired the black caucus at one time and was again--it was at a day and time now you're going now back to 1970s, integration was fairly new in many aspects, but there were certain things that hadn't changed. For instance, the lack of a housing, housing legislation meant that even though you changed in employment and you changed in public accommodations you still couldn't live anyplace you wanted to live and that's why that Jones vs. Mayer case [Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co., 1968] was important. (Nods head). So-- Speaker 1: Okay let me ask this, what was the political makeup of the city council? In Chicago [Illinois] they are all Democrats, I don't know if you know that (laughter) but there are no Republicans on city council [Chicago City Council]. Speaker 2: It's pretty much the same. Speaker 1: The same in St. Louis? Speaker 2: There is a guy named Fred Hyde [ph.] who is a Republican, I think he may be the only one. Speaker 1: One, okay. All right, so basically the same kind of machine type system as-- Speaker 2: Yeah the Democratic primary guarantees you a seat, you don't get any opposition. I ran as a Democrat, no Republican opposition not in my ward. There was, as I said, one republican on the board that I remember. We used to kid him because he said we even--Democrats had to get together to caucus and choose their leadership but the Republicans, there's only one of those, you can kind of have your caucus meeting in the car on the way down here (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, that's pretty much-- Speaker 2: That's Chicago too? Speaker 1: Yes, Chicago definitely, definitely, I know in the primary Harold [Harold Washington] ran, Washington ran in '83 [1983], I mean it was the primary he ran against three Democrats and when he won that I mean (unclear)-- Speaker 2: It was over. Speaker 1: --over, yeah, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I never--Harold was in my office once that's the only time I ever met him and he was in my office because I was having a fundraiser for Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] and Harold came down. Harold and Bill were both in [U.S.] Congress at the time and Harold came down to speak for Bill, I think before he became mayor. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was something. So, now, when was Bill Clay elected? Speaker 2: To Congress or to-- Speaker 1: To Congress, I guess. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]-- Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: --probably in November of '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: And you served on that committee--you said to his committee? Speaker 2: I served from about someplace around in 1980 or '85 [1985] to 2000. I was a member of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation board [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 482200 Speaker 1: In your tenure as c- as alderman what were some of the major issues here in the City of St. Louis [Missouri] that--? Speaker 2: You know it's interesting there are--development was important in those days but a lot of the major issues though had been resolved. Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] was the leader of the Jefferson Bank [Jefferson Bank and Trust Company] demonstrations, which put the entire banking community and the entire employment community on notice 'cause this was in the '60s [1960s], this was early '60s (unclear) this was before the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed. So the banks were not hiring black people particularly this Jefferson Bank (unclear) he decided to do. So Bill led the boycott of the bank and demonstrations. He and I had worked together on other demonstrations. Bill is a little older than I am; he's in his seventies now. So he was like the big guy when I was a younger guy. And so he always had superb leadership abilities and so he would lead these demonstrations or if we were going to have a demonstration, we'd go get our big brother Bill Clay and he'd mess with them people, so, so in our (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was, he was a CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]-- Speaker 2: He was CORE, he started--he was one of the organizers of CORE. Charlie Odem [ph.] who just died was the national president of CORE, I spoke at Charlie's memorial service and young Bill Clay [Lacy Clay] spoke at the service as well but he was a big CORE, CORE guy. In those days he was--I mean I was a teenager but he wasn't a lot older, he was like in his twenties, and--but he was a hell of a protester and he was always charismatic, he was always charismatic and irascible. I mean they just couldn't control him. So Bill--he fought his way onto the Board of Aldermen, he fought his way in the [U.S.] Congress and he was always successful. I mean he had--everything he touched turned to gold; there was just something about Bill. I always admired him as you can tell and he's done very, very well. I still like being around him, I enjoy it when he comes in town and we talk to him. Story_ID: 482201 Speaker 1: So there's issues that--you're saying there were some development issues here [St. Louis, Missouri] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the problem-- Speaker 1: --a lot of the big issues had been-- Speaker 2: The big issues, employment was no longer a fight 'cause of the work that Bill [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] and that group had done with the Jefferson Bank [Jefferson Bank and Trust Company]. The rest of the folks didn't want that fight so they kind of caved in. Public accommodations were no longer a fight 'cause although he and I and others had demonstrated at Howard Johnson's and White Castle when they wouldn't serve us the public accommodations had passed so that fight was over. There was a fair employment practices law or the Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that had passed so the employment fight was over. So employment was over, the public accommodations was over, there was no place to picket in a housing fight 'cause those were kind of house by house but, but that was mostly over by then too. So, so it was a new--most of the major fights--. By the end of the '60s [1960s] there weren't many--if you think about it I mean Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] there were no more Martin Luther Kings, the Montgomery [Alabama] boy- bus boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott], that was all over I mean so. And that was all by the mid- to late '60s [1960s]. All the big fights were pretty much over. I mean, now was there stuff left to do, a lot of stuff left to do. There was more school integration that was to come. You know job integration even today isn't where it should be and housing, et cetera, but most of the big battles that set the footprint for what was going to go on in the future those were over. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you ever consider yourself running for mayor? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, yeah I--what interrupted it was that I became very successful in my practice and then as my practice developed and then I became a vice president at Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] and I was a very successful corporate executive and that lasted until last year. I mean got my last paycheck from them, I was paid fully through 2005 and so there was no time to run for mayor. I had to, I had to keep being successful (laughter). Story_ID: 482202 Speaker 1: Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] started off as a client of yours, right, and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 1968 or '9 [1969], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay and eventually, from what I understand, you became the first member of their corporate affairs department, is that (unclear)? Speaker 2: I started-- Speaker 1: You started-- Speaker 2: --what I chose to call corporate affairs. They asked me what did I want to call it and I said I want to call it corporate affairs. Speaker 1: Okay. And so what--I mean you were hired basically to solve some of the discrimination problems at Anheuser-Busch to--from the inside? Speaker 2: Yeah and it was--again it was an interesting twist 'cause I really had been in my mind you fought white companies, you fought because they were the impediment to your success and so now here I am on the inside of one of these white companies and I said, you know I wasn't raised like this. I can only work for you in this capacity if you're going to be serious, and at the time Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was, was on them and they said well okay you get him off of us. Speaker 1: I wondered about that okay, so yeah, because I know at that time he was demonstrating, he was on-- Speaker 2: He was on us and so he came knocking on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was 1980 or so? Speaker 2: Nineteen--1980, '81 [1981], '82 [1982]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he came knocking on the door and I had landed there by this time and I had started you know and I asked him--I told him there were certain things that they would have to do and they said well what do you mean? I said you know you got to be serious I'm not going to be just window dressing for you and I'm not going to fight the kind of things that Jesse is for 'cause he's for the right stuff so you need to get in shape. And I will help you to get in shape if you're serious about getting into shape. And they said we're serious and I said what are you prepared to do, they said what do you recommend and so I said well certain things you need to do in order to--. So ultimately I developed--I had a portfolio for all the black programs at Anheuser-Busch which I was happy, really happy to take on. So I developed their economic development program, I used to conduct seminars to show them how to search out and find African American businesses so they could do business with them. I headed their charitable contributions in the black community. I used to search out and find good corporate partners for them to have in the non-profit community. I developed programs in the banking industry with the National Bankers Association and then the legal community through the National Bar Association and the medical community through the National Medical Association and the dental community [through the National Dental Association]. I mean, ultimately on my watch Anheuser-Busch had one of the best names for its relationship with the African American community. Story_ID: 482203 Speaker 1: I was asking you off-camera about the Ga- Great Kings and Queens of Africa and you said that was developed by a gentleman by the name of Henry Brown [HistoryMaker Henry H. Brown]. Speaker 2: Henry Brown was the--actually I think the person who th- who thought it up, I'm not sure but I think his name is Byron Glore [Edward B. Glore] and Byron, of course, is a very good friend of mine and he was at the company [Anheuser-Busch Companies] and had gone by the time I got there and Henry succeeded him. And I think Henry picked, picked that program up from Byron as I remember, I'm not positive on that but then it developed under Henry's leadership and Henry developed a great program, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah that series I mean so many black artists gained notoriety through painting one of the Great Kings and Queens portraits (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah and before Henry's career was over he was in the office that I had established and so that program ended up falling into my office and then once Henry retired I took over the program and we further developed it and it worked. It became one of our main programs and as far as I know and I don't know but as far as I know it continues today. But I don't know because what they used to do was they would unearth a different king every year and the supply of kings is virtually inexhaustible. Great Kings and Queens of Africa, I mean if you think of all of the tribes and little countries that exist in Africa I mean you could have--you could unearth a new king and queen every--they didn't do it every year but there has to always be some more to be found or some more in the making or some more yet unborn. Story_ID: 482204 Speaker 1: We were talk- talking off-camera about BET [Black Entertainment Television] in its early days. Speaker 2: Black Entertainment era yeah-- Speaker 1: I mentioned competition with [HistoryMaker] Louis Carr, where he--who was a salesman for BET--who mentioned that when he sold ads in the early days Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] was the largest advertiser for Black Entertainment Television. Speaker 2: Yeah, Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] owned it in those days and Bob and I are friends, and became friendly--companies understood because of guys like Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.], guys like John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], white companies began to understand that just from a standpoint of fundamental fairness and good business sense they ought to advertise and do business in the black media, in the black magazines like Ebony and the Black Enterprise magazine, and the--. So ultimately grew into black television. I'm sure the part about BET was that many of its subscribers were white 'cause it was kind of a network kind of thing the way it operated. But Bob Johnson was a brilliant lawyer he developed it and he was very successful and is now a multimillionaire if not billionaire as a result of the way he's grown that thing and what it has become. And Anheuser-Busch, and yes Anheuser-Busch--we believed in those days that we had to be supporters of all of the institutions that were important to the black community in order to relate to the black community. So we supported black television, we supported the NNPA, national newspaper association--the National Newspaper Publishers Association, we supported that. We supported virtually all the major institutions, responsible people--that were responsible organizations that we knew. I mean the dental association [National Dental Association], the medical association [National Medical Association], lawyers' association [National Bar Association]--all those were supported by the company. Story_ID: 482205 Speaker 1: Now this is something that's always discussed in Chicago [Illinois] as a criticism of Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], but I believe at some point he re- he acquired a beer distributorship. Speaker 2: Budweiser, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Budweiser, yeah, so is there a story behind that that you can tell us, or--? Speaker 2: He--I mean his son [sic. Jackson's sons, Yusef Jackson and Jonathan Jackson] actually acquired it, but it was acquired perfectly legitimately. I'm trying to think, I mean it--by that time it was really a non-entity. I mean the Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] distributorships were at that point it was Ed Lara had one in Los Angeles [California], a football player had one over in Kansas City so it wasn't, wasn't that novel by the time Jesse's son got one and the one he got was one that had been kind of up and down ultimately bought into it--'cause you could make them successful. But there were some unsuccessful ones. The history of that one was kind of checkerboard as I remember, I don't remember it being just a slam dunk success, I think he worked pretty hard to make it successful. Speaker 1: Okay but you know people try to connect his protest with the distributorship, you know. Speaker 2: I would never have done that and they were separated by a long time in time. I mean it's not like there was a protest, or a protest ending that distributorship it was a protest to start in '81 [1981], '82 [1982] and I think that the distributorship might not have come about until the '90s [1990s]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so I mean there was, there was no reason to connect them. Story_ID: 482206 Speaker 1: You just retired from Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Got my last paycheck in 2005, last year. Speaker 1: All right. And while you were there you had control of a considerable amount of money that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --for the black community to target you know--there's--I think 60 million [dollars] went to the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] from what I understand. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, ultimately we raised that kind of money for the United Negro College Fund. We probably spent a million or two a year on the Lou Rawls Parade of Stars and then we raised with that million or two a year, we raised that 60 million. We tried, we tried to be smart about what we did because it was clear to us that you couldn't--one, you couldn't buy yourself all the goodwill that you needed and you couldn't give enough money away--you didn't have enough money to give away not enough to make a big dent in the organization. So, so rather than try to do any of those things and when I talked to August Busch [August Busch III] about it and he agreed with me it was better to try to do things in a natural way for instance, we--if you--with his minority business development program you know I said, August, you can- you haven't got enough money to make a dent in the African American problems in this country, the federal government doesn't have enough money and certainly this little company doesn't have that, it's not a little company, big company (unclear) company, but certainly this company doesn't have that kind of money to make a dent. But if you would take your money and use it to what you spend, you spend enough money that it could make a dent. So our program now at Anheuser-Busch I bet is north of $200 million a year. Now you can't get two mi- no company of that size can afford to give $200 million to the black community but if you invest it or spend it with minority businesses, it is multiplying and the minority businesses reinvest in their community. So if I'm--live in a community and I'm making a salary from a black business and then I spend that salary with the black grocery store and the black grocery store spends that salary with the black lawyer around the corner and the black lawyer spends that salary with the black doctor I mean you know it turns over two or three or four times in the black community. It makes a heck of a difference on a $200 million investment in the black community they could end up being billions of dollars if properly recirculated. So I said that's the way to do this thing and we did ultimately and the same thing is true with the United Negro College Fund. I mean we, we can invest a million bucks, but we can raise 60, 70, 80, 90 million with that million so that's what we did. Speaker 1: Okay, okay that makes sense. Speaker 2: 'Cause working smart--you know working hard and working smart. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a fairly large budget. I guess figure, I don't know if it's true but you had a budget of $300 million throughout the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It wasn't anyplace close to that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, not even close-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) I mean, maybe 20 or 30 million. Speaker 1: Okay per annum? Speaker 2: Per annum-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, and, and, and that was a lot of money. I mean I--that's a lot more than they spend today. Story_ID: 482207 Speaker 1: Did things change while you were there in terms of commitment of the company [Anheuser-Busch Companies] to the bla- did--or did they--is there a difference now compared to what it was when you first started out in terms of what the emphasis is and what the--? Speaker 2: A lot of things we had to force feed early on which I would like to think and I you know I'm obviously not there anymore but that you didn't have to force feed anymore it just became a way of life. Doing business with--black business, with women-owned businesses became a way of life. Working with charities in an intelligent way just became a way of life. Before you came, earlier today I had a group of business people who were like, how do we get involved in that kind of thing, I mean it becomes a way of life and so it did. And, and so what happens is, for instance I may have been one of the more popular executives or of the better known ones, but the guy who is vice president now in charge of all their operations is much more significant and has a much more significant role than I was ever in. I mean the guy who runs every brewery in America is black. That's power, that guy is really very significant. His name is Mike Harding [Michael S. Harding], that's his name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that's strong stuff (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's actually running every, okay. Speaker 2: He's the vice president over operations, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. That is strong stuff. Story_ID: 482208 Speaker 1: So you just re- you ba- basically retired last year and you're, you're--are you completely retired now or are you still in private practice as a lawyer, or--? Speaker 2: Oh no, I'm full-time-- Speaker 1: Okay, full-time, all right. Speaker 2: --private practice. Speaker 1: Okay. How has St. Louis [Missouri] changed, how are things for the African American community in St. Louis changed over the years and I was asked to ask you about how St.--how the black community of St. Louis interacts with the black community of the City of East St. Louis [Illinois] across the river? Speaker 2: I represent East St. Louis now, I represent the mayor of East St. Louis, Carl Officer. Unfortunately there isn't much of the community of East St. Louis left to interact with. I mean--let me say that better, let me say that better. Twenty, thirty, forty years ago East St. Louis probably had 150--130 to 150,000 people, very sizable African American community. Today it's probably got 30,000 people. So I mean the shrinkage is significant. So when I said there is not as much of a community to react to I mean when a community goes from 150,000 down to 30,000, you know--and the other problem is that their, their 30,000 is not well-off. So they are having all the many social problems that 30,000 poor people would have. Crime is an issue, healthcare is an issue all of the, all the problems that poverty produces, all issues, but good school system. Speaker 1: That's sad, I mean it just makes you--and I saw it when I was there in the '60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s]. They were starting to lose, you know, so. Speaker 2: But I mean now when you look at 30,000 people--one of the things that I do today--I do three things for business purposes. One is I practice law but the other one that I do is I have the development rights for the East St. Louis riverfront along with my business partner. That's an opportunity because East St. Louis has got to grow, got to grow. And so what an opportunity it is to be in the development business 'cause as the mayor likes to say--Carl Officer likes to say, when my city shrank from 150,000 people to 30,000 people, the land didn't leave, the people left. So the land is still there. Now we know it can be a city of 150,000 'cause it was a city of 150,000 people. So now all you have to do is figure out how to develop it. Speaker 1: It's strategically located one would guess, right. Speaker 2: Well located, well located I mean it's closer to some parts of St. Louis than my office is. Story_ID: 482209 Speaker 1: What do you envision in terms of opportunities for East St. Louis [Illinois] to--what kind of economic base would it have (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's almost--well you got to think about rebuilding a city and how you would do that. How do cities spring up, neighborhoods spring up, shopping malls spring up where the neighborhoods are so that people can buy stuff, businesses spring up. East St. Louis is as close as a--as any suburb of St. Louis [Missouri]. You drive over the bridge and you get to a point of that river where you're in East Louis (unclear), so it's as close as a suburb can possibly be and it's right adjacent to the metropolitan downtown St. Louis area. So if you developed a bedroom community, for instance, which you could easily do and every house they build over there sells and they build them. They have tax abatements; they have nice economic inducements anything you build over there where housing is concerned would probably work pretty well. Now you've got to make sure that they have proper police protection. But if you look--I mean they've got a Casino Queen [East St. Louis, Illinois] over there, a gambling boat, which--in the middle of this poor black community and if you go on that boat 70 percent of the people are white people from southern Illinois. They feel secure, police are there, they're not molested in any way, they can go on and gamble and so it becomes something that's very safe. Same thing is true of the housing over there. Provide safe housing, clean housing, reasonable priced housing, police protection, fire protection people will fill it up. Story_ID: 482210 Speaker 1: I was asked to ask you about the Xerox seven and Barry Rand, you know. Speaker 2: (Nods head) I'm not sure what the Xerox seven is. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: I know and I should end it with that 'cause it's probably better that you don't guess on things like that. But Barry was--became one of the senior people at Xerox [Xerox Corporation]. I mean he was working for the chairman of the board who gave him a lot of authority and, and who Barry and maybe I guess the other Xerox six convinced, convinced that--kind of like I did with Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] that there were ways to do business, tapping into a resource like the brains of some of the African Americans that would be business, business beneficial and the chairman bought the program. And I think Barry did an excellent job of communicating it and then Barry became one of the top executives in the world. He was a top executive at Xerox, he went over to Hertz--no, no, to Avis [Avis Budget Group, Inc.], not Hertz. He went over to Avis, and became president of Avis and then became a great executive. Story_ID: 482211 Speaker 1: Were you a- around at the beginning of the Executive Leadership Council [ELC]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: It was comprised of African American leaders mostly men although there were some women in it. And they were guys who were in strategic positions. They were also people who had responsible positions not just names or titles I mean they had responsible positions. ELC was always interested in making sure that they were going to take a person in--I was one of the original charter members. They're going to take someone in, they had to have a good portfolio and so most of the African American top leadership ended up in ELC and it goes today, and it's--. I opened some mail from ELC today, and you know there aren't many weeks or months that go by that I don't get some kind of mail. Speaker 1: Who are some of the people involved in the beginning of ELC? Speaker 2: Every African American you can think of. I'm trying to think of some--my friend Ben Ruffin [Benjamin S. Ruffin, Jr.] who just died was a big ELC member. I know Darwin Davis [HistoryMaker Darwin N. Davis, Sr.] who just died was a big ELC member. Almost every business person--I'm trying to think of a fellow [HistoryMaker Mannie Jackson] who just bought--not just bought but who now owns the Harlem Globetrotters was with Honeywell [Honeywell International Inc.] I think a big ELC member. It was really all the top African American business executives who, who joined it. And it had a good substantial membership and we were all members. Story_ID: 482212 Speaker 1: When did you first, first meet Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.]? Speaker 2: Probably back in the '80s [1980s], the early 1980s. And he and I just hit it off, we became good friends and are good friends today. I mean we vacation together; you know we probably have vacationed together a dozen or more years straight. Either his house--I don't think there has been a year in the last ten, fifteen years that I haven't been at his house or he hadn't been in mine, mi- in St. Louis [Missouri] or in Florida. So we became good friends and I was very interested in what he was doing because I was interested in black businesses from the Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] investment perspective and he was very interested in companies like Anheuser-Busch giving him positive support, which I did and he was helpful to me in terms of developing or an understanding of where the resources were so that as I conducted minority enterprise, enterprise sem- seminars around the country he was very helpful. Story_ID: 482213 Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well I hope and pray that our biggest problem is solved. To which you should say and what is your biggest problem? And our biggest problem right now is that we are losing so many African Americans to prisons, drugs and death so many more than half, more than half are going--either dying for some drug war, going to prison or involved in drug trade, more than half. Now I can say that safely because more than half probably go to prison all by them--itself unfortunately. The real reason they go to prison is because more than half drop out of school and when they drop out of school prison becomes almost a certainty for those who drop out of the education process and lose the ability to earn the kind of income that they need to sustain their families. And so that's got to stop, it's got to stop. We've got to figure out a way to recapture these young people, to educate them, to stop the brain drain, to stop the school dropout problems and to, to redirect this energy in a way that it becomes a benefit to society and not a drain on it. And right now what's going on with our kids is kind of a drain. Story_ID: 482214 Speaker 1: Sir, when you look back on everything you've done to this point what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Even at sixty-six I'm still growing it so I'm not sure what it really is but if you ask me what things that I did which I consider to be worthwhile, developing--the opportunity to develop the kind of programs that I did for Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] has been something that I'm very, very proud of. Raising money for scholarships and programs for the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] is something I'm very, very proud of. Developing a model for other companies to look at where spending money with African American business concerns is something that I'm very, very proud of. A lot of the progress that we have made in companies in terms of their employment practices, in terms of their spending practices, in terms of their support of minority businesses were my models. When people looked around to see who was doing what and there were other people doing good stuff, I mean I wasn't the only one out there. You know there were as I mentioned Darwin Davis [HistoryMaker Darwin N. Davis, Sr.] earlier, he was over at the Equitable [Equitable Life Assurance Society of America; AXA Financial] doing the same kind of good work. If you look at the work that [HistoryMaker] Ingrid Saunders Jones I think is her name down at Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] is doing great work down there. Coke has always done a very good job. I mean if you look around the other companies that are--who are doing, who have earned a reputation for doing good work and Coke was certainly right up there at the top, Anheuser-Busch was right up there at the top. But I'm proud of the role that I played in helping to design the kinds of programs that could help the community and that others could look at and copy and further help the community. I think that is my legacy. Story_ID: 482215 Speaker 1: The other piece of, of what I consider to be my legacy and that--I hate to say it that way 'cause it sounds like I'm taking myself much more seriously than I, than I take myself. But, but the one thing that I worked on in addition to the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], I always have been very concerned about educating young people. So I am the chairman of the board of Harris-Stowe State University [St. Louis, Missouri] and I'm very proud of that school and the kind of education we're providing for young people from the inner city which otherwise would not be provided. I was chairman of the board of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and did the same thing there. And so if you look at where I spent my time--my free time, my energies it's been in search of an educational answer for our young people. Story_ID: 482216 Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Nothing that I can think of. Things have gone pretty well and I'm pretty--I'm satisfied with the choices I've made. All of them, most of them have worked out really pretty well and so I've had a good life it's been a good run. I'm trying to think if I--. I guess I would probably be more purposeful--would have been more purposeful. Sometimes it's better to be lucky than smart and I think I was very lucky. My father [Wayman Smith, Jr.] used to say the harder I worked, the luckier I'd get but I did get some opportunities along the way and I tried to work hard and make those opportunities--turn 'em into something meaningful for me and for others. The one thing that doesn't happen as much in the African American community as I believe it happens in the white community is that young people kind of grow up in the white community knowing that they might be president of their father's construction company or they might be president. Our kids don't have as much of that kind of example. So they don't grow up like young Butch Graves [HistoryMaker Earl "Butch" Graves, Jr.] grew up knowing he might be the next head of Black Enterprise magazine. They don't grow up like some (unclear)--we're maybe one generation deep in that regard and there are only a handful of people who are like [HistoryMaker] Linda Johnson Rice and Butch Graves and others who, who have that kind of opportunity and so if I were redoing my life I would have been more purposeful. I may have ended up where I ended up, but I would have started off a little better and I would have focused--I would have focused more on what I wanted to do and I would have focused earlier, kind of a late bloomer but I would have focused earlier. I would spend some time trying to help encourage that through programs in our community 'cause I think that's important to get our people on track early. They certainly get off track early enough and I would certainly like to figure out a way to put them on track. Story_ID: 482217 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family. Speaker 2: By that you're talking about my, my, my, my main family--my mother [Edythe Meaux Smith], my father [Wayman Smith, Jr.], brother [Christopher Smith, Sr.], sister [Robin Smith Patel], and daughter [Kymberly Smith Jackson]. My daughter is forty years old just celebrated her fortieth birthday. She's an assistant U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of California. She lives in Sacramento [California] coming home Christmas. She just bought a condo in St. Louis [Missouri] and maybe she'll come live here and practice law with me, I don't know. But she's a--I'm very proud of the way she's developed, she's a good lawyer and she's a hard worker and she's been responsible for putting a lot of bad people in jail; that's her job. My mother and my father I think I've discussed with you my mother's background. She's now eighty-nine years old and working hard to make sure she makes ninety, ninety-one and ninety-two. She's a little frail but she doesn't have any major illness and she's doing very well. My sister just got married and she's been in TV as a major anchor and reporter since early '70s [1970s]. So she's had a good thirty-five, forty years for a young lady who was born in '54 [1954], I mean she's not much older than that. (Laughter) She came into television literally when she was a teenager and she's doing well. My brother's a lawyer right here in this building. We practice law together so he's doing well, so. My father died when he was fifty-three years old, he was born 1915 and died in 1968 right when I was coming up, into the practice. I really miss him terribly that was a tragic loss. I was twenty-eight when he died and you know so sorry that I didn't get a chance to spend more time with him but he had a heart attack and popped him right out. I mean he literally didn't have time to put his coffee cup down before he left us. I talked to him that day and he said, "When are you coming down?" It was the day for Christmas in '68 [1968] and he said, "When are you coming down?" and I said, "I'm on my way now," and he said, "Well hurry up I want to see you, and I said, "Dad, I'm on my way." I got there and he had already been dead an hour so and I only had to drive 130 miles. Yeah, so, but that's my mother and as I said my mother now is a little frail and she's lost some weight. She's gained back about ten pounds of it recently. My philosophy originally was if you can get to be eighty-nine years old, eat the way you want to eat. And you know I've changed my position on that now I say, "You know, Mom, you've got to eat three squares a day 'cause I can't stand to see you lose any more weight not on my watch so you've got to eat, you've got to take care of yourself." I mean, I'm kind of like--Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] once told me (laughter) when he got a certain age his doctor asked him, "Are you still smoking a lot?" And Bill said, "Only four or five packs a day," or something, and he said, "Well you've got to stop that immediately," and then he asked Bill, he said, "How about the drinking part?" (Laughter) Bill, doctor said, "Hey you keep smoking those cigarettes it doesn't matter" (laughter) (unclear) and so that was kind of my philosophy. You know, Mom, just do whatever you want to do, you'll live to be almost ninety, who am I to tell you how to live your life, enjoy it, but now I feel a little differently. Story_ID: 482218 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you that you think we need to address or someone we need to mention before we ask our last question? Speaker 2: I ask--I remember covering Margaret Wilson [HistoryMaker Margaret Bush Wilson], who was a good partner of mine who I know is--you're going to interview and she's been a significant role model in my life. [HistoryMaker] Frankie Freeman was another lawyer in this community and has been a tremendous role model in my life. (Unclear) David Grant, Henry Twig [ph.], others who--I always wanted to be a lawyer. When 'Perry Mason' was on TV I always watched it. I mean it just seemed to me that was a cool thing to do (unclear) so a lot of lawyers were my role models, Herb Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.] and others that I mentioned to you earlier. I always wanted to be one of them. I mean I'd call them and talk to them and ask them questions and they were always nice enough to respond and so I grew up believing that was the way to do it--the thing to do and I'm glad I did. I was kind of self-directed in that regard 'cause I knew some of these people but I didn't know them that well. But I was--I kind of chose my own path and my parents [Edythe Meaux Smith and Wayman Smith, Jr.] were kind enough to let me choose my own path and to support me while I chose that path and they were very, very good about that and I appreciated it. Story_ID: 482219 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different, sir how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Pause) The elements of life that I think are important are your religion, your suc- your business, your success, your family and not necessarily in that order, family is probably first in my mind but family, religion, business. I'd like to be remembered as, as, as a--someone who cared about his family, I'd like to be remembered as, as, as a smart, good lawyer and a smart, good business man and I'd like to be remembered as someone who cared about his religion and was guided by the strong Christian principles that I've developed in the Judeo-Christian philosophies, which I follow...