 Story_ID: 638922 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines, and I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please? Speaker 2: My name is Paul Wilbur Stewart [HistoryMaker Paul Stewart]. That's, Wilbur is spelled W-I-L-B-U-R, and Stewart is S-T-E-W-A-R-T. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: Twelve, eighteen, twenty-five [December 18, 1925]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Clinton, Iowa. Speaker 1: And tell me, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Right now, I'm a, I'm a, I'm a teacher in the schools. But, I do more of a lecture. I lecture on different categories on the west. And I go from, I'm working for the Denver Public Schools. And I go out to the school district as I'm asked to come. And then I go out there and lecture on the subjects that they want me to, to talk about. Speaker 1: But, you're also the director of-- Speaker 2: Founder, I'm the founder (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Founder. Speaker 2: --and, and the curator of Black American West Museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: 17594 East Linvale Drive, and that's in Aurora, Colorado. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is November 4th-- Speaker 1: Sixth. Speaker 2: Fourth--fifth. Speaker 1: It's 6th. Speaker 2: Sixth, you know, I was supposed to do the 3rd, that's why. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Sixth. And this is 2008. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638923 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what we call People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, really (laughter). Generally, I, I like spinach, greens. I like cornbread and macaroni. Speaker 1: And what about your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Fall is cool everything is, is receding. I have a tree outside my window and I've been watching the, the leaves come down off of it, and now, today it's bare. And it's like life. You know, you're here and then as the leaves come down, they're gone, and we're gone. Speaker 1: When you go on vacation do you have favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, right now, I like Honolulu [Hawaii]. Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Yes. My phrase is--and, I think about it from this young lady that I interviewed, she said, "Age is just, is a matt- age is just a number, and it's just a matter of time, and if you don't mind, it doesn't matter." And so, I remember her saying this to me and then I realized what it was saying. And so, I try to remember that when I, when I talk to people. Story_ID: 638924 Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family and your family tree. I know you have a very extensive, you have very extensive knowledge of your family. So, let's start with your father. Tell me your father's name and-- Speaker 2: Eugene. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 2: Eugene Joseph Stewart [Eugene Stewart, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Where was he born and when, if you know? Speaker 2: He was born in 1900 in Clinton, Iowa. Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your father. Speaker 2: My father, my father was a very unique man. I'm gonna have to say this. In Iowa, the schools--we were just like the only ones in the school. And my aunt and he, mostly through school, they were the only blacks in their classrooms. And my father had a dream and he wanted to go into business. He was, when he was in high school, which was unique, he was in the high school band. He was the only black in the band, and the band director was still living when I came along. He said that he was an outstanding cornetist, and my dad could play several instruments but he specialized in trumpet and cornet. And later after coming out of school, he went in the [U.S.] Army and was in World War I [WWI]. And after he came back out of the service, he was interested in going into business. So, he opened up a trucking company [Stewart Transfer Company, Clinton, Iowa], you know, so to speak, drey--they had expression. Well, what he started out with, he was doing scavenger work. He was hauling, he was, you know like, like coal to people. He would be moving people, minority. And then, then later on, he went into another truck which obvi- that you will see in the pictures and he started taking people from Iowa, moving them into Illinois, into Minnesota, Wisconsin, and to Michigan. And then he had an office. He opened up on the main street in town, 5th Avenue [Clinton, Iowa]. I have a picture of that which I'll show you. And he later bought a semi, which you'll see in the picture. And in this office in the downtown area, he--my aunt was the stenographer. She was, she was the person that handled all the office memorabilia, routing the trucks into these areas when they went into Minnesota, Michigan and such. And in her spare time, she taught music. Speaker 1: What was you aunts name? Speaker 2: Elizabeth Stewart Fisher, last. But, later as--I remember an incident when one of the truckers wasn't able to go out on one of the routes. She took the truck out and drove it. And she was, she was so gifted, I didn't even mention, but she taught piano, pipe organ. She taught trombone, violin, baritone, (laughter). She could play the tuba, cornet. She could play all those instruments, and she taught 'em. And then after my, my father's business, after he lost his business, then she went into Chicago [Illinois] and she played organ for Quinn Chapel [Quinn Chapel A.M.E. Church, Chicago, Illinois]. That was one of the old, old churches there at that time. And I remember when she'd come to the house and come back and talk about Chicago, you know. And it was, it was very interesting but she, she was a lady that if she had been in, in this generation, she would probably'd had a company and all herself because she was that type of woman, you know. She tried to teach us piano (laughter). I only ended up playing trumpet. And but, she had us on the piano and she had, you play E, D, B, D, F, you know, on the piano. We were just little, you know. And it was very interesting, you know, how--when I think about that, you know. Story_ID: 638925 Speaker 1: About your father's [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] trucking business. How did he get the funds to start his, his trucking business? Do you know that? Speaker 2: Very interesting. Well, see, like he started out hauling in a minimal, and then he'd get, and then he would, he'd hire white drivers in the, in the section and he had trucks here, there, you know, each one. And as he kept going along and acquiring, he got his first semi. And then, he got the next one. Jess Gregory, a white man, was our first driver, and I remember very well, sometime I'd go on the routes with 'em some if he go up to Michigan or Wisconsin or up into--down in St. Louis [Missouri] where Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] was. I'm talking about going--in fact, I can take off from school sometime. They'd let me go. And when I came back I would had to make a report of what I saw and what I, and what transpired which was very educational for me, you know. And so, as my father kept accumulating these trucks then I remember right back of his, of the office building [Stewart Transfer Company, Clinton, Iowa], it, it was a block long behind there. So, he had his trucks in the, in this area. He'd store them for a while and then he had to rent other places, you know. And I was discussing with my brother [Eugene Stewart, Jr.] there, this, the question with you, how was he even able to amount having twelve semi's traveling around in these areas and, you know, we, we even went with him sometime, you know, to, to these places, and just how he was able to accumulate in a small town like Clinton, Iowa, what he had. There was, he had, he'd gotten into the position where Keeshin [Keeshin Freight Lines, Inc.], they had fifteen semi's. They would take it--his produce or whatever his, his merchandise was--from one across the state line into another state, like that. And, and then Allied [Allied Van Lines, Inc.], Allied is all over the United States. They wanted to put him in, too, but they want him, more of a minimal role, which he didn't wanna do so he never got in with it. But, he was actually crowded out. That's what happened. Because after a while they have what they call interstate commerce, and you have to bid on routes. And what, what was happening was that every time he'd make the bid, they find out, they would bid a dollar over what he had bid. And that's how they squeezed him out, see, but just to realize it. So, I got from him the business sort of, of trying to, to do what I'm doing, you know. And it was very helpful because basically, we had a little candy store in this office, and we'd go out and sell candy. And that taught us to sell at a loss 'til we learned how to, to do. And then, you know, then he had a little place, a place of business for us. And we operated like after school and had a little, had a jukebox in the back. And so, the young people would come in dancing and they buy candy, drink pop. And we operated that. And we knew it was at a loss but we learned how to do business. Speaker 1: I see. Story_ID: 638926 Speaker 1: Now, your father's [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] growing up in Iowa. (Coughs) Excuse me. This was way before integration and they were the only black kids. Tell me, did he talk to you about his growing up? Where did they live? And tell me about your grandparents. Speaker 2: Okay. Do you want me to start with my father and go (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, your father. We're still on your father. Speaker 2: Yes. Okay. Speaker 1: Your father's parents. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about them; what they're names are. Speaker 2: Okay. My father, his mother's name was Alantha Glanton Stewart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And did you wanna know when she was born? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Tell me everything about your grandmother that you know. Speaker 2: Yes. And she was born in Atlanta, Georgia. And then the family later came up to Clinton, Iowa. She was born in 1864, to my remembrance. And anyway, she, she when she came up to, to Clinton, Iowa--see, I'm, I'm seeing, now that you're mentioning it, that she went to school in the South and then after she came north I think she was out of school at that time, because my brother [Eugene Stewart, Jr.] and I were talking the other day. After she got out, out of school, high school, she went to college. And what we're trying to figure out, she taught school down in Kentucky. And I'm trying to think of the African American school that would've down there, she--and then after that she taught school and she--I remember her selling, her telling us that she used to ride side-saddle five miles out in the country to a country school to teach. And it was interesting to hear when she was ab- would talk to us we would, we would get a chance to know about her. And a young lady by the name of Missouri Slater [Missouri Dozier Slater], that's Duke Slater's mother [sic. stepmother], the football player, she was evidently going to school at Howard at that time and she met this, this gentlemen while she was going to school and she came and told my grandmother, "I met a wonderful man. You should me him," you know. "I'd like to introduce you to him." And so, they did meet and he was grand--he was in the--at Howard University. He attended Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And he graduated the first year in '96 [1896], 1896. And when he came, but he came out of school to get a job. And he couldn't get a job and I'm finding out in his field. And this was very interesting to know because see he went back to Howard and when he graduated the second year, he had taken up theology. And this is one thing that I learned why many black men couldn't get into their field, because when they went out to get in their field and they weren't accepted, they took up theology. And, and then, just like in my field, later, barbering was another field that many black men were visible in. Speaker 1: So, who was this, this gentlemen who went to Howard that grad--? Speaker 2: Noble E. Stewart [Noble Stewart]. Speaker 1: And this was your--? This was--? Speaker 2: Eighteen- 1896. Speaker 1: But, who was Noel Stewart? Speaker 2: Noble? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: He was my, he was my grandfather. Speaker 1: Your grandfather. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's how your grandmother met your grandfather? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Through--okay. All right. Story_ID: 638927 Speaker 1: So, he [Stewart's paternal grandfather, Noble Stewart] became a minister? Speaker 2: Yeah. But, what was interesting after they married, they moved to Clinton, Iowa. That was right around just, just a little before 1900, and that's when my father [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] was born. He couldn't get a job and I found out that he listed as gardener. So, I'm sure that that was hard for him to take. And I didn't find out 'til I came to Colorado that he came out here in 1902. And so, what I'm trying to find out is, that was he, I know he came to Denver [Colorado], but he had a sister in Colorado Springs [Colorado], and I couldn't locate her because she was married. And so, I've gone through the record but I wouldn't've known her first name, see. So, after he, he was here, I find out that he went to, he went to San Francisco [California]. And the period of time seemed to be like, they have the fire, I think in, around 1908 [sic. 1906], and that's where I found him there and he was window dresser. I was looking through--when I travel around, I found out in the census there that he was a window dresser. But, what I was trying to figure out is, I didn't find him anymore after that. And what was unusual is that after--during that, they had the fire out there, see. And so, San Francisco was very disruptive there in terms the place has burned down. So, I didn't look in Oakland [California]. But, but, actually I found the records in San Francisco when I went down there to speak at the university. And so, then I found out that they, my [paternal] aunt [Elizabeth Stewart Fisher] told me, he wrote a--he had a letter written to him from Liberia to come over and teach, which was right down his line. So, he went over there possible around, I'll say circa 1920 and he stayed there until 1945. And he came back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and he died there, and that's when I found out that he was there. So-- Speaker 1: So, this was Noble Stewart, you're still talking about, Stewart? Speaker 2: Noble E. Stewart. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's just go back a little bit 'cause he, before going to Africa now, your father was born in the 1900s? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. What I wanna know is--1900 your mother--your [paternal] grandmother [Alantha Granton Stewart] and grandfather are in Clinton, Iowa, and he had just come out of school so he did a lot of different things to be able to live in the community. Do you know anything about the community? Were there (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. It's farming. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it was, they were doing farming? Speaker 2: It was a farming community. Speaker 1: But, there were very few African Americans living out there? Speaker 2: That's--very few. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: We used to say they can count 'em on their hand (laughter). Story_ID: 638928 Speaker 1: So, did your father [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] share any other stories about his growing up? Speaker 2: When he went in the [U.S.] Army, he went, he went overseas, and then he came back to Evanston, Illinois, and that's when he met my mother [Martha Moore Stewart]. And then, they later married and he moved back to Iowa. And but, he told me that he used to, he played jazz. And he played in Chicago [Illinois] at the old Club DeLisa, and (laughter) I remember when the musicians used to come into the house and I collect records, music also, and the old records, jazz and all. And so, these men would be Eddie Aldridge [ph.] and, and Speck Redd [Ernest "Speck" Redd, II], some of the men that--and I was just small and I used to see them practicing in the house, playing the music. And so, by my dad playing trumpet well, I wanted to play trumpet, and this is interesting if you--if you saw a picture of my dad and when you played--when he played trumpet and cornet, he looked like Louis Armstrong. What was so unusual about Louis Armstrong was born 1900 [sic. 1901]. He was born in July [sic.]. My dad was born the Fourth of July, and I think Louis was born the ninth [sic.]. And if you look at 'em in a picture when he's playing his eyes are going over his trumpet, you know, and you could, you would think when you saw him playing that he's another Louis Armstrong. And so, so it was similarity there, you know. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: But he was very smart, straight A student all through school, and my [paternal] aunt [Elizabeth Stewart Fisher]. And so he had a, he had a, I'm using the term phenomenal mind. You know, I remember some things that, that he did in terms of, of his work, you know, with his trucks and all. And he seemed--what, what was so bad about an incident that happened with him. He was going down to take out a route in Little Rock, Arkansas and he drove his truck down. He took this merchandise down there, trying to see about getting some other lines in, and when the police saw him, they arrested him. And they, they put him in jail. And he says, "I have my identification," you know, "here's my, my birth date and all, and my paper." "We don't wanna see that. You stole that truck." So, they put him in jail. And he said, "Well, you do owe me one telephone call." So, they said, "Okay." So, he called the gentlemen that he carried the merchandise for and he says, "We have your truck, your truck is down here in Arkansas and they have put me in jail, and everything is being tied up." And he said, "You're gonna have to come down and get that truck." So, the man came down and showed his identification and said, "Yes, this is my truck." And they said, "Okay, well, we knew he couldn't own it," you know what I mean. "We thought he stole it." And so, he never went south again. That was his first time down south (laughter), and, so, I have to laugh, you know, thinking about it even in my, my first time down south which I'll relate later. Story_ID: 638929 Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your [paternal] great-grandfather, Richard, Richard Glanton. Is that his name? Speaker 2: Yeah. Mr. Glanton. All, all I knew about my great-grandfather is when my [paternal] grandmother [Alantha Glanton Stewart] told me that, they left the South in an entourage. The whole group of them left, and in that book over there that I have on Roland Hayes, it gives me an insight. They left in a group. And anyway, then when he (laughter)--this is, I don't, well I guess I'll just say, Culberson. And Culberson was the--my grandmother's first husband. Speaker 1: Was this your grandmother, or your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: That was my, that was my grand--great-grandmother's husband, Culberson; Tom Culberson [Thomas Culberson], that's what it was. Speaker 1: Okay. And your great-grandmother's name was Melissa [Melissa Glanton]? Speaker 2: Melissa, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, when they left the South on the way here, see, she fell out with him. So, she turned around and Glanton was his good friend so, she--they later got married and then that's when my grandmother came along through Glanton. I--yeah, my grandmother. So, I mean, my great-grandmother, you know, when they left the South with Culberson. See, that was her first husband. I know it's (laughter)-- Speaker 1: That's okay. Yeah. So, I got it. Your great-grandmother, Melissa. She was first married to Tom Culberson. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And she had children for Tom Culberson. Is that right? Speaker 2: Ten. Speaker 1: She had ten children for him, and then she later married Richard Glanton? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that's when they moved from the South? Speaker 2: They--yeah. In fact, they were on their--they were leaving and that's when the fallout was. Speaker 1: Do you know what year this might have been? Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the thing about it. And I--and through this book, Angela Moore [ph.], see they were cousins and so I got, I got the, I got that, I got the--Earl Mann and all, and a picture of his mother. But, they all came in that group, see. Speaker 1: Okay. And what state were they coming from? Speaker 2: Georgia. Speaker 1: From Georgia. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. So, now you-- Speaker 2: Around Rome. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Rome. Speaker 1: Rome, Georgia? Speaker 2: Yeah. I had a lot--that's where Roland Hayes' mother [Fannie Mann Hayes] and all, they grew up in there, in that area, Rome. Story_ID: 638930 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, let's talk about some of your, your cousins of your family because there're quite a few. Speaker 2: Dozier? Speaker 1: You talked about--yeah, well, talk about, it's Grant Dozier? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. And how he's your grandmother's cousin? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And tell me about Grant Dozier. Speaker 2: Well, when I--when we were kids, we used to see--he and Sherman [Sherman Dozier], that was his brother, and Missouri [Missouri Dozier Slater] that was his sister, okay. They, they were, they were early settlers there in, in Iowa. And when we found out that Grant Dozier, he was a--we, what we used to remember seeing him was in the library all the time. We go in the library and he's there reading, and then the Kiwanis club [Kiwanis International] and the Rotary club [Rotary International] and all these different clubs would have him as a speaker there. And I remember some time, when we were just small, that we'd go down there, you know, to hear him lecture, you know. And my [paternal] aunt [Elizabeth Stewart Fisher] told me in the later years that she went down to see the Doziers in Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause she'd never come in contact with 'em. And she was just surprised that they were very fair skinned because, you know, my father [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] was, was very dark and my mother [Martha Moore Stewart] was light, but, on my father's side they were all dark skinned so, you know. And so, she was thinking that she was gonna see a dark skinned family, and they were all light, and she was--I remember that was in her later years. And she was very surprised, you know. But, and Grant was, he would be considered a lecturer in the town. And then his brother, he worked for families like that, and that was Sherman. And many times they were walk, we'd see 'em walking three and four miles. Grant, he would ride the streetcar, but his brother did the walking, we see him walking, you know, from place to place, you know. He--neither one of them ever married. Story_ID: 638931 Speaker 1: I said we were gonna talk more about Grant Dozier, but you wanted to go back and talk more about Tom Culberson [Thomas Culberson] who was your great-grandmother Melissa's [Melissa Glanton] first husband that she had ten children from. So, tell me about Tom Culberson. Speaker 2: Okay. When he came to Iowa, I found out they came up there for a reason and it's coming to me. They had a lot of trees that were along the Mississippi River. We're located right along the Mississippi River, Clinton [Iowa]. And so, they brought the blacks up there to cut down the trees and work in the saw mills, see. And so, I'm finding out that Tom Culberson helped to build some of the sidewalks in Clinton at that time, early, were wooden. And then, and some of 'em were concrete later on. The names of Tom Culberson was in the sidewalk when my brother [Eugene Stewart, Jr.] and I found that out, when we came back from World War II [WWII], we went back there to see if we can find any remnants of the sidewalk with the names it, you know, but I know they've done a lot of building and all that and tearing up so we never found that. But I also found out that Tom Culberson had a confectionery there in Iowa. He sold candy and pop and all of the confectionery products. But I didn't know that, see. And so, I can see where my father [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] also did a follow up with us in terms of the same thing, see. And then, you know, you never realize this, see. And so, I can see that basically how it came out that we were given a foundation, and then we were trying to fill in the molds, you know, as children, see. Speaker 1: And also, Tom Culberson's father, you're doing research on who he might be. Is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. And as I said, I found this picture of an officer at Fort Benning [Georgia], that's what it was, and I wanna see if I can find out some basic information on the Culbersons. If I can, I can find out when Tom was born and what plantation or where ever he was born. And, and that's something that I wanna do as soon as I can, and so then I can open up that, that abyss there that I don't know about. Speaker 1: Right. But your belief is that this officer in the Civil War, Culberson, might have been the slave owner-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that Melissa had, you know, these children--he, that--not Melissa, I'm sorry, that Tom was one of these children of this slave master (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 638932 Speaker 1: Now, one of your other cousins, Duke Slater-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --talk to me about him. Speaker 2: Okay. Duke Slater, well, my [paternal] grandmother [Alantha Glanton Stewart] and Missouri Slater [Missouri Dozier Slater] was first cousins, and Reverend Slater [George Slater] was her husband, an early minister. And so, Reverend Slater had Duke by a wife that died, and so Missouri Slater married him and then Duke Slater was raised, and he was raised in the house that I was born in, 845 10th Avenue. I have a picture of the house. And then later on, he went, he went into high school, and there's a picture of him in 1914 when they won the state championship of Iowa. And he's the only black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What high school was this? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What high school? Speaker 2: Clinton High [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa]. Speaker 1: Clinton High. Okay. Speaker 2: The same one that I went to. And (laughter), and they were All-State. And then from there he got a scholarship, which is unusual, to go to the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa]. And then he attended the University of Iowa and he was on the All-American football team. And the team, University of Iowa played against Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana], and I'm thinking in this book that I was reading on, reading, 1919 that they played against Notre Dame, University of Iowa, and Notre Dame had not lost a game. And this, this last game that they played, I have a picture of the quarterback is handing off to the running back, Fred Duke Slater is blocking three men to the left. The running back is coming over his leg into the end zone, and time was running out, and they beat Notre Dame ten to seven. The score was seven to three. And so, I have the picture that I have of him. Then he later went to the Un- went to Chicago [Illinois] and he was a councilman there for a while, and then he later became a judge there. And when I moved in--moved to Evanston [Illinois], we used to go and visit him, you know, and talk to him about some things. And I remember when we were little, he'd come out for the homecoming for the University of Iowa. He'd come out to our house and when he come in, and stop off, and then he go the next day on to, to the university, and he was there to speak, you know, and the alumni. And his hand was so--I remember he'd shake hands, and his hand would come up almost half way to my arm. His hands hung down below his knees. And, you know, he was a gigantic man, and I remember one of his trips from Iowa coming from Chicago into Iow- into the house, he went to sleep at the wheel, and he hit a tree and hit the tree, knocked his eye out, broke his, his nose and jawbone and all like that, see. And it was, you know, it was, it was a sad event but I remember another event some of the men, alumni that were, that used to know him said they were playing a team there in Chicago. I don't remember the name of the team, but he was getting, he was getting in all the tackles and so, they said, "We gonna take care of him." So, they had a huddle and when they came out of the huddle, the all lined up on him. And when they lined upon him, they broke his jaw, they broke his nose, broke his cheekbone, broke a rib, you know, all--and they took him off the field. That was before half. So, they said, "Well, he's outta here. So, we'll go on and we're gonna finish this game up and win it." (Laughter) When the half time came on back out, here he came back out there and he was just (laughter) as bad as he was before. They said, "We can't do anything with him," (laughter). It was interesting to tell, you know. But yeah, he became a judge there in Chicago. And I can't remember when he died but my brother was living in Chicago at that time, he used to go and visit him, you know. And we'd see him occasionally and talk to him, you know, like that. Speaker 1: Do you know what law school he went--attended? Speaker 2: You know what, what I wanna find, there's a book ['Duke Slater: Pioneering Black NFL Player and Judge,' Neal Rozendaal] that, that's written about him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, you know, I was telling my brother, I don't know about it until one of the ladies from Iowa that was living there, and she was telling me about the book. And if I can find out the book, that'll give me some info--more information (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's, that's fine. Speaker 2: --on him. Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's fine. Story_ID: 638933 Speaker 1: Now, Roland Hayes. Speaker 2: Roland Hayes. Speaker 1: That's another one of your cousins. Speaker 2: Yes. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me who he was. Speaker 2: Yeah, Roland Hayes, he was born, he was born in, he was born in Rome [Georgia]. And it was, well, yeah--and anyway, it seem like when there's--this group left, the family, they, they left but they stopped off in Tennessee. And he atten- he went to school, let's see at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. And he used to--Fisk--sing with the Fisk Jubilee Singers, okay. And I remember he, in this book that I have on him, after--and when he sang with the Fisk Jubilee Singers, they would go over to Europe and they would sing. But, but he, in school, he wanted to be a singer, and his mother [Fannie Mann Hayes] tried to, you know, to send him through school best that she could, and he later took up classical music. And when he took up classical music, he was one of the very early African Americans to go to sing, sing classical in Germany, and Italy, and in France, and you know, some of the areas. And one of the stories they told was, Germ- the Germans, they invited him to come to sing. And when they invited him to come to sing, they, when he came out on the platform, I found out later on that, I think Richard Mann, that's another cousin of ours, was his pianist. And he was in this, the elbow like, of the--and getting ready to sing, and they started hissing and they hissed him about five minutes. You know, hissing is like booing. And so, he just, he looked at the pianist and waited. And so, then they, then he give him the signal, then he gave him a signal and they started singing one of the German favorites in German and everybody was quite. When he finished singing he walked off the stage. And boy, he walked off the stage and they didn't stop. They wanted him to come back so they were cheering him, and cheering him until, 'til he came back. And then he stared singing songs in Italian and in French and all, and they were surprised. They--what they thought he was gonna sing is spirituals and that's why they were booing him. (Laughter) "Oh, you're gonna--," and so, I remember reading this and he really, he put 'em to shame, you know. But he traveled all over Europe singing before the kings and queens. I--he won the Spingarn award [Spingarn Medal], and there's write ups in the other--I got two books on him. And I mean, I was just so proud. And so, when I opened the museum and I had read this book about him. I, in turn I said, you know, I knew, I knew just a little about him, but after I read the book and then found out, I wrote him a letter and I told him. He wrote a letter back, you can see it there, and he said, "I'm so proud, I'm proud of you," you know, "what you've accomplished." And then he said, "It's unusual the likeness, and he had it underlined, and I never realized is because I've cut my hair, I got it short. But looking at some of my early pictures when I look at him and looked at me, I didn't realize it. And so, when he started sending me copies of his, of his achievements, and I got write ups and photographs of him, you know. And his sister--his daughter, Afrika Iman [Afrika Hayes Lambe], she was a singer. And I think I have a picture of her in there, later on. Story_ID: 638934 Speaker 1: But just to know that--and then, the other branch is, so I--after I, I started reading 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley], I read this book on Alex Haley, okay, and after I got through putting it together, we're first cousins. And I'm gonna show you a book, it was on the airplane and Haley's on the cover and I'm on the inside; didn't know it. I went to one of the schools and this, this young, little boy said, "You're in one of our magazines up here." And I said, "No," you know. And he said--we all look alike, you know. And he said, "Yes, you are." And so, I went up there, and then the teacher said, "Go, upstairs and look at it." I went upstairs. He's Alex Haley on the cover. I said, "No. That's Alex." And then the teacher turned around and she turned back and there I am in--near the back in another article on me in the same magazine. And I met him when he came here to Denver [Colorado] and--when he wrote his first book ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley], around '87 [1987] or '88 [1988]. And when I--after I found out reading about it, I started asking questions. I said, "Did you ever know about this book, Angela Moore [ph.]?" And he said, "Oh, yeah," I say--you know. And I said, "Well, Earl Mann and--has a book with Roland Hayes and then it tells about our family, you see." And so, I got a chance to find out more about the family reading that book, you know, and about my [paternal] great-grandmother [Melissa Glanton] and all, and when they, they came up to Iowa and such. Speaker 2: Now, okay, Roland Hayes was the classical singer. But Earl Manns, tell me about Earl Manns. Because you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We referenced him but you didn't tell me who he was. Speaker 1: Well this is unusual. I came out here in, I think it was '62 [1962] it was for the Olympics but I knew that Earl Mann was living here. And I knew that he was in political office but I didn't know what. So, when I came out here and I met him, I started talking to him and then he started telling me a few things, you know. And that's my [paternal] grandmother's [Alantha Glanton Stewart] first cousin and so, and later I found out he had been the legislature. He served six terms and he had retired. And so, that was really a nice inroad. So, I got a chance to talk to him, you know what I mean, and then some of the pictures that I have of his mother [Ida Robinson Mann] and his brother and the family. One of this brothers lived in, lived in Clinton [Iowa], and he came here to Colorado. Earl Mann I understood went to school in Champaign, Illinois, and then he was drafted to go to World War I [WWI]. He was the first group of black officers to be in World War I. And while he was in, while he was over in Europe, he was gassed, the mustard gas. And they brought him back to Fitzsimons Hospital [Fitzsimmons Army Hospital; Fitzsimmons Army Medical Center, Denver, Colorado] to die. Excuse me, I got gas. But he recuperated because of the rarified air that they have here. It was good for his lungs. And so, he later was the first black to work in the water company. I have a photograph of that sitting there. And then he threw his hat in the ring for legislature. And he was seated and he served six terms in the legislature and he was instrumental in helping to open up the bill for open occupancy in homes here in Colorado. He was--they used to call him Lieutenant Earl Mann when they would see him, "Lieutenant." And so, when I, when I saw him, you know, I was very proud to be around him. And he shared several things with me about history out here, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Okay. Well, we'll talk more about the, the history out here in Denver-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --in a little bit. Story_ID: 638935 Speaker 1: But let's go to your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, tell me your mother's name and where and when she was born. Speaker 2: Okay. Do I, do I have it down there or do I not have it? You know, you got that. There's an envelope right there with all that information. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we'll, we'll get it later. But just right now tell me her name. Speaker 2: Her name was Martha Moore [Martha Moore Stewart], and she was born in Abbeville, South Carolina, and oh, 1902. Speaker 1: And did your mother share any stories about her growing up in Abbeville (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the sad thing about it was that my father [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] and my mother had split up. Speaker 1: Well, no. Let's talk about your mother when she was growing up. Speaker 2: When she was growing up? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. All I know--I didn't know a lot about it, because I didn't live, I didn't live with her that long. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the thing. See, I was raised by my [paternal] grandmother [Alantha Glanton Stewart] and my aunt [Elizabeth Stewart Fisher]. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. Speaker 2: See, that was the thing. See, so, my father and mother, they split up. But intermittently they would come back, and she'd come back and visit and all. And she was living in Evanston [Illinois]. And so, we, in the summertime we'd, like we'd go and visit her and like that. But our early years, we, we weren't around my mother, see. Speaker 1: I see. Do you know her parents? Your grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes, Saul Moore was her father. It's a picture of him you'll see. Speaker 1: You're saying Saul, S-A-U-L? Speaker 2: S-A-U-L, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Mary. Speaker 1: Mary Moore? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they were in Abbeville? Speaker 2: No. They were in Evanston. Speaker 1: Evanston. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's where your grandparents lived? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know anything about them? Speaker 2: Well, what I heard was, my great-grandfather owned property down in South Carolina probably, it probably was in Abbeville, and he had quite a bit of, of property. And he got into an argument with a white man and he beat him up and had to leave. And that is why he, he left town, ad he went to Atlanta [Georgia]. I didn't know that until later on. But he had a store and this was where the argument came about. He was selling goods, he had pop and all kind of other articles but he had his farming implements on the back wall. And so, when he wasn't busy, he'd take that and go out and plow up the field. And so, this one morning he was getting ready to go out and this white man came in and bought a bottle of pop. So, when he went back and he was taking down this harness and so this white man was looking around like this and he said, "How's a Negro like you get a place like this?" And so, I can see him freeze, you know. And he just went on again starting doing what he was doing. So, this white man came back again and he grab him on the shoulder and turned him around and says, "Nigger, did you hear what I said?" And he grabbed him in the throat, choked him, almost killed him, and he knew he had to leave. So, he packed up everything and he left and went to Atlanta, opened up another store there, was doing there real good 'til one day this white walked in the door, a white man walked in the door and was looking around and then he looked at him, and he was doing like this (rubs his chin), and he looked around and he said, "Uh oh." He said, "One of these guys will recognize me, I gotta leave." So, he packed everything up and went to Evanston, Illinois. And then he got property there, and where the high school is today, he had owned all of the property, even where the football field was. And he owned most of the property all the way down to the main street in Evanston. And so, what happened was that, not having the education that he should've--that he didn't have, every time and this was a method that I--when I talk to people now I hear that this happened to their father and grandfather. They had land okay, what they did is they did not send the tax notice for a couple of years. And when they sent it to 'em, they wasn't able to pay. So, they take land like that, and that's how they took all that land where the high school is. It's the second largest in the United States; Evanston Township High School [Evanston, Illinois]. He knows where it is (laughter). And, and then all the way down to Davis Street. That was about eight or ten blocks down. He owned all of that property. He had four apartment buildings and each one, each time, they did the same thing to him. The only one I think is standing now is apart--and my brother [Eugene Stewart, Jr.] is living in 1801 Grey Avenue. That was the one that is left of the properties that he had. So, and it was a sad thing that my, my aunt told me. She says, "He was so despondent after losing his property, he went down and way down into Lake Michigan." And his brother said, "Saul, Saul come back, come back," you know, "Man, don't do it," you know. And so, he didn't, he didn't drown himself but he was very despondent over losing all the property that he had except the property that my aunt has right now. And so, this is, that's, that's interesting. That's the story on Saul. Speaker 1: Okay. But you never knew them? Speaker 2: Never, never (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Never met them. Speaker 2: I met Mary. Speaker 1: You met Mary. Speaker 2: Yes. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638936 Speaker 1: Tell me about Mary [Stewart's maternal grandmother, Mary Moore] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was still, she was still living when I moved to Evanston [Illinois], you know, and I talk to her. She was mother of the church. They called her Mother Moore. And so, most of the time you'll see, you'll just caller her Mother Moore, you know. But she was--and I have pictures of them and the family. Speaker 1: Did you have any personal time or talks about the family with Mary Moore? Speaker 2: No. The only one I talk to is Peter, Peter Moore [ph.]. He was my, my mother's brother, and my, and my aunt, Roseanne Moore. And they would, I'd get some of those stories, you know, that they would come up with, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: I wish that I, now, since I got into the museum business [at the Black American West Museum and Cultural Center, Denver, Colorado], I wish I had had a chance to ask them more questions, because, you know, after I--And I didn't mention this but I have Indian [Native American] blood also, on my mother's side, Cherokee. And on my mother--grandmother's side, it was Blackfoot. Speaker 1: On your, okay, on your mother's side, Mary--your mother's name was-- Speaker 2: My mother was Martha [Martha Moore Stewart]. Speaker 1: Martha. Speaker 2: Yeah. And you'll see the picture, and if you look at the picture you can see some of the evidences. Speaker 1: And, and that's because either Saul [Saul Moore] or Mary Moore were Indian? Speaker 2: See, Melissa [Stewart's paternal great-grandmother, Melissa Stewart] was the Indiana. Speaker 1: Oh, that's on your father's side? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's what I say on my father's side is Blackfoot, on my mother is Cherokee. Speaker 1: And you know this because? Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: You know--okay, you said Cherokee on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, was Mary or Saul Cherokee Indian or their parents? Speaker 2: You know, I think it's, I think it's on Saul, Saul's side, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now-- Speaker 2: That was interesting. I never knew it. My family died before I even knew we had Indian blood. You know, that's really strange, you know. You know, after I'm into it then I begin to, to check and then my [paternal] aunt [Elizabeth Stewart Fisher] told me. She said, "Oh, you're, you're great-grandmother was, was--Melissa, she was pa- part, was Blackfoot and black," see, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 638937 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your childhood. Speaker 2: My childhood (laughter). Speaker 1: Tell me what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Okay. I used to remember when my, my father [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] had a touring car. I have a picture of it, and my mother [Martha Moore Stewart] with the kids and it had a rumble seat in the back. And you'd open the rumble seat and we'd sit in the rumble seat. I don't, I don't care what type of weather it was, we sat in the rumble--you'll see the car (laughter). And I remember a lot of times we'd be sitting out there and it be snowing and raining and we'd be there. So, what we have to do is pull the seat down on us and then, you know, when we'd get where we wanted to if we were still, still--and so, and we'd get out and then we'd go in where we were going. And where we lived they built a high school, Clinton High School [Clinton, Iowa], where I graduated, right across the street. So, we'd come down the slope like this to the sidewalk. And then down the hill was some little cliffs, and we could go down the cliffs but there was a, there was a pathway, there was a rock and you could walk down it with a, you know, it wasn't roped but it was a material. And we just, you would walk down it but we always like to go down the cliffs to the high school, see. And in the summertime, over here, over onto the right was, was a hill and we'd get, we'd get our sleds out (laughter), and we'd run and hit that, hit that hill and just slid all the way down almost to the high school. But we'd manage to stop before we get from there to there. And then we'd get our skis and get--we, no, we didn't have any skis we had barrel slaves. And we, we break up a barrel and it's a--they're, they're like this and then we put, we'd cut up an inner tube and put it on there, nail it on there, put our feet in there and we'd ski, we'd slide down (laughter) the hills like that, you know. Sometime we be going so fast, it'd be back--good if one of us is in front 'cause if we didn't, if we didn't stop ourselves, we'd slam into the side of the high school (laughter). And, and did the same with the sled. Story_ID: 638938 Speaker 1: You were telling me about, about skiing down to the high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa], and you know, your earliest memory of that time. Well, let me ask you, when you think about a sound, a sight, or a smell, what do you remember that takes you back to that time? Speaker 2: Well, the county ditch. It was, it was, it was a ditch that emptied in from the river, Mississippi River, into part of the--what was--well, not far from where we were, from a moor, we were like on a moor. Moor was adjoining to our other par- I'd say about three or four blocks. The, the city [Clinton, Iowa] kind of ended really, I mean it didn't end, but they hadn't built out in that area, see. And so, we were right on the edge, see. And so, they had this ditch and they had fish and frogs and snakes in it. And we used to go down there (laughter), and not so much fishing but just to go down there and see the frogs and (unclear) snakes. And I, we used to take, I take a rock like this, it was flat, and I'd take it and I'd skate it. And I'd see a head out there. And I thought it was the snakes head and I took it and no, I thought it was a frogs head and I just skipped it across the water, and when I hit, it wasn't a frog, it was a snake. It was a moccasin. And the moccasin came out of that water like that. And it was tree over there and I was, you should've seen me trying to climb that tree (laughter). Oh, man, I was careful when I would skipped those rocks in there, and you know. And we'd go out in the moor and they had weeds like this, and you'd be down in the ground, and at the bottom of the roots, they were like a spear. And so, we would, we'd pull 'em up and, you know, we'd be out there and sometime, we'd be like Indians, you know, and throwing spears and chasing one another like that, you know, and I remember that part. And the weeds were about that high, you know. And so, we, the rabbits And I mean, you'll see, you see these muskrats and all of these, these animals out there and they were just a, it was something, you know, it's a deviation, you know, from the city 'cause that's the borderline and then you go out there into the moor, we call it, see, you know. Speaker 1: And, what did it smell like? Was that there's (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just a musky smell, you know. It's like a, now it's a mixture of mold and you know, dead, dead grass, like that, see, and that was the smell, you know. Speaker 1: And, what about the sounds? What sounds remind of that time? Speaker 2: Crickets (laughter). Yeah, crickets, and mockingbirds and, and chirping, and I can, at one time I could imitate some of the birds and whip-poor-wills and to hear that country, it's like a country sound. And it was, and you know, sometime we'd get fresh air. Just real pure air, and it was something to just smell it. It just, oh, it was like refreshing, you know. But, then when you get down into the moors, it was just like, kind of like a musky smell, you know, like that, see. And I can remember that very--sometime we'd go tramping. Sometime we go three of four miles, just walking, you know. A lot of time, we, what we did, we'd take, we'd take a potato (laughter), and we'd take an ear of corn, and we'd go out and we'd make a fire, and we'd roast it. You'd dig a hole and roast the potato and the corn and we had a salt shaker in our pocket with salt, salt it down and eat it, you know. We had wild mulberries out there, and cherries, and all like that. So, we didn't have to get a meal. We had, we had the meal with us, you know. And it was just funny when you think about that, you know. And grapes, a lot of time, you'd find wild grapes out there, you know. And you go, and you get those grapes, and what was the--crabapples, yeah. And so, we, we didn't have to worry about a meal, we had, oh, what, you know, something to, something to eat if, you know, when we were walking out like that. Story_ID: 638939 Speaker 1: So you, you made your own fun? Speaker 2: Well oh, yes. Oh, yes. We had, we created (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, what about cowboys and Indians [Native Americans]? You were talking about cowboys and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. We used to play cowboy and Indian. And that's what motivated me to do what I'm doing today. So, we used to (laughter), we used to play the cowboy and Indian. So, you'd, you know, you, you'll try to dress up in the best way you could, the Indian, you know, and the other boys, the white boys would have the cowboy hats on. "I wanna be the cowboy," I'd say. "No, you can't be the cowboy." I'd say, "Why not?" And they said, 'There's no black cowboys." I never saw it--we used to have movies on Saturdays, ten cents. We go down and watch movies all day. And popcorn and pop, you know, and peanuts, and candy, and I'm always looking up on the screen and I'm always hoping to see a black cowboy. I never saw one, and as I mentioned earlier, I didn't mention it to you, but when, when I wanted to be the cowboy, I couldn't be 'cause there was--they said there wasn't any, and I couldn't prove there were so I was always the Indian. And then here I'm finding out in the later years I am part Indian, see. I didn't know that, see. And so, anyway, when it, when it came down to it, well, like I was just saying, I have no, no, notion that there were black cowboys at all until I came here in '62 [1962]. They showed a man, Stepin Fetchit, I remember him very well, comedian, black comedian. I saw him get on a horse. He couldn't get on the horse, but when he got on it, he fell off the other side, you know. And that was very, very degrading to me, and you know, and so, all I saw the African Americans in a degrading situations. So, I didn't have a good look, you know, at African Americans in that direction, but I knew that, and the kids knew that my father [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] had a business, and they did not treat me otherwise, you know. And so, as I was just saying until I went, when I went into the [U.S. military] service-- Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's, let's-- Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. I wanna remember that, see, because that's the jumping off part right there, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. We'll put a pin right there so we'll remember that. Story_ID: 638940 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But as far as the community and the makeup of, of your friends--well, first I'm sorry, let's go back and--tell me about your siblings. Your brothers and sisters. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me their names, the order that they were born. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, where you fit in. And just tell me a little bit-- Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: A little something about them. Speaker 2: Okay. My brother, Eugene Joseph Stewart, he's a junior [Eugene Stewart, Jr.]. He was, he was, he was my oldest brother and I had a half-brother too. But, we all lived together there, and he lived separate when his mother left, you know. But, he was still, you know, our half-brother. And so, Eugene, he was a straight A student in school; I wasn't (laughter). I was just average, you know. But, but, history was the thing that I remembered most, you know, it just stuck in my mind. And I can, like now I can remember about individual. And so, Gene was a, he took all the college prepa- preparatory classes. And my [paternal] aunt [Elizabeth Stewart Fisher] when she was not in Chicago [Illinois], and when my dad [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] was not out on the line, and my [paternal] grandmother [Atlantha Glanton Stewart], they worked with him, you know. And he later, when he went into, when he graduated from high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa], he was in the band, he was in the band. And then he played football, and then they, my dad sat down with him on--the war [World War II, WWII] came out, aeronautical class, and he taught him and he went to school there on--for aeronautics to be a pilot. But when it came time to go in the service and all, they wouldn't take him in the white course. So, he waste--that was wasted time, so. But, he later ended up an OCS [Officer Candidate School] and then after going to that, he still, they still wouldn't give him the break so he did become a clerk in the [U.S.] Army. And, and you know, I remember when he went overseas, you know, to Germany and such. Then I, then I came along there and when I came along after I played in the high school band, and I played football and ran track. And I got a chance to meet part of the Culberson family in Iowa City [Iowa]. And like I said, they, they were far, you know, well, I guess eighty, ninety miles from us. So, I guess, you'll see 'em periodically because that how we was spread out, see. And I didn't know all of that about Duke Slater until later, later on, you know, that that some of the cousins were there. Speaker 1: So, who was next? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Who was next in your line of your family? Speaker 2: Eugene and then me. Speaker 1: Right. It's just the two of you? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then, Richard [Richard Stewart] and then Elizabeth [Elizabeth Stewart Jones], my sister. Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me about Richard. Speaker 2: Richard. When I, when I left Iowa, I'm in the service he was still in school, you know. So, he came out after I was out of school. I mean, after I was in service, see. And so, he, he was living in Evanston [Illinois] then. And so, we didn't spend a lot of time together after, you know, I left Iowa, you know, because when I went the--so, he, he later worked in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] and he went to Buffalo, New York. And that's where he died. Speaker 1: And, then your sister? Speaker 2: And, Elizabeth, she stayed in Iowa. And she had the ten children, you know. And she was around the house, the house that my dad, my dad had houses there. And she and her children all grew up there in Iowa and she married, and she died fifty some--I've got it written down, you know. Speaker 1: So, she died young? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: She died young? Speaker 2: In the fifties. She was in her fifties. Speaker 1: Oh, she died in her fifties? She was in her fifties? Speaker 2: She was--yeah, yeah. Yeah, she was in her, her fifties. Let's see. Speaker 1: Yeah, so that (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay, wait a minute. She was born, I know I have it down. Have you seen that, the sheet? You haven't seen the sheet? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I have it all written down there. Speaker 1: Well, anyway, she was born after 1925. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, that mean, that she--she died very young. Speaker 2: She--let's see. I was '25 [1925]-- Speaker 1: And, then it was Richard. Speaker 2: I'm '25 [1925]--Richard was '28 [1928]. And then she was, it was either--she was, I think she was two years younger than him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was probably '30 in 1930. Boy, I tell you, thinking back that far (laughter), that's, that's a long way back (laughter). Story_ID: 638941 Speaker 1: Tell me what holidays were like for your family. Speaker 2: Not much, because we, we were separated, see, you know. It wasn't like, you know, my dad [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] would be drive--out there driving his trucks [Stewart Transfer Company, Clinton, Iowa], you know what I mean. And then my [paternal] aunt [Elizabeth Stewart Fisher], sometime she'd be in Iowa and then the next think I know she'd be in, in Chicago [Illinois], you see. And so, we were with my [paternal] grandmother [Atlantha Glanton Stewart] practically that, that we were around, you know, more than anything, see. Speaker 1: Okay. Talking about the community in which you lived, now you talked about playing. Tell me who your friends were, and who were the people in the community. Kind of give me a tour of right where you lived. Now, you talked about the moor, but tell me more about where you lived. Speaker 2: Where we lived it was, it was a white area, all white, you know. And then the, the district where the African Americans lived were about four miles from us on the other side of town [Clinton, Iowa], see. And I was--forgot what area that we called, we called it, my brother [Eugene Stewart, Jr.] and I were talking about it. And so, all our neighbors were white, you know what I mean, all the friends. My best friend was a white boy that, that used to come out here a visit the museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado]. He took my books and all and put 'em in the library back there, you know. I forgot his name that quick (laughter). And I can see his face, but he was, he was my number one friend. And when I played football while he was--he didn't play football, but he would, he would give me the rub downs and all like that, you know, a trainer like. And afterwards I'd walk downtown with him. I had a job after school. And so, I, I helped, there was a--I can't think of the name of it, but they, they had paper that they, that they cut up; printing company. And what they did is there was a chute, and when they--after they finished the orders and things like that, the used paper would come, the magazine paper would come down the chute and it filled up a space from here to about here. And my dad [Eugene Stewart, Sr.]--said, "I wanna play sports." And he said, "All right, you wanna play football, okay. You play football but afterwards, that's your job. You get all of that paper out of there," (laughter) and that. If you don't finish it--see, and then he would take it and load it up the truck and take it to the--it's a place where they buy scrap paper. What you gonna do in the war [World War II, WWII], you know. And so, I'd bale it up into 150 and 200 pound bales. And so, where that was a--I had to have all that paper out of there, you know. And then at night, I--most of the time I'd miss the bus or the streetcar, and I'd walk home three miles. Then I had to do my work, my school work, my high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa] work. In the morning I had a job that I got up at six o'clock and working in the grocery stores, and shoveling the walks, and helping to load up everything in. And the things--I can think of the different jobs (laughter), that I, that I did. And sometime after football practice, I'd be--I'd walk downtown because the bus, I couldn't catch the bus at that time. And so, this friend would walk with me. We'd walk down and maybe I'd get an ice cream soda, you know, you know, something like that. And then, then he'd go on home and then I'd go on and do my work, you know. Story_ID: 638942 Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's go back just a little bit first, and let me know the name of the elementary school that you went to. Speaker 2: Lincoln (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause we kind of skipped that. Speaker 2: Lincoln. Speaker 1: Lincoln. Okay, elementary school. Speaker 2: Lincoln elementary school [Lincoln School, Clinton, Iowa]. Speaker 1: And, and this was a school that was integrated as far as, you were able to go, you and a very few. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, my brother. Speaker 1: Okay. You and your--and you-- Speaker 2: I don't know if there was anybody else in the classes, other classes. Later on there was some cousins, you know, that lived, lived about, one, two, three; three blocks up. Speaker 1: Now, you were in elementary school during the Depression [Great Depression] time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Your family, do you feel, how did you feel? Or, how did your family fair? Because your father [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] had these businesses. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you family was, you know, pretty prominent in the town. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. They were, yeah. And you know, they were all very well thought of at that time. And they--it was, it was like I was just saying, our, our integration was more with the white kids than the black kids, 'cause we didn't live around 'em, see. But on Sundays, we'd see them at church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Clinton, Iowa], you know what I mean, like that, see. But the Avenue, that's what we used to call it; Maple Avenue, that was--and, so, they had a little what they call a juke joint down there, you know. We didn't go down there when were, until we were like, like seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, you know, like that, see. And they had the records and all like that, they played in there. You know, Gene [Eugene Stewart, Jr.] and I was talking about that the other day (laughter). But, we didn't frequent that, that Aven--that very much. They call it the Avenue. We didn't go down there very much, see. Speaker 1: Well, do you remember any of your elementary school teachers? Speaker 2: Mrs. Burdick [Ruth Burdick]. That was one of the teachers that I do remember. She was a, she was a young teacher there. And one I don't, I can't think of her name now, but she broke me of the habit of writing with my left hand. I'm left handed. And she'd come up behind me, it was white girl in my class and myself, we were left handed. And she'd come up down the hal--she'd sneak up behind us and we be writing with our left hand, you know, just automatically. And she'd take that thick ruler, just like that, and wham right across your, your knuckles, and you'll do that and you shift. So, I write right handed now, see. And so, we got, we had a class reunion a few years back and she told me, Frances Sipes was her name. She said, "Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Stewart], do you remember that, that teacher?" Ooh, I almost called her name. Well, she said, "You remember she used to hit us across our knuckles?" She said, "Well, look at my knuckles." They was split from that thick ruler. And she used (laughter), and so, I remember that, you know. And, and what was so funny, you know, they have the dances at, you know, not many dances, I mean, at noon they, they'd play records and the kids would be out there dancing. And so, the white girls would come over and they wanna dance with me. I said, "You can't dance." And there'd be a few that I'll get out there and dance with and they'd be jumping up and down so much, I just walk away from 'em, leave out there (laughter). I was just the funniest thing. They all wanted to come and dance with me. I was a good dancer, you know. And so-- Speaker 1: And, and what was the music during that time? Speaker 2: It was Benny Goodman, and Tommy Dorsey, and Jimmy Dorsey, and that, that kind of, that kind of music, you know. And some of the records that I, I remember, you know, I didn't, I didn't like, but I remember the songs, you know. And then it was, remember this was one girl, she was a sophomore, Winnie--Winifred--Winnie, Winnie Morris, was that Winifred Morris [ph.], no. Well, her first name was Winnie, and occasionally we'd get out on the floor, and we'd dance. She was a sophomore, and I, I was a junior at that time, yeah. And let's see, either I was a senior. I may have been a senior when she came in 'cause she was, you know, young, you know, but she could dance. And so, we'd get out there and we'd just do our, our little, our dance, you know. And they, they'd wanna come up and dance, and they couldn't dance (laughter). I remember it so well. Story_ID: 638943 Speaker 1: You were telling me about the teachers in elementary school [Lincoln School, Clinton, Iowa] and some of the books that you didn't appreciate. Like, they dwelled on them too, too long. And that-- Speaker 2: Did I mention--you got 'em? Speaker 1: --the teacher--no. You, you, yeah, you said, that the teacher didn't call on you. Was this in elementary school? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. A lot of what I--when it was time, you know, to ask questions, you know, wanna find out who knows the answer to this, and I'd put my hand up, and when they didn't call on me, I just wasn't gonna stand there, I mean, sit there with my hand up all day. So, I just, you know, I'd look out the window, you know what I mean. And then I, then I'd get a seat over there by the window, and then I just look out the window, and then when the teacher thought I was just watching the birds, which they would be jumping on the, the sill and all, they call on you thinking that you weren't listening. I, I heard everything they said. And I'd answer the questions and then they'd said, "Well, there's somebody that's did their homework" (laughter), you know, like that. But, I didn't get called on very much, you know. Then I had a--Miss Burdick [ph.], she was a good teacher. And so, I remember it, and she, and she was very good. But, here's another thing that I, I didn't like about the curriculum, okay. You know, they ask you in high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa], you know, and what you wanna do, what you wanna get into. And so, anyway, they, they tried to put me into, well, the woodwork class and let's see, woodworking and the cooking classes, you know, like that. And I didn't, you know, I didn't, I didn't wanna go into those class- my brother [Eugene Stewart, Jr.], he, he got a chance to get the--well, I, I, okay. Like my brother took high school, I mean, college preparatory so, you know, chemistry, physics, you know. I took some of the courses, but they were trying to relay me into the, the woodworking, and into those kind of classes. And I didn't, I didn't, I didn't adjust to 'em, you know what I mean. I didn't like 'em, so I didn't do good, you know what I mean, I like, see. But, the teachers, the men teachers would want you to take something subservient rather than something higher, see. And so, they figure, "Well, you know, you're not gonna do any better in this other so you just get into this class," you know what I mean. But, they were, I didn't like 'em because they were very, they were gruff, you know, all like that, see. Speaker 1: You said, you didn't like the books like, 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' [Harriet Beecher Stowe], and Huck-- Speaker 2: 'Huckleberry Finn' ['The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain], and 'Black Sambo' ['The Story of Little Black Sambo,' Helen Bannerman]. And they, and they--so, what happened, that's why I got into my fights, see. When they would, she'd be reading those--cutting those off, and the kids would look around at me. And I said, "What are you looking at me for?" You know, and they be laughing and I'd run up and slap 'em in their face. Or, I'd take my fist and (laughter), boy, I would, I you know. And so, and so, and then the teacher, you know, you know, they wouldn't, they wouldn't support you. That was the thing about it. And I was really surprised, my brother got along in that direction better than I did, see. Because, if you say anything out of the way to me, I'm gonna retaliate. If you, you know, and I, you know, I'll tell you another thing. If I see a big white boy beating up another little white boy, I'd go over, and I said, "Don't beat on this kid." And he'd say, "What are you gonna do about it?" (Laughter) And there I am in a fight, see. That's the way I was, that type of person, see. And so, I know, I had fights, I just knew, they'd go across town to get a boy and bring him over and say, "I bet you can't whip him." (Laughter), I said, I said, "What have I got to do with him?" And say, say, "You're tough." You know, I say, "Well, I don't know him," and I'd walk away, and then the boy think I didn't wanna fight. And he'd grab me by the collar and there we are right into a fight (laughter). All the time. I'll tell you. But, I was, but I was so friendly with people that they recognized that too, neighbors and all, and they knew that, that I had--I, you know I'm a people's person. That what I am, see. Story_ID: 638944 Speaker 1: What were some of the other professors--professions of your neighbors, people that lived around you? Speaker 2: Oh, they were, they worked in, oh, in the Clinton Company [Clinton, Iowa]. That was, they manufactured corn into corn starch, and products of the sort. And then John Deere [Deere and Company], John Deere, that was in machinery for farming. They, they had factories like that. And so, but, the Clinton Company I remember. I was big, and a lot of people ended up there. So, one of my fri--there was a friend of mine that I remember my friend earlier in junior high school type Stremlow, Eddie Stremlow [Edward Stremlow]. And we were, we were, we were very close and so, when it came to go to high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa], we, we were talking, we said, "Oh, we don't wanna go to high school, it's too hard." I'd pick up a paper and see, I'd see algebra, and I'd see chemical--chemistry and all I could see those papers kids that, you know, they dropped them and whatever, and I'd look at it and say, "We can't do that kind of work." So, I wasn't going to, I didn't wanna go to high school. And so, this, this white boy, he quit. He went--it went from, from--after junior high school he went right into the factory, you know. And so, my dad [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] said to me, he said, "Son," he said, "if you don't wanna go to high school, I don't want you to waste your time doing it." He said, "Try it a year, and if you, you know, if you see that you can do it, okay, but if you don't see it, you know, don't force it." So, that was a good thing that he did that. And so, when after I got in there and I realized that everything is, you know, explained to you, and then you took it from there. Then, I, I--and, so, so here's what said, he says, "Well," he says, "I guess you wanna come out and help me on the truck," (laughter). And I said, "Well, dad I don't know." I said, "I think I changed my mind" (laughter). And so, I, I didn't, 'cause I'd worked on that truck. And a lot of times we had to load up hundred pound bags of sugars and flour and crates of lettuce and all. And so, he wanted to see. But, he did that for a reason, which was good, see. And when I realized that I knew that I didn't want to do that then, okay (laughter). So, I didn't. Speaker 1: Did you father ever finish high school? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He, yeah, straight A student. Yeah. But, see, didn't have money to go to college. See at that time, you know, it was difficult. Story_ID: 638945 Speaker 1: The band, at homecoming, yeah, it was homecoming I remember. So, and this, I was, I guess, I was in my junior years. And you know, like I say, normally, you know, there was, you know, stores, you know, we could go into only--and this is with Marcusi's [Clinton, Iowa]. It was a confectionery and that's where people went, you know, to have their ice cream sodas and sundaes, and you know, things like that. And so, my dad had hauled for Marcusi and he--my dad also hauled for Lagomarcino [Davenport, Iowa], a group company. It was, it was a group--it was a produce company, and like I was telling you, like sugar, packs of sugar, flour, crates of lettuce and cabbage and carrots and nuts and all like that. And they had, they had, they had produce companies in Clinton [Iowa], and in Davenport [Iowa], and Muscatine [Iowa], and all up and down the river. So, my dad, with his trucks [Stewart Transfer Company, Clinton, Iowa], you know, he had the contract. So, she was hauling for these people. So, this was, this was interesting, when you're talking about the Depression [Great Depression] and I was talking to somebody else about this, it was a tight time, you know. And so, my dad would, well, when--we need to haul from--for Lagomarcino they would have boxes of almond Hershey's [The Hershey Company], and they would have different candies, chocolates and all. And so, what happens is when they would sell 'em to stores if you had one, you tore the wrapper off and it was white then the whole box goes. So, my dad when they would take this, this--these boxes and they'd tear it open they'd see one of the bars was white then the whole box--they said, "All right Gene [Eugene Stewart, Sr.], put those over there and you could--and drop them off at the dump," okay. So, my dad, we had--we'd help him take them into these stores and so, this man in the back had a big, it was a copper, copper vehicle that he would put the chocolate candy into and melt it. And when he melt it, see all the, even if they had worms in it, they're the same thing when he'd take 'em, you know, he would take 'em--he loaded them up, that's what he did. He load them up into, he had, you know, like a little garage, and so when he get those instead of taking 'em to the dump he'd put in, put 'em there. And so, he'd go in the place and the guy said, "Boy, I wish I could get more of this chocolate." He said, "Boy--," people would buy, they take put an almond in it, a pecan in it and sell it for a dollar and a half a pound, see. And you know (laughter), and they getting old candy. So, he, he say, so the man says to him, "Yeah, I wish I could get some more of these, you know, I can sell a lot of it." So, my dad said, "Well, how many do you need?" And she said, "Oh, I can use about eight boxes." He said, "Oh." And he said, "Well, I'll see what I can do." So, my dad would go into the shed, and pull out about eight boxes, two dollars a box, he'd sell it to him. That's a lot of time--money in during the Depression, see. And then, he, and so, he was doing real good, you know, selling to his one man. So, Marcusi, one time this what he did, I'm--the band was--we had finished, we had finished doing our playing and when down to Marcusi's. All the band members, most of 'em, we got into a little, it was like a round, a half of circle area that we sat in, booths, you know. And so, I saw Marcusi come in with a tuxedo on, and you know, he had his top coat and everything and he was walking to the man in back of the counter. So, I saw him talk to him and he pointed over at us, see. So, about ten minutes later the guy came over. It was crowded, the place. So, he says, "This booth is too crowded here." He said, "Somebody's gonna have to leave." So, when he said that, you know, I said to my friend, I says, "Hey, you know," I said, "It's getting late. Is it after ten o'clock?" And so, I said, "I gotta be home," see. So, he said, "I'll go with you." Can't recall his name that quick. So, we left, you know what I mean. So, when left, I told my dad, I said what happened, see, 'cause I knew what that, what that was saying. He didn't have to say, you know, Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Stewart], you know, you know. So, my dad stopped hauling those chocolates to him. Story_ID: 638946 Speaker 1: He'd get those bananas and when they're black on the outside, you can't sell 'em. But, on the inside, they're white. They give you a banana splits from those, see. So, my dad would get a crate, bring it down and sell it to him, you know, four dollars, see. And so, my dad [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] shifted and there was ano--Tofanelli [ph.] that was another--see but they both were outside a theater. The theater was over here. That was a Strand Theatre [Clinton, Iowa] and I forgot the other theater. So, he was hauling for this guy too. So, this guy said, "Boy, my business is bad." He was really a nice guy, you know. And talk--and we'd go in there and he'd give us some hot peanuts, you know, a bag of it, you know. Give us an ice cream cone, you know like that, see. And so, after he told my dad that he says, "Okay." So, we went to Tofanelli and talked him into selling. He was, his business was slow, he says, "What do need some boxes? I can get you a few." Before you knew this, it shifted from there to him. And boy, and so, the movie theater was there so my dad used to, he had an ash truck that they hauled the ashes from, so the guy come and haul and sometime we'd work on the ash truck when they was short of help. Speaker 2: What is the ash truck? Speaker 1: You know, we'd haul ashes after the coal, you know. And the furnaces, they would, they load it, then they put the ashes along the wall, over like that, see. And then you had to take, you know, when you unload it, you took baskets. And loaded the baskets and took 'em up or handed them up through the grate, you know, like that, see. But we could go in the movie theater free (laughter), any movie theater. So, Tofanelli was right there, see. And so, when it shifted, Marcusi saw us going in the Stand Theatre one time, he hollered, "Hey, hey," you know. "Come over here boys," you know. And so, you know, okay, and he says, "Well, I don't see you around here anymore." Got us a bag of peanuts, you know. And he says, "Yeah," said, "I haven't seen your dad, you know, okay. And so, anyway, we told our dad what was happening. And so, what happened, my dad never did get back with him to do any business with him anymore, see, because what he did, see, you know. But, he saw the shift and he knew what was happening in the other direction. The man was getting all the business and he was getting the business that he should've had, see. And so, he lost out in that direction. But, my dad never did, he never did capitulate with him, you know what I mean. And my dad hauled for most of the places around there, you know what I mean, like that. And then we were, when we were in high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa], my, my--sometime my brother [Eugene Stewart, Jr.] and I we'd take the trucks and we go and work and do things and help out in that direction, see. Story_ID: 638947 Speaker 1: So, you were able to go into the different stores and sit with your, your white friends and have ice cream sundaes, it was never-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --never a problem at all. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And when did you have your first black friend? Speaker 2: When, when did I do what? Speaker 1: Have your first black friend. Speaker 2: Oh, in my neighborhood. You know, all the kids up and down the street, you know what I mean. Like, they--well, see since my dad [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] was in what he was, he was a very respectful man, and they all wanted to be your friend, see, you what I mean. So, we didn't have, we didn't have that problem, see, you know what I mean. I remember we used to go over to the houses, you know what I mean, and they would, they'd invite you to eat, you know, and thing like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, I was under the impression that you lived in an all-white area; the street that you lived in (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No, see, I told you the black area was down on the Avenue [Maple Avenue]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, see-- Speaker 1: But, you didn't live down there. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Right. But, you used to, you had friends that lived there, so you went to visit them is what you're saying. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And, we went to the same church. Speaker 1: Oh, so these were your church--okay. And tell me about church. What was your, what's your first memory or your memories of church? And what church did you go to? Speaker 2: We went to African Methodist Episcopal church, A.M.E. [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Clinton, Iowa]. And my [paternal] grandmother [Althantha Glanton Stewart] was the choir director and my [paternal] aunt [Elizabeth Stewart Fisher] was the pianist when she was in town. And I don't--you know, what I hate, and I hate to say this though, but some of the ministers that were in the churches weren't, weren't too high caliber ministers. They were not, not as educated as they, they should've been because I remember Reverend Berry [William Berry]. And I said, I asked him, I said, "Reverend Berry, what is it that--," the questions, it is, it's hard for a camel to go through the needle eye, you know, it's better for the camel, it's harder for the--I can't get the expression in my mind, but, I know it well. Let's see, it's easy for to--oh, it's easier for a camel to go, to go through the eye of a needle than a rich man to go--to get into heaven (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Get into heaven. Okay. Speaker 2: And, I asked him the def- and to explain it to me. And he said, "Well, when you go to school, you ought to understand it." He never could give you the explanation for what you wanted to know, see. And so, that wasn't good, you know. And then another thing, in the political arena, they used to have a man that's running for political office, he'd come and he get in the church. And come on a vote for me, you know, and all. And said, "And, down the Avenue there's a keg of beer, you know what I mean, and all like that. And you know, in our, in our intellect we couldn't, we wouldn't come together on that, see. And later on, you know, it was that, if you, if you were in a big city, well, I'll say like Denver [Colorado], Denver gets a good, a good minister. But, in a smaller area, his--that minister isn't up to par, see. And so, we didn't get the minister--we got a couple of 'em, but when we came along there weren't--he was there for a long time, Reverend Berry. And we just, we saw how he was explaining and all, we didn't think he--and, he'd come there to visit, to our house, spend Sunday eating (laughter). And eat all the chicken up (laughter). You know anything about that (laughter)? Yeah, Reverend Berry, I remember (laughter), yes, sir. Speaker 1: Was your grandmother a good cook? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a pretty good cook, but she wasn't, he wasn't a, wasn't a southern cook. Like all that corn bread, you know, that crackling, we never had that kind of food. We just had the, the regular, well, we had the pork chops and she like the steaks and things like that. But, oh, and we had, we had neck bones, you know what I mean. But, she wasn't that, and since I've been out and tasted some of the cooking, the southern cooking, I realized we didn't get it (laughter). We didn't get that southern cooking (laughter). Story_ID: 638948 Speaker 1: So, now, you're getting ready to graduate from high school and the name of your high school again? Speaker 2: Clinton High School [Clinton, Iowa]. Speaker 1: Clinton High School. And what year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, we talked about the Depression [Great Depression] and during the war [World War II, WWII] and the candy and the different things. What else do you remember about that era; about wartime? Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, and let me, let me explain this. When my dad had the office downtown [Stewart Transfer Company, Clinton, Iowa] he had a, he had a little candy store in this office, you know. It was off to, off on this side here; pop and things like that. So, I had a candy route. And when I come out of school I would pick up candy bars; Mr. Goodbar, and Milky Ways and all those. And I'd put 'em in a box and I'll go over to the offices and I'd go to the garages and I'd sell candy. And that was teaching me how to, to handle money. And we operated that as a loss (laughter). And what we did, you know, (laughter), and then I remember we'd go down to the ballpark and the tennis court, and I used to sell pop. They--I had a carrier and I'd walk over there and sell pop to them, see. And, and I learned, you know, how to meet people. I met the good and the tough ones too, you know, but I always learned to smile. And they say, "You're always smiling," you know. And I'd say, "Well, they told me a smile is worth a million dollars so, I'm still looking for it," (laughter) I said to 'em. And so, I learned that selling aspect. And then my father had a storage. He had the office and then next to it he had a--there was storage building on the main street of town. And what he did is, when he hauled furniture, like he'd haul people up to Minneapolis and to, into, into Illinois and into Wisconsin and all. Why--when he'd, when he get the--in the semi, well, the people would say, "You know, Gene [Eugene Stewart, Sr.], I don't--I'm short twenty dollar," or something like that. So, and, he says, "Well, I'll tell you what, and this roll top desk, I'll just hold this, you know, until you pay it. And he'd take that or they had--you know, my [paternal] aunt [Elizabeth Stewart Fisher] knew to do these dishes for, I mean, you know, cut glass and all in Tiffany. And so, they had, and so, we'd just take that and say, "Well, you know, do all these chairs." I got a chance to learn about antiques seeing that. And so, he had that, he had his storage, well his storage would be from the front here to the back, to the back. And it would be from here, over to there, full of furniture, see. And so, he'd hold it for a time, and if they didn't come and get it, he'd sell it, you know what I mean. And so, I got a chance to see some of that old, real old furniture, you know. And later on when I became a barber, I did the same thing. I collected that, see, you know. But I learned from my father, you know, buying and selling, you know, like that, see (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 638949 Speaker 1: So, was there a talk about you going to college during high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa]? Speaker 2: About my brother [Eugene Stewart, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Your brother first? Speaker 2: Yeah, about my brother, uh-huh. And I knew that, you know, at that time you're talking about if you could go to college then, you know, you were gonna do something. But, my brother went into service, see. He got drafted, but he had taken aeronautics and when he went in the service he thought that's what he was gonna be able to do, you know. But, like I just say, he did get into OCS [Officer Candidate School] and then like I said, and then he went into the clerical aspect of the [U.S.] Army, see. Speaker 1: Right. So, after you graduated what did you do? Speaker 2: What'd I do? Okay, my brother and I, we moved to Evanston [Illinois], that's where my mother [Martha Moore Stewart] was, and we roomed together, and I was going to Roosevelt College, that's in Chicago [Illinois], and my brother was going to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], okay. But, Northwestern, you see, we had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] too. But it couldn't accommodate my brother in Northwestern at the price. So, I said, "I'll stop going and you go ahead and, and then, you know, and then, then we'll just help each other," you know what I mean. So, what I did is, I took up barbering, Moler College [Moler Barber College] down in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois]. It wasn't far from the college anyway, see. So, I, I got into that and then I got my license and then my brother went back in the service. So, that, that ended his, his--the college aspect. And so, so I went on, I kept on barbering and I worked, I worked in Evanston and then I went to North Chicago [Illinois], and then later on, I had a shop up there. And then I went to New York [New York]. No, I came, I came to Evans- back to Evanston, I worked in a shop and this friend of mine, he wanted me to--when I was in service I went up to New York, and I liked New York. Speaker 1: When--wait. Speaker 2: When I was in service, so, I just, that's how I, I--okay, am I jumping too far ahead? Speaker 1: Well, no. But just let's get the, the order, okay (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 638950 Speaker 1: So, after high, in high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa] in 1944, you and your brother moved to Evanston. Speaker 2: No. High school to service. Speaker 1: No, you. Speaker 2: I said me. Speaker 1: Oh, you went to the service? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I thought you said your brother went into the service. Speaker 2: Yeah, he went in the service first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, and then when I graduated, I went into service. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, okay. All right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right, well, let's, let's put a pen right there and let's talk about you in the service. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell me what it was like to be in the service. Speaker 2: Okay. I went into the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What was the funny thing was, they drafted me from--for the [U.S.] Army, and that was in Des Moines, Iowa. And when I went into the, you know, the, they sent me down to, to, I'm saying Fort Leonard Wood [Missouri], but it wasn't at Fort Leonard Wood. It was in, in Missouri--Jefferson Barracks [Jefferson Barracks Military Post], yeah. And when I went in--went down there, they were all were, the Army and Navy together, see. But, what they were doing is they were gonna separate 'em. Once, you know, Army, Navy, Army, Navy, like that, see. So, I, I tasted the food. They had a kettle of lemonade, like that, and they had dust all across the top of it. And they took the ladle and they pulled it back like that, and they just put some lemonade in the food. And then the potatoes, when they got the potatoes they had rotten potatoes and good potatoes, and just slapped it on it like that. And I said, "No, I can't take this," (laughter). So, when we got ready to--they were gonna separate us all: Army, Navy, so. They were having them go along, and came in with a guy--group from Iowa. All of us was gonna go, you know, Army. So, when after I saw that food, I said, "If there's any way I can get out of it, I'm not gonna (laughter), I'm not gonna get in that." So, as they were coming along they were saying, I hear 'em say, "Army, Army, Army," you know, like that. And then he said, "Navy," and they kept on. And when they got up to me, this friends of mine, you know, he was by me, said, "Yeah, we're going to Army, aren't we?" I said, "Yeah." And when I looked, looked at and the guy got ready, he looked at me and I said, "Can I get in the Navy?" And he said, "Bam, Navy." I left this fellow, I said, "No rotten potatoes for me." So, and then I went from there to Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Illinois]. Great Lakes, in the--well, he knows, he knows where Great Lakes is. Great Lakes, Illinois, Waukegan and all that area. Anyway, and so when I went the, the service there, they gave you an aptitude test, you know. And what they did is if you graduated from high school--and, I wanted radio. That's what I wanted. And I had been into the radio, you know. And so, I wanted to get into radio school. But, they picked, they only put, they took a percentage of the guys for the service school, and the rest of 'em was in the regular Navy, see. So, they picked--I was one of the ones you saw in the group. That's, that was the service school group. And that was interesting because at that time where I, when I went in prior to that time, blacks were only getting cooks and baker. They were getting mess cooks or taking care of the officers' bunks, you know, that type of duty. But, not, radioman and, and ship, ship, shipmen, and the other, the radiarman--radarmen and all. And so, I, you know, they were taking a special group so, I was, I was blessed to be able to go to school. Through--after, see after I got out of the Navy, they sent us straight to Hampton, Virginia, and that's my first trip south. Never been south before (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, you were in part of this radio group in the Navy? Speaker 2: But, they--but, I ended up in, I'm a yeoman. A yeoman is, you know, taking care of the records, the morning report, and you know, and that type of thing. That's what I end--'cause what happened is they had a man who had a radio shop that was drafted. So, he had experience, see, you know what I mean. And I think they took two and the other guy, they were all both in similar, similar occupations. So, I got the next one was, was the, they call that yeoman, yeoman the storekeeper, storekeeper. So, that's the school that I went to, see. And then they sent me to Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia]. Booker T. Washington school. Speaker 1: They sent you there while you were, or after you got out of the Navy? Speaker 2: No, after we finished our basic. Speaker 1: After you finished your basic training? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Then, then they sent us directly to service school. Story_ID: 638951 Speaker 1: So, you went to Hampton, Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Yes, and I didn't know all about that (laughter). Speaker 1: So, tell me about that experience. Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, when I went to Hampton, I didn't know that, that you--I wasn't aware, I wasn't--I didn't even think about it. But, they had the streetcar, and so I got ready to get on the streetcar and they said, "To the back." That--wasn't thinking, and this, we're standing, "What is this? Is it full in the front?" (Laughter) We got on the back and we had to stand up naturally. And then we began to realize where we are here, you know. And we went to Hampton, we went, we went on, went to the school, you know, and all, we were based there. And went into, went into town, I remember the first week and (laughter), went there and we went to the movies and all, back of the movie. And then they had, they had street cars, buses, and so, you get on the bus and you, you go to the back, but I made a mistake (laughter), I, I got my first liberty and there was an area where the [U.S.] Navy guys hung out, but it was way on the other end of Newport News [Virginia], you know. So, didn't know how to get on--get there but, I asked the guys and they said, "It's way out there, almost to the end of the line." And I said, "Oh, okay." So, this African American man was standing over there and so I asked him, you know. And he said, "I live out by there." I said, "Oh." And so, he said, "You can ride out and I'll show you where it is." Well, when I got out there--I got on the bus, and, and so when I got on there, I stop here and he went straight back. I looked back, you know. So, I just grab the handle and I was looking out, I wanna know where I'm going, you know. And the guy kept saying, "Kindly move to the back of the bus." And so, when people get on, I just move in like that, you know, and I'm looking out the window to see where I'm going (laughter). And so, finally, it never dawned on me until we kept getting way out, and I kept looking out and I didn't see any lights for a long time. And I kept looking back at him but he never looked at me. And so, when, when I, I started seeing lights way ahead, about a block ahead, and I looked and looked back him, I saw him get ready to get down off so I walked back. And so, when I got off, I says--he said, "Well, it's about a block up," you know. And so, so, I said, "I didn't do anything wrong, did I?" He said, "Well, you should've moved back with me." I said, "Why didn't you tell me?" And he just said, (makes sound). And I said, to myself, I said, "I could've got in some problems there." But, were we really, after I finished the training and we were going on a long liberty, I wanted to go to New York [New York]. I'd never been to New York. This friend of mine was born in New York, you know. So, we got on this bus in the middle of the day. And we got on this bus, there was about five white people on it, and so, fifty of us. So, we got on it, and we fill up all this space and then we looked, you know, beside the white people, and they said, "Do you mind if we sit here?" And the guys, "No." They moved on over and everybody, so the bus was loaded. And this lady was driving the bus and you heard her kept saying, "I don't know what you do down here--up there, but we don't do that down here." And we heard her talking but we didn't pay any attention. She kept saying it, and so, we, and said, "What, what is that you said?" And she said, "We don't do that down, down here what you do up there." Said, "Do what?" And she says, "We don't sit together." And we ask the people, "Do you mind?" And they said, "Well, we don't mind." Nobody minded. They said, "Well, they don't mind. Why should you?" And she said, "We'll see about this." And so, she drove the bus up about a block, got off, went and took the telephone and was making a call, got back on, and she said, "We'll see about it." So, when we got to the end of the line and getting ready to get off, the boats that you go up the river, you go up to Washington, D.C. first and then, and then we get on our train to New York. Why, when we got there, we looked down to walk to the pier there, fifty policeman with submachine guns and rifles, and they were down there waiting for us. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And, so, we said, "Fall in." And we marched down there, double time and we came right down that, and we got to 'em, they just split and we walked up the plank, got on the, the boat and then we looked out there and they were all disorganized like. And on the top deck there, there was a sign, "No coloreds allowed up here." And went up there and threw the sign off into the water, and sat down and crossed our legs (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: The man said, "You can't sit up here." And we said, "Why not?" He said, "Didn't you see the sign?" And we said, "What sign?" He couldn't find the sign, so that ended that. Story_ID: 638952 Speaker 1: You leave there and then you go to Hawaii, you say. Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then they sent us to Eniwetok [Enewetak Atoll, Marshall Islands] and Kwajalein [Kwajalein Atoll, Marshall Islands] where they kick the bomb off, see. That's--I was there then, see (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, this is, this was Pearl Har- and you were there for Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii]. Speaker 2: Well, after, right after Pearl Harbor when I got over there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The ships were all bellied up, you know, where they had been bombed. And, when we came in, we just had to maneuver in. Ships were just like they were when the Jap- after Japs [Japanese] had hit it. And, I mean, the island was, it was something else. And, we took our amphibious training across from Hickam Field [Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii]. That was the [U.S.] Air Force base. And, ours was (unclear) Base where they were training us to go down and fight the Japanese, see. And, that was our amphibious training and then when we left there, we went down to Eniwetok and Kwajalein. And, then, then they kick the bomb off. And, then we went to--we were head with Admiral Nimitz [Chester W. Nimitz], the Third Fleet. There were ships as far as you could see that way, as far as you could that way, and as far as you could see the front. We were in the rear. And, what we were doing there was a sub behind us, Japanese sub, and he was trying to come in and hit one of those battle ships, 2 or 3 million dollars. They didn't care what happened to them, and what we were doing, we were throwing back depth charges, you know, behind to keep 'em back, because if they came in under, they didn't care if they hit one of those battleships. They didn't care what happened to them, see. And, that was what we were doing. And, as we were heading down there, on our way down there, we got words. The Japanese had surrendered, and that was it. So, we never, we never got to Japan. But we were, we were heading there, and you never saw so many ships in your life to see out there, you know. Speaker 1: Well, you were describing about the, the water when the, the bomb hit and how the water looked like a tsunami. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me that story when-- Speaker 2: Well, see-- Speaker 1: --you were saying what it looked like-- Speaker 2: What it was is-- Speaker 1: --description. Speaker 2: If you look, you know, you back it was black, it was black. But, then all of a sudden you could see the top of the black was white. That is crust of the--well, after it had dropped, then it was coming. And, when it was--it was coming, we went down, and they said, "Batten up your hatches." So, we went down to the bottom of the ship and we, we secured the, the hatches. And, then when it hit, when it hit, we could feel it. It just shot, that, that ship just shot up in the air, it's like that, see. And, when it hit down, bam and (makes sound), just like that. And, that's the way it was, you know, while we were out there, you know. We were out there thirty days in the water without even coming to land. I mean, I can tell some stories that, oh, wow (laughter). Story_ID: 638953 Speaker 1: And, what was another thing that you wanted, wanted me to mention so it happened. We had a riot, two riots over there. And, we were in, yeah, we were in Eniwetok [Enewetak Atoll, Marshall Islands] at that time, and they had the, the white, the white Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and the black Marines. The 54th, they were the top Marine rifle outfits in the service. So, we were stationed the [U.S.] Navy, the Navy, we were on, we--the Marines were on one end, black Marines, and the white on the other, see. And, then we were in the center. And so, Christmastime when they, they had USO [United Service Organizations], and what was happening was that they started playing music and all. And, then these white hostesses came in and they were white Marines, Navy, and black Marines, see. And, so, when they started playing (laughter), playing 'Central Avenue Breakdown' (laughter) and all them fair songs, the white girls would come over and, and get a black man and they start dancing, see. And, so, the white guys didn't like that, see. So, what happened was this one white officer--black officer was standing at the bar and this hostess came over and he was talking with her, you know, like that. And, this other guy wanted to dance, and so, she said, "No, I'm not dancing, I'm just talking to him." And, he went off like this and he was talking to his buddies. And anyway, later on what happened as the party got good, the off- the black officer was walking outside with the white hostess, and when he got to the door, he ca--this, this white fellow with his buddies was outside. And he met him and he hit him in the chest with a knife. And, when he hit him, he--when he fell in, everybody saw him, it was just like this, and we grabbed them boys and we put (unclear) on their face (laughter). And, so, when we did that, boy I mean, the whole island, word got around, boy. And, we said, "Let's go, go to our barracks where our guns were there." And, we got there and we, we got our self in there and I was on the second deck. And, so, the officer came on around two o'clock in the morning and he says, "Let's talk about this," you know, all like that. And, then when we started talking and one of 'em, Redd, (Unclear) Redd [ph.], he jumped out of the second deck (laughter) about that high down, with an officer with his gun in his hand. He said, "And we can settle it another way," you know, like this. He says, "We didn't start this thing," you know. But, we, we might--look--we, we said, said, "We haven't gone down there to fight, but we can fight right here," you know what I mean. And so, anyway, they cooled it off and sent us further down. And then we had another riot because we wanted to go to--they had a movie and--no, it wasn't a movie. It was a USO show, and everybody was turning out for the show, but not us. But, they had an area from here to there for us to be in and the rest of the theater was all white. So, this, a couple guys the next day, day they said, "That was a pretty good show. So, well, let's go." So, I went with them and went down there. But, we didn't stop in the back, we moved down in the center, and we sat down there. And, so, it started filling up, you know. And, then the off--so, the officer got on the loud speaker and says, he told 'em, he says, "Everybody move to their section." And nobody moved, you know. We said, "No." So, then they came down with the SPs [shore patrol], the police and they tried to move us. Said, "Oh, what do we have to move for? We're just here to see the show," you know. And, so, they saw that they weren't doing anything and they couldn't do anything so, they sent for the military police, SPs. And, when they sent--there, they came down there with their, their weapons carries, big guns, and submachine guns. They ran down and jumped up on the seats, like this. And, they were talking about, "Let's run 'em out of here." And, so, the officer on the dais, I mean, it was an officer there saw he was gonna get it, something was gonna happen. So, the white boys started running out. And we running, said, "Let's get our guns." And, we headed to our barracks and got there, boy, and said, "We're gonna go down under here. We don't have to go down in Japan (laughter)." And, so, anyway, the way it ended up there that, then they tried to drive through the area and calm people down. So, they said, "Everybody come to the, to, well, it was the mess hall where everybody come, come through and bring your guns." And so, we showed up, we didn't have our guns with us. And, they said, and they take your name down, they said, "And, then you turn in your gun." Said, "We don't have 'em." And, said, "Somebody stole 'em during the night" (laughter). So, anyway, we, we got over that, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 638954 Speaker 1: So, how many, how long did you stay in the service, in the [U.S.] Navy? Speaker 2: Eighteen months. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is like 1946 you, you come out (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. That's when I came out. March 15th, I think it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: March or April. Speaker 1: So, this is when you and your brother [Eugene Stewart, Jr.], now you move to Evanston [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And, you go to Moler [Moler Barber College, Chicago, Illinois] and get your barbers license. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, do you open a barbershop there, or where do you go? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, later on I went up to North Chicago [Illinois]. Let's see, I worked as a barber in Evanston [Illinois], but then later I went up to North Chicago opened up a shop and then I came back and opened a barbershop there. Speaker 1: Was Moler interracial, I mean, was it an integrated school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, in Chicago, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Moler was one of the top barber colleges there. And so, then, then after I was, yeah, I came back to Evanston and then I went to New York [New York]. And, (laughter), I went to New York and I wanna--this friend of mine, Dean Sampson [ph.], he'd gone to Stuyvesant School [Stuyvesant High School, New York City, New York]. It was an all-boys school, but it was an academic school. And, he was straight, he was straight A math. That guy, when we went to, you know, when we had gone into service school, we roomed across from each other. They, the ones that were in the math, and the others that were in the clerical, see. And so, he 'em, he told his instructor, he said, "There's not a math problem that I can't solve," (laughter). I thought that was so funny, he gave a problem and he stayed up all night and he had a sheet over his head and, "We're gonna get him," grumbling, "this problem can't be solved." And, the next day he went back there and he told him, he said, "There's no answer to that one." And the, and the instructor laughed at him, and said, "You're right, there wasn't," (laughter). And then I went to live with him in New York after I got out of the service and I wanted to see what New York was like, you know. And (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So, what year was this? Speaker 2: Fifty [1950]. Yeah, '50 [1950], '51 [1951]. That was that period of time. Story_ID: 638955 Speaker 1: Well, before we go to New York [New York], you were telling a story about Hamp- about Hampton, Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. And, we really didn't dis- explore that. Were there any other stories you wanted to share about while you were there? Speaker 2: Well, I'm just trying to think 'cause most of the time we were in school, see, you know. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And, being in school. Speaker 1: But how was school? Speaker 2: Oh, okay. (Laughter) I, while I was down there I joined the Hampton Naval Glee Club [Hampton Institute Naval Glee Club] under Flax [Charles H. Flax] and Noah Ryder [Noah F. Ryder], the man, the man who wrote the anthem, the anthem, Noah Ryder, yeah, 'Lift Every Voice and Sing,' he wrote it [sic.]. And, he was one of our directors there, but he was in service at that time too. But, Flax who had, who had taught music at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], he taught, taught, he taught at Hampton, then he went to Tuskegee and taught music. And, our, we, I was part of the Naval, Hampton Navel Glee Club. So we traveled around, up and down, from Washington, D.C. down into to, to the different places in Virginia. We were the captains, Navel Glee Club, that what we were, see. And, in it, you know, it was neat because we got a chance to travel during that time. But, here's something that happened, I was a bugler having been a trumpet--and, so, we had to play 'Reveille,' and 'Taps,' and 'First Call,' all this. And, so, the glee club was going up to Baltimore, Maryland, that's what it was. And, so, we all had to go. So, I designated Sampson [Dean Sampson (ph.)] to do the, to do 'Taps.' In the evening at six o'clock that flag has to go down. Well, he was--so, I regulated him to do that, see. When I came back, I was served with a general court martial. You know what the general is? That's the worse you can get. Not letting the flag go down, see. So, when you, you know, and that, so, I was supposed to get brig time. So, anyway, I told him, I says, "I was with, with"--I can't--Armstrong, Mr. Armstrong, I just remembered his name. Captain Armstrong [ph.], he was over the--of Hampton that time. And, I said, "I was with his glee club," so I said, "I had designated a person to play for." Well, what happened is this friend of mine, he was about five minutes late and when he was--see, the flags is supposed to go down before the sun sets. Well, when he got there it was, it was setting, so it was too late, see, but he went on and played anyway. But they blamed me for it because they said I was supposed to be there, but well, after they got it designated and they found that I had designated a person, you know what I mean. It was like, if I hadn't designated a person and gone, then I was really in trouble. That means I will be in the brigs two or three years. That's right, see. And so, when we got it straighten out and then he told him that he, that he had overslept and he said, and he got over there but, you know, it, it was setting, see. So, that was, that was a bad thing (laughter) that was getting ready to happen too. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638956 Speaker 1: But here's another thing I wanted to mention. So, when the, when the, when the war [World War II, WWII] was over, we didn't, I didn't know it at the time, but see, we had pep- pup tents, like this, you know. And the ocean comes up, you know what I mean, but it didn't come, we were far enough back so that it didn't flood. But, this one morning I woke up and I turned over and I said, splash, into the water. That's how the water was all over there. So, the point I'm getting to is when the war was over the Japanese started coming up from underground. And, you saw so many, you couldn't believe it. And they got in the chow hall and they were, we were here, and they were over there. And, what--at night when we had guard duty, some would come up out of the ground and hit the, hit the chow cans where they threw the remainder of the food out, you know. And they would come out and they'd get in the can, and you hear the can rat- rustle, rattle. And, so, some of those guards shoot 'em, see. And some of 'em were, you know, and so, we didn't realized that they were that, that many--I mean there was, I mean there were lines of 'em coming out from under the ground into the chow hall, see. And, we were saying, "How?" And what we couldn't realize is they, see they were underground almost that deep. When the, when the tide comes in, it was coming up to the top of the ground, "How come they didn't get drowned?" That's what we couldn't under--I couldn't understand that, and all that many under there. Wow, that was really something. So, I just wanted to get that point in. There were just so many. But, what we hated was, they fed 'em before they fed us. Yeah, we see 'em over in the line and they ate and then we had to eat after them. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Yeah. See, and we had defeated them and then we got to get behind there and let them go first. Yes. Speaker 2: So, after the war, they were still hiding underground and then they-- Speaker 1: When they found out it was over. Speaker 2: Eventually, they found out that they were under there and they got 'em all out. Speaker 1: Yeah, and they come on out, and they got in line and then they, they put 'em into camps. Speaker 2: Camps (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: All right. So-- Speaker 1: Oh, let me tell you another thing what happened. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Is that after the war was over, we had to unload the ships with the munitions, ammunition, ninety pound shells. We worked sometime for eighteen months [sic.] unloading ships, you know. And what we did is, we threw those shells into the ocean, and they're down there now, boatloads of shells. And, if they ever trigger you could blow up half of the, the earth. It's that--there were that many shells. You know, eighteen hours unloading ships. I know, they wasn't gonna bring 'em back to the states. They had to put 'em somewhere, so they just ditched them in the ocean. And, I know that; ninety pound shells. Oh, boy, that was something. Speaker 2: Well, why did, why didn't they wanna bring it back to the United States? Speaker 1: Where would they put 'em? See, where they could blow up (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yes. And, this another thing I wanna mention. The group that, that didn't go to the service school went to TI, Treasure Island. That was an ammunition dump, and it blew up at Port Chicago [California], blew up. And, three quarters of my company was there when it blew up. I got a book on it too. I didn't know that the book was out 'til about two or three years ago, but my company went there, you know, and worked in the ammunition dump. See, rather than to go to service school, they had to--they used them in that, that capacity. And, I thought, "Isn't that something?" And, so, you know, just--and, while I was in New York [New York], I was walking down the street and met one of the guys I was in service school with, beside the guy [Dean Sampson (ph.)] I lived with. And, I, you know, it was something to, to, to see him. I think he had the same last name as mine was Stewart. Story_ID: 638957 Speaker 1: So, 1950, '51 [1951], you go to New York [New York] for the first time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, tell me what that experience was like. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was really something. I went--and my good friend [Dean Sampson (ph.)], he said to me, he says, "Why don't you come and live with me, you know, stay with me for a while?" I didn't wanna to that, but I didn't know--and, then, and then my brother, my younger brother [Richard Stewart], he got married in New York. And so, you know, that, that was another thing that had come about, but I lived with him and he was born there, you know, born there. I'd never lived in a tenement building before, see. And, you know, we would, you know, I remember walking down the street. They have what they call Blue Monday, and it looked like everybody's out like a Saturday night. And, I'm walking down there and they told me, they said, "Be careful of your wallet." They say, "Because these guys will get your wallet." And, so, I'm walking down the street and there's a guy, he was about 6', 6'6" and as I was walking, I saw him approaching me from the front, and I--he kept, he was looking right at me, you know. Now, they say, "They recognize you by the different clothes." You don't wear, I was wearing clothes like the Midwest, suits--things like that and they wear jackets and such. So, I just had a suit on, you know, and shirt, and so he spotted me. He knew I wasn't--so, I was looking right at 'em and I'm walking I said, "Uh-oh," I said, "something up." And, so, my brother said--my buddy told me, "Be careful when you walk down the street." So, the guy came up to me and he says, "You got a light?" Like that, see. And, the automatic thing is that if you don't know what's happening, well, I didn't smoke, but, you go to your pocket, when you do that, that's it. The guy's behind you, you got your hands like that, and he said, "Give me back my wallet," and he's grabbing your wallet, you know, taking out. People look, thinking, thinking that I robbed him, see, you know what I mean, like that, see. So, what I did is, I kept walking, he walked up to me. I said, "I don't have a match," and I just kept walking right straight through him, just kept going. So, I got down to the corner and I turned around and looked and I could see 'em getting together and they were talking, you know, like that. "Why--you didn't get 'em?" You know like that. Story_ID: 638958 Speaker 1: Another time I remember, I had a date on, I was down at Sugar Ray Robinson's place [Sugar Ray's, New York, New York] there on Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard] and 125th [Street]. And, I had a date that night, I was supposed to go, I'd been, I had saw the Rockettes already. I wanted to see, and they were one of the, the best dancing groups in New York, and so I had a date. And this young lady was a friend of Sidney Poitier, she was a--wait a minute, she was a, Sidney--this young lady was a friend of Sidney Poitier's wife [Juanita Hardy] so we're all going out together. So, what happened was, I went by her place to pick her up and see, I didn't realize that they don't start going out 'til 12:00 getting ready to go. So, I got over there about 11:30, she wasn't ready. So, I went out and I said, "Well," and I walked down to, I went to Sugar Ray's and then I came--and I saw this poolroom. So, I went in and I just sat down for a few minutes and I was looking around and watching in (unclear). And, one of the guys says, "Let's play a game," you know, and I look at the time and I said, "Well I got twenty-five minutes. I'll go and play." So, I went, when I went up there and we shot a couple game for a quarter he says. And, so, I made a mistake. In my back pocket I kept my money in like this see. And so, I wouldn't put it in here, there, there, I put it in my back pocket. So, I just would pull out money like that, see. And, I happened to pull out a little more than I should've and one of the guys was sitting there, see. And, he signaled him, and so, he said, "Let's play a couple more games," you know. And, I look at my watch I said, "I can play a game or two." So, anyway, when all--about fifteen minutes later in walks about six guys and they all sat down there in the seat. And, I'm looking around and I said, "Oh, boy." And, so, I told the guy I wasn't gonna play anymore and I said, I said, "Well, I don't have any money." And, he says, "I saw you pull out a roll." And, I said, "Well, I got a date tonight," you know what I mean, I got to save that see, you know." And, he said, "Oh, okay." So, I guess that's when this guy had signaled the guy to get the--so, when, when they came and they all sat down there, see. And, I said, "Oh, boy. How am I gonna get out of this?" So, I walked to the door and I just looking down the street like that, and I was walking down slow, and all of sudden I just took off as fast as I could. I was running down the street. I got to this intersection and when I got there, the traffic took off in front of me. Here I was, and here they came out of that pool hall and here they come. Then, someone went across the street, some were there, and so. Then, this guy started jogging and he came up behind me. And, I turned around like this (gestures), and I saw him looking down the street, he said, "Did a bus come along here?" And, I said, "I didn't see a bus," like that, see. And, then he took off ahead of me, so they go me in front and the other guys were over on that corner. It's like triangle there, see. And, so, I said, "Oh, how am I gonna get out of this?" So, I was walking across and then I got to the other side, the guy had, he's a store ahead, he stopped and, and then I saw them guys getting ready to come across the street. So, I'm boxed in, see, and so, all of a sudden a cab pulled up and he stopped about that far in front of me, and a person got out. And, they, and when it stopped I ran and see when the cabs take off the door, they have a roof on it, and it shuts like that. I came up under that (laughter), and I was holding on, and, "Hey," and he's, "Oh, I didn't see you." And, he slowed down enough for me to get in and he, and he took off and everybody was coming, running like that, and missed me. He said, no, so he said this, he said, "Look like they was trying to get somebody tonight" (laughter). And, and so, I told the cab driver--he said, "Where you going?" And, I said, "Dropped me off at the corner of 128th Street." See, I didn't tell him my address see because they work together too. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: See, so, I got off there and when I saw him turn around and go back the other way, I just ran three doors down into my apartment building and fell across the bed and started laughing (laughter). So, I didn't make that date (laughter), yeah. Story_ID: 638959 Speaker 1: Did you begin to work there? Did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked in the barbershop there for, for a time. And-- Speaker 1: Do you remember where it was? Speaker 2: Yes, 161st Street and Amsterdam [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And have you ever been to New York [New York]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, well you know where the zoological park [Bronx Zoo, Bronx, New York] is? I was--it was 171st [Street] or so, and I was just down from that. And, all I had to do is get on the "L" [elevated train], come up, up the hill, and then get off and then come up, you know, to the barbershop I worked in. And, it was something I was gonna mention. I was not far from Yankee Stadium [Bronx, New York]. Yeah, that's where--in that area, see. And, so, I, I really, I like it all, but my mother [Martha Moore Stewart] got, became ill and that's when I wen- came on back to, came back to Evanston [Illinois]. Speaker 1: How long did you stay in New York? Speaker 2: Several months. I was trying to think about it because--oh, you know what, I, I know what, I went out there for my brother's wedding. That's what it was, and when I went out there, then I stayed with my, my partner and then I, then I moved into 110th Street, right off from the park. Speaker 1: Central Park [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638960 Speaker 1: You're living in Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Because now you moved from--well, you were working in what's called the Sugar Hill area, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And, so, and then you moved to 110th Street which is-- Speaker 2: But, I, but I was at 110th first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then, then, then up there, you know. Speaker 1: And 110th that's, is that Lexington [Avenue]? Is that near Spanish Harlem [East Harlem, New York, New York] or on the other side of the park [Central Park, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, it was, it's right, you know, I was right on 110th Street and the park was right across the street, see. And then as I come back, I'm trying to get that in my mind, Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], and then as I go up Lenox, it's about a block up, there's Spanish Harlem in there, that area. You know, I didn't know where I was, just walking around, you know. And (laughter), that's really something, you know, as I think about it. Speaker 1: What other nightlife do you remember? You talked about Sugar Ray's [New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Oh, the-- Speaker 1: Small's Paradise [New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: The theater. Speaker 1: Oh, to--the Harlem--the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Apollo. So, I heard about the Apollo. So, I always wanted to go there. And I had a record called 'Second Balcony Jump,' and I didn't know that it came from the fact that, the Harlem, on the second, as you go up to the second, I mean, from the first floor to the second, there was a balcony there. And, and, lot of, lot of the people when they get to swinging they start jazzing up and down, and that whole balcony would, would swing. So, that was the second balcony j- so I, I had gone there, you know, many time to see some of the entertainers, you know. And then, Father Divine [Reverend M.J. Divine] had a place right up the street. And so, they said, "If you, you wanna get something to eat, you just walk up there and say, 'Peace Father.'" So, I went in there, I've been--I had went in there a couple times just to see what it's all about, you know. And then, then, then I, I like to dance so they had the, the--oh, come--what is the name of that place? Speaker 1: The Savoy? The Savory? Speaker 2: Savoy. Yeah, it was the Savoy Ballroom [New York, New York], yeah, and I love to dance, and so, they had, let me see, at that time, they had I guess Erskine Hawkins was, was in there at one time. And there was a, there was a lot of these, these West Indian groups, Bondermere [ph.], and Tito Rodriguez, and Tito Puente, and some of the bands that, that play national. But I've gone there and you can dance from two o'clock 'til two at night (laughter). And so, anyway, I had some fun going there dancing 'cause I love the dancing. So, let's see, I can, I think I know a couple other bands that I, Red Prysock, yeah, he was there. And Tiny Bradshaw (laughter), and some of those guys that I had been hearing about when I was in Chicago [Illinois]. And then I went there and saw--and, then I went to the Brown Bomber, Joe Louis' place [Joe Louis Bar and Restaurant, New York, New York], that was 155th [sic. 125th Street] right, yeah, right on the edge there. Speaker 1: What about Small's Paradise? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Small's, sure, Small's. That, that's when it was Small's then and it came, it was the basketball players took it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wilt Chamberlin. Speaker 2: Yeah. But I went in Small's. And I'll tell you what happened. A guy went in there and I was in there, you know, just visiting. And the guy was talking and so, he said, you know, he was telling one of the guys in there. He said, "I just bought me, you see that Cadillac out in front there?" He said, "I just bought that Cadillac." And the guy said, "Oh, yeah." And he said, "Yeah," see. And so, what had happened was, a guy came in there and caught him a good one, see. And he had the key in his hand see, and says, "Man, I'm short of money." And he says, "I wish somebody just had, just had a few hundred dollars." He said, "I'd sell it right now." He said, "I just need the money." That's the way he was talking. This guy heard him. He was a greenhorn, you know (laughter). He, he, and he said, "Yeah, take a look at it. You need to go out and look at it." And the guy went out and looked and, you know, and he came back in. He said, "You need a couple hundred dollars?" He said, "Yeah, here's the key." So (laughter), the guy, the guy, had gave the money and he said, "Oh, I gotta, I gotta make this appointment here. I guess I'll have to catch a cab." The guy left. And he's out talking and so the gu- people was all in there smirking and all. And so, he said, "Well, let me go in there and try my car" (laughter). He went out there and tried to get the key in the lock. He couldn't get it. He come in there and said, "That key won't lock. Where's that guy?" Everybody was just laughing. And I said, "I was there for that to happen." And he thought he'd bought the car and, and he had, this guy had beat him out of that money. Speaker 1: That money. Speaker 2: That fast. And I remember that from Small's Paradise (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Renaissance [Renaissance Theater and Casino, New York, New York], that was another one. Story_ID: 638961 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, oh, and the Four Deuces [sic. 3 Deuces Jazz Club, New York, New York], downtown. I went to that 'cause--what's the trumpet player, Miles Davis. Miles Davis was down there. And when I went in there, I thought you were gonna have some room to sit down, and you didn't have no room to sit down in there, you had to stand up and listen to them. And Miles was there--I got a chan- 'cause when I heard he was there, that's why I went down there, see. And I, you know, my friend, Sampson [Dean Sampson (ph.)], I helped him to learn to play trumpet while he in service. He turned around and organized his own band. And he wanted me to hang around in it--with it. And I said, "No, I'm not doing that right now." And so, he took me down to the Strand [Strand Theatre, New York, New York] downtown, and Billy May was in there auditioning. And he told me, "Come on in," you know. And so, I went on in and we sat down and listened to him practice. So, Bill Mays says, "Is anybody out there that would like to audition for the band?" He says, "We got, we got some instruments here that you can audition for." And my buddies jumped up and said, "My friend here" (laughter). I said, "What are you doing here?" I hadn't even touched my trumpet in two years (laughter). And so he said, he said, "We'll we got an extra trumpet up here if you'd like to do it." And I looked at them, I said, "What do you do this to me for?" I tell 'em, "I don't wanna--I haven't played. My lips is out of, out of kilter, see." And so, he says, "Well, I know you can play," you know, and all. I said, "Well, I'm not into it right now." So, when they started playing again, Billy May, again, I got up and walked outta there. I said, "No, way." But I used to, you know, King Cole [Nat King Cole], he has a brother name Ike Cole. And when I was in, when I was in North Chicago [Illinois], I met King Cole's father, father and mother. They came in the barbershop that I was working at, at that time. And I met Ike Cole and his brother, we call him Dinky [ph.], he was in high school at that time. And so, we started playing, you know, just a little, like a combo: piano, bass, and trumpet, and sax, you know, like that, see. And so, then when I was in Evanston [Illinois], I'd go down in Chicago, and I played with Red Mitchell. And my dad [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] used to play in the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] and when he played in the Club DeLisa that was, he, that was during the Depression [Great Depression], he played there. I played in it after I came out of [U.S. military] service. I didn't know my dad had played there. And when I played in there, Joe Williams, that's 'Alright, Okay, You Win.' He come in there with a wrinkled suit and he--I mean, he wasn't into anything at that time. And you know, we'd see him and he'd say play. Peg Leg Bates was there. Red Saunders had a band there. And then we'd play on off nights on like Monday nights, you know, like that, see. And so, I remember, I remember when I was playing with these guys. But some of 'em started getting into the drugs. And when they go into it, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't play that so I got out of it. And I've seen some of my--the guys that I've played with in other places, you know. But they were so stoned I didn't--they didn't even know me, you know. And I, you know, and when I think about it, you know, and then, so, then I just started collecting music and I started collecting records. That my father when he was playing, the men that we're playing with him, Speck Redd [Ernest "Speck" Redd, II], they call him Speck Redd in and the records today, well, I mean that was back in the jazz era that they records were out. And they call him Speck, my dad call him Speck. They have him down as Speckle Redd. That's because he was freckled. See, and I didn't know that. And I had, and saw the record but I said, "I don't know who this guy is," you know what I mean. And it, it was just, it was just so strange. So, Ike Cole, he wouldn't play with his brother, you know, where his brother played, King Cole. He played in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and in that area, see. So, I'd introduce, introduced him to his wife [Margie Cole] who he's still married to. So, he came out here about five years ago. So, my wife [Johnnie Mae Stewart]--when I saw he was in town, at the El Chapultepec [Denver, Colorado]. I told 'em, "We ought to go down and see him." And I said, "I used to play with him." My wife's a singer. So, he says, "Oh," and she just kind of laughed, you know, 'cause it's King Cole's brother, see. So, I says, "I'll bet you, you don't believe me." And she just kind of laughed. So, we went on down, and he was playing. But he wasn't--when we came in he was on a break. So, I went in and I said, "Oh, gosh, we missed him." And so one of the guys said, "Oh, he's in the back. He's eating with the owner." So, I went on back and they was sitting in the kitchen area, and he had his back to me. So, he was talking to the owner. And so, I said to my wife, I said, "Watch this." I said, "Is the fat man here?" He, he's heavy, see, and he just did like this. "Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Stewart]," he said, he jumps up. He came back and he said, "How long it's been, thirty years?" (Laughter) It was that long. And he, he, he played, he dedicated some music to us and he gave me his card. I have it around with his photograph on. He still has his group, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I just wanted to get that in. Speaker 2: All right. Story_ID: 638962 Speaker 1: So, now, you stay in New York [New York] and then you go back to Evanston [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a barbershop in Evanston? Speaker 2: Right after that, a man that had gone to school with my mother [Martha Moore Stewart], their barber had died, and so, when I heard about it, I jumped right at him. And he said since he knew my mother, you know, they had gone to school together, I got the job--the shop. I opened that shop, see. And then I, this, I hung around there and then I went, I left and let's see. I went up, I went up to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], I went up to Milwaukee, that's what I did. And while I was up there, I wanted to see, see Billie Holiday when she was up there. That was her last year that she was there. And when I went up there, she was at the Moon Glow [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. That is what it was. And I, I was always a favorite of her and, let's see Pres-- oh, can't even call his name this quick. But he, he named her Lady, Lady Day, and she named him Pres--Presi--oh, I can't even call his name. I'm seeing this face, but, all those--when I was in Chicago [Illinois], all of those musicians I met, you know what I mean, and all, I knew some that are on top today that, that we played with in the combo. So, I see, you giving the sign, okay. Speaker 1: So, talk to me about what happens nex- so, you have this barbershop and you go to Milwaukee just to visit or do you set up shop there? Speaker 2: I went up there to open a barbershop in, in, what I did is, when I went to, went up there, I went up to--oh, from North Chicago [Illinois], from North Chicago, see I as in that area why--there was, I heard they needed a barber in Wisconsin. Wisconsin, yeah, where was that? It's a pres- I mean, the capital up there, I can't think of the name. Oh, I should remember--but, see, Milwaukee, I ended up, I ended up working in Milwaukee at the, I almost called his name, on Walnut [Street]. And I worked there for a while then I, then I went down to, let's see, what was this place? Let's see. In--can't even call it--Wisconsin. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Madison [Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: That's funny-- Speaker 1: Was it Madison? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Madison. Speaker 2: That's was, that was where I was going, wanted to go to open the barbershop. They didn't have a barber up there and they needed a barber. So, when I went up there (laughter), I got up there and it was ten below zero [degrees]. And so, I was talking to, to this man, and you know, just getting sort of a feel for the area, and over there, over the radio it said, "It'll be forty below tonight." I said, "No way." I told, told the man, "Thanks for--," 'cause you know, he was trying to get me to come up and open a shop there 'cause I'd taken the state--what was this other place, I can't think of it. But he was trying to take--get me to come up there, 'cause they didn't have any barbers up there. So, I said, "That would be good." But when I said the forty below, I said, "No, I'm not gonna do that." I was trying to call, they make, they made, they made, you know, automobiles. And I'm trying to think--it's that something why I can't think of that place. Speaker 1: Well, it'll come to you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, actually, in the 1950s you really had different barbershops in different locations. Speaker 2: Yeah. See, that's what I did. Speaker 1: So, it-- Speaker 2: And, I wanted to travel, you know, and go to the different places. And I took the state board, took, and when I went to New York, I actually was one of the top, top grades for that and Wisconsin, you know what I mean. And so, you know, I was kind of happy, you know, but the weather, that weather boy. I had a house on the lake. I was a block off of the lake. And when my, when my, and when I--Nash, Nash, that was where I ended. So, in between I worked at Nash Rambler [Nash Motors Company] assembly line, you know, and (cough) then I, and then I would work at the barbershop on Saturday's, you know what I mean. And when it got so cold, my car kept saying, "Unh-uh, unh-uh, unh-uh," and I said, "No way. I'm not gonna live up here," you know. I had to run, I remember one time I had to run to catch a bus to catch a train to, to the Rambler place, you know and so. Story_ID: 638963 Speaker 1: So, in the 1960s, is that when you come to Denver [Colorado]? Speaker 2: Yes, I came here in sixty--'62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me about what happened when you came to Denver? Speaker 2: When I came here, I came to visit, like--well, I came for the Olympics, that's what I really came for because I was into sports. I collect everything like in terms of sports. And so, it just happened that one of the guy--I didn't mention this but in high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Iowa], I was a track star. And I, they had--we took state and then Drake Relays. Drake Relays goes to the Penn [Penn Relays]. The Penn is one of the top in the--and, so, anyway, when I--see from with the track, see, I went, you know, from high school, then I went in the [U.S. military] service and I met some of these, these guys that were runner, good runners, you know. And one of the guys that, this white boy that when, that we, when we took state, Lee Haufaker [ph.] was his name, and he was miler; he was farm boy. But when--I was miler, half mailer, quarter miler and that's the races that I, that I was into. So, anyway, when I went into service, I met some of these guys, Reginal--Reggie Pearman, and Mal Haufaker--no, no, wait a minute. Lee Haufaker was who I was, who I was in school with. But Mal Whitfield, and Reggie Pearman, I met these guys. And so, when they had, they had the, they had the Olympic tryouts in Evanston [Illinois] where I was living. And so, I got a chance to see these guys, you know. And my good--this is for--the white boy Mel Whit--I mean, yeah, yeah, Lee Haufaker was running out there. And I said, "Wow," I said, he's in the Olympic tryouts. So, I went, so I went there, and when I saw him I told him, I said, "Listen," and he's one of these guys, he could run five and six miles. These first--he warms up on a mile. And then a half-mile, he's, he's, you know, he's mediocre, see. So, I, what I did is, you know what I mean, I was a--I ran the, the quarter and the half. And so, he would run, he--we'd run the relay, when we run the relay, he'd run, when we run the four times, see. So, he's out there running the, the half-mile, and I told him, I say, "Don't lay back." He's, he comes in with a late sprint. So what happens was, yeah, when I saw him running, he, he did the same thing he did, you know, which he should've done when he was running the mile relay. So, he, he lost out. But I saw all of these other pla--guys that went on to the, to the Olympic tryouts. So, when I came here, I came here to also see these men, and then see my cousin [Earl Mann]. And then after I came here and I like it, and then I got a place, bought a house and then I later-- Speaker 1: So, you really liked it that much that you decided to move? Speaker 2: 'Cause the weather. Speaker 1: Because of the weather, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. I left Chicago [Illinois] and the hawk was running wild there (laughter). And I come here it was just like that out there. And I said, "Oh, this is where I wanna be." So, then-- Speaker 1: So was your cousin the one that was showing you around when you noticed cowboys? Speaker 2: Was--? What he did is, he was showing me different areas here. And when he showed me, you know, you know, I, I said, "Maybe I'll like to rent out here." And then, then, and then I, you know, eventually I saw that I wanted to live out here. See, 'cause houses was high in the Chicago area, and then here, you know, they were low, you know. And I saw I could buy a business, you know, cheaper, see. And so, anyway, when he was showing me around, you know, and I, I mean he sold me, he sold me on Denver. Story_ID: 638964 Speaker 1: And so, after I came out here [Denver, Colorado] it was like it was a turning point, you know, for me, you know. And then after--and then I was meeting these men that had been retired and had been, well let's I just say the councilmen and all that, and he would introduce me to these men. And there's a picture I wanna show you hopefully before you leave, of Strom Thurmond's son that was out here. And I didn't--and he told me that at the Owl's Club [Owl Club of Denver], they had the Owl Club and I was sitting there. And I said, I was looking at all these men, I said, "What's that white guy doing over here?" And he just said, like this, you know, and he says, "After, I'll talk to you later." So, I got back to the house and he told me, he said, "That's Strom Thurmond's son." And he sent him out here, you know what I mean, so that he could get a better, a better way of living. And so, he worked for one of the oil companies, you know. And so, I, you know, I didn't realize it. So, I found a lot of that out here that people don't know, you know. Speaker 2: The interracial-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --children. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, I'll, I'll show you his picture. Speaker 2: But, what is the Owls Club before we go on? Speaker 1: Owls Club was a black men's club, it's you know, a club that they had formed, you know, for, well, just, just, men that in the businesses and such, see, you know. And so, these men were had accumulated things and so they just got a club together of the sorts, see. Speaker 2: Okay. And something like, well, it was different than the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] type organization? Speaker 1: Even the fraternal guys would be members of the-- Speaker 2: They would be members of the Owls Club? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 638965 Speaker 1: So, when do you notice your first cowboy, your first black cowboy (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, that was, when I, when I was looking around the town then, and I look at one end, then it took, and we went over to this other end and I--we turned this corner, and I saw this tall black man with a cowboy hat on, his boots, and he had his chaps, and spurs. See, you can wear guns on your, on your hip as long as you didn't have any bullets in the cylinders, see. And I had looked and then I said, said to him, "Look at that drugstore cowboy over there. Who's he trying to fool? There's no black cowboys." And Earl [Earl Mann] was eighty--he, he was about eighty-one years old at that time. And he turned around really slow and he looked and he said, "Well, yes Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Stewart], he's a cowboy. In fact, he has a ranch outside of Denver [Colorado], has horses, and cattle, used to ride on the trails in the early days, been around Denver for years." Boy, when I looked at that, I mean, that really turned me around boy, and from that time on. After I came out here and then I bought a barbershop. And then, it was a mixed shop, you know, it was Spanish, whites, African Americans, Indians [Native Americans] and all. And so, I'm trying to find out about cowboys. So, I'd ask these, these guys and similar, and the old men that would come in says, "Yeah, my dad used to mine up here in Cripple Creek [Colorado]. Yeah, back in 1890." "What?" you know. "My dad had a ranch out here, or down in, outside of Pueblo [Colorado]." I said, "You got any pictures?" And he said, "Yeah, I'll bring some back when I come." And that's the kind of shop I had. I had pictures on the wall, you know, of miners. I had pictures of cowboys, ranchers, bull riders. I had musicians. I had a rack in the back there with records from the, from the blues on up. Uh-oh, that's my (background noise). Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, yes, and in the--and (unclear) and these men would come in and some of their fathers had been, had ranches and then they had, and some had lived, lived in the south but they moved up here and then they worked on ranches, you know, up in Wyoming and such. And to find that out and then having pictures to show this type of thing. And then so it became a focal point and people started coming from all walks of life, you know, they come in and, and they would share information with me. Story_ID: 638966 Speaker 1: Then later on, I opened up a, a museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado] in, in the old Clayton College [Clayton College for Boys, Denver, Colorado]. But prior to that, I opened it up in a saloon, an old saloon. It was on 21st [Street]. It was, let's see, it was on, yeah, 21st Street, 221 21st Street, that's what it was, in an old saloon. And it--but, it was owned by a white person, you know what I mean. And all the glass windows were down in the basement and all like that. And when I opened that up, you know, and then-- Speaker 2: So, you rented the space there? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. And this was about 1971? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: And, and then, then after that, they, the, they took over the whole block and they turned it into a housing area. Speaker 2: So, it's urban renewal was happening? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what it was, urban renewal, see. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, then I opened up in another, another area, it was a doctor. A doctor had, had his office and I--when we opened the basement up, Dr. Bookhardt [ph.] and we had the collection there for a while. And then the, the next place was the Clayton College. Speaker 2: That's Denver, okay, Denver Clayton College. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, you had-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I was there about ten years, I guess. And it was in a school for boys they had been. Now, this man, Clayton had opened this up in the 1880s. There's a whole, it's a whole, it covers a whole three block area. It still is standing, you know. And I had, had the collection there, you know. And then I went to the Five Points area [Denver, Colorado]. And when I was in Five Points, why I was there for a time and then somebody came up with this home of Dr. Justina Ford. Story_ID: 638967 Speaker 1: --Before you go to, to Five Points area [Denver, Colorado], you're at Denver Clayton College [Clayton College for Boys, Denver, Colorado]. And, you said that this was a school for, for boys. Speaker 2: Yeah, wayward boys. Speaker 1: It was a school for--wayward boys, I see. And, what was the reason why? 'Cause you said you were--the museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado] was there for ten years. Why did you leave? Speaker 2: Okay. What it was is, there was person that was over the whole thing, you know, controlling the buildings and everything like that. Well, what happened was, this person, there was conflict with the person that owned it. Really, you know, it was just like, it was--at least, when I, when I, I was still in the barbershop this group, there was a dance group and they took, they were having dances and said, "Why don't you share this building, this part with us, because there's a space here and you could have the other space?" See, the building that we were in. Well, anyway, that group, they moved out and another person, they came in and took over the running of the particular building that we were in. But, something came up in it. And, I don't, I never did find out, but we, we had to find a place. Speaker 1: But wasn't it hard for people to find the museum? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. You know, because, see, we're away from town and, but on the way to the airport, you know, if you were coming from the airport [Denver International Airport, Denver, Colorado] and going into town, you know, you, you'd pass it but you couldn't see it, you know, right away. It was back of another building. And, so, that, that made it, made it difficult. Because I had, well, I like, 'The Today Show' ['Today'], 'CBS Morning News' ['CBS4 Morning News'] with Charles Koval [ph.], six o'clock news, Roger Moore [ph.]--they came out looking for the place, you know, to film me because I have tapes on that, see. And, they, "Well, how do we get to it?" You know what I mean, like that. And, then if we look up we see the cameras like he's coming and all that. You could see 'em off, you know, would see him, and then we knew they were, they were there and so that was, that was, it was difficult to find them, when you, when you say that-- Story_ID: 638968 Speaker 1: But now, where it is now [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado], it's not hard to find, you know, because it's right at the end of the light rail. And you just take the light rail from downtown, stop and walk across the street, and there it is, see, you know. And, so, that made it-- Speaker 2: So, it's much easier and, and the building that it's housed in is, it was a black female, she was the first black male--black female physician--? Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: In Colorado? What was her name? Speaker 1: Justina Ford. Yeah, Dr. Justina Ford. And, she was, she's from Illinois. She was, she was in Galesburg [Illinois]. You know where that is young man? Galesburg. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I, don't know. Speaker 1: No. Okay. Anyway, but, she wanted to be, she wanted to be a doctor when she was a little girl and when her, when her mother be fixing the chicken, she wanted to cut the chicken up and she wanted the heart and the liver and lungs and all. And, then later she went, she went to nursing school. And, then after nursing school, then she met this, this black doctor and he helped to finance her to Hering medical school [Hering Medical College] in Chicago [Illinois]. Well, people, you know a lot of 'em don't know that. They know that somewhat but, but they thought the family did it. But, he was, he helped her and then she worked with him for five years and after working with him, he died from a rare brain disorder. His brain turned to stone, and, so, anyway, she took over his patients. She was a heart physician; Cotto [ph.], Dr. Cotto was his name. And, so, after working with him she got, got her really a good start because he had a profession, see. And, so, she took over his, his working and then she delivered seven thousand babies of all nationalities and spoke eleven languages fluently. And so, I have met in the schools, when I'm out in the schools, white teachers, Spanish teachers, Jewish, one of 'em told me, she said, "Mr. Stewart [HistoryMaker Paul Stewart], my, I think my father, Dr. Ford delivered my father." So, I went back to the high school, she said, "You know, I asked my dad." And, she said, "Yeah, he delivered my father and six other brothers and sisters that I had. But, I wasn't the one--I was the one that wasn't delivered by her." And she brought me the certificate of his that--and, what was so interesting, see people didn't have money during that time. And, they had people come from Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia and Ireland and all, poor people. And when they came to Denver [Colorado], see they didn't have money, to have a child being born, so they'd go to her, and she delivered the child and they said, "Well, I don't have any money." And, she said, "Well, when you get some money, bring it." And they'd bring her a basket of apples, or carrots, potatoes, cabbage, you know, bags of food to pay for her, for their, their treatment, you know. One, one young lady, a Spanish young lady, she was thirteen years old, and she was delivered by Dr. Ford, and so, she went to California. But while she was in California, she got pregnant again. She got pregnant, she call for Dr. Ford and said, "I'm having a baby, and I want you to deliver it," see. And she say, "I'm gonna come back," you know, "and, I want you to deliver it." And see in that time women were skeptical about men putting their hand on 'em. But, a woman it wasn't bad. So, that, you know, so women not only just, just, just African Americans but women period, you know. And so, another doctor, a white doctor, one year before her, they were good friends. And, this is the story. A white doc- a white farmer up in the mountains sent for Dr. Ford to come up and deliver his wife's baby. So, Dr. Ford didn't drive automobile, but she, she'd take a cab or a horse and wagon. So, this lady took her up to the mountains, you know. And, so, when they got up there, this man was standing there with a shotgun and so he said, "My wife is inside there." And so, he said, "And, you better do a good job or I'm gonna use this on you." So, both of them went in and they delivered the child and when they, when they came out, he went in. He said, "You know you did a good job." He says, "I might let you work on me." They said, "Yeah." And they said, "We might have to use that on you too." (Laughter) And so they told me that story. Story_ID: 638969 Speaker 1: So, tell me about the museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado]. Let's talk more, let's talk about it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell me the type of items that are there. I understand there's probably more than thirty-five thousand items. Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there items like, in the book I was showing you, you saw the buffalo coat, the baldy Walter Jackson who rode with the Sundance Kid. I got the tail end of it. He was in his nineties. And, he, I saw an article on him and then some people that come down from Wyoming knew him up there. And, so, he, he went up there in the early days, and he used to wear this buffalo coat, summer and winter, no matter how hot it was. And, he started ranching and he, the Sundance Kid, he was a bandito, outlaw (laughter). And, so, these guys all they get together and they, like I say, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen years old, you know. And, it wasn't unusual for 'em to go and rob a bank or so, you know. And, so, anyway, the story he told was that, one night he was with his gang and they were in a bar--they called them saloons in those days--and they said, "Let's go in this next town up here and there's a, there's a bank we wanna, we gonna rob." And, so, he said, "Well, I'll think about it." And, so, what happened, an old timer was in the bar and he heard 'em talking. And, so, and the guys went over to the side and he said, "Son, I wouldn't do that if I was you," you know. He said, "Might ha- something might bad happened to you." And, he said, "I'm just gonna tell you in front." So, he didn't go out with 'em that night. When they went to the next town, they were all killed. So, that turned him around. And, so, anyway, then he started, started breaking horses and riding. And, they did a movie on him. Speaker 1: And, who is this we're talking about? Speaker 2: Walter Jackson. Speaker 1: Walter Jackson. Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I'm sorry I didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. And, there's a picture of him down in the museum by his coat. His coat is down there. And (laughter), and, so, anyway, he stayed up in, in Wyoming for quite a while and then, then like I just said, he, he died. But what was interesting was, he had a mail order bride. And, see in those days, you know, it wasn't many women around. So, he sent for this young lady to come from New York [New York]. And she came on the stage coach and when she got off he was standing over to the side. And when she, when she saw him over there, and she said (laughter), he says--she said, "I'm not gonna marry you. You're too ugly." He said, "Well, you're gonna have to get some money to go back 'cause I'm not gonna pay for your way back." So, she ended up there with him (laughter). And, I thought, "She couldn't leave" (laughter). But, but, there's a picture of him with his coat on, then I have the coat down there below, you know. Story_ID: 638970 Speaker 1: I understand you have--is there are documents of the Younger brothers. Who are the Younger brothers (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Younger brothers were a bandit gang. They were like, Jesse James. Jesse James was an outlaw. He took form the rich and gave to the poor. And, so, I, and I have some--so the black families that related to him. And, in fact, there's a young white fellow that's been working with me, he was a teacher in the schools. And, after I, I went up there and I was lecturing, and I was telling him about family. He says, "Well, that's part of my family." He brought his kids down there to see him. And, then he said, he just talked two years ago to his, to an uncle, he's about ninety-something. And, he said, he and said, he, "His last wife was black," you know. And so, they were mixture, and I talked to a lady that came down, I have bowie knife and mustache cup that was giving to me by the black family. And, when I went, you know, talking to them, they're very fair skinned, see. And so, a lady came up to interview me from, from Texas. And she was with the newspaper. And so, I was showing--giving her a tour through the museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado] and I showed her the mustache cup and the, and the bowie knife, and then she kind of laughed and she says, she says, "Well, what you're saying," she says, "I am," part of Texas she was talking about, she said, "Amarillo [Texas], 90 percent of the people in there are, are Youngers." And, so, what you're saying is, you know, is not too far off wrong. And, then two girls came from California and I, and they were two--with two black fellows and I, you know, they, well, they probably were Indians [Native Americans], see. And, so, I said--and one of the girls was calling her sister back and they were point at bowie knife and the mustache up. And, I said, "Yes." I said, "Youngers." They said, "We're Youngers." I said, "Oh, is that right?" She said, "Yeah. My mother," you know, and they were, you know, we were talking. They were Youngers. And so, a lawyer, one of our top black lawyers in here is a Younger, and he's got information on the Youngers. And, then I have, and I interviewed a family down in Colorado Springs [Colorado], Mr. Gudgel [William Gudgel]; and, Mr. Gudgel, when I interviewed him is was ninety, ninety-four years old, okay. He was an early miner. I have a picture of his mine, mining company and all. And, then his wife--his mother was a nurse, one of the first black nurses down there. They're all very, they're the color of him. And, so, they had a picture of her mother, his, his mother's mother. And, when I saw the picture I didn't know anything about that, the mother, but here this is her mother, okay. "She was a slave," he said. So, I came up to Denver [Colorado] and I was interviewing the Williams family. And, I was talking to this man, I looked over on the wall and I saw this picture. It was a drawing actually and I looked at that and I said, "Do you know this lady here?" And, this guy was musician. He said, "Oh, yeah." And, he told me the name. I said, "Do you know anybody in Colorado Springs?" He said, "Oh, yeah. I got an uncle down there, Mr. Gudgel." I said, "You're related to him?" And, he said, "Yeah." And, he said, and when he got to talking he says, "She's a Younger." I said, "Younger?" Now, the man didn't tell me that. But, here I had a picture on the wall; she was a Younger. And so, here I am finding out the mixture. But, what was interesting when I was in the barbershop, a white man came by, you know, and he was cust- he came by and got his hair cut. And, he saw all these pictures I have on the wall and he said, "Well, let me show you a picture I have at home." He came back. Here's a picture of Jesse James. They're on a porch. The men are all around him. A black man is sitting on the, on the railing there, and another man is standing right there beside him, black. At that time, I wasn't aware. And, then, see if I got a c- got a copy of the picture, I would've had (background noise) that information. Story_ID: 638971 Speaker 1: The information about Jesse James and the Younger brothers, but what other items are there [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado]? I know there's the--about Bill Pickett, and Mary Fields, that was something that was interesting. Tell me about her (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Mary Fields, Mary Fields was born in Tennessee and she was going to a Catholic school there. And, when she was about thirteen or fourteen years old, she was pretty big for her age, and she got into an argument with a janitor and she beat him up pretty badly. So, they kicked her out of school. Said, "You can't beat up the teachers" (laughter). So, anyway, she got a job driving teams of six and eight horses, hauling. They cut down trees, sawmill and she'd haul these, she'd haul 'em, haul these trees from the woods to the sawmill. And, they, they'd cut 'em up. And, that, that was her job; cutting, carrying 'em. But then they found out she was pretty good with the shotgun. And, so, they hired her as riding shotgun on the stagecoach. So, she'd sit up beside the driver and as they would drive along their way, if somebody come to rob the stage, she'd just shoot 'em off the horse, see. And, so, what happened one night, she was driving the teams of, and they was driving the horses and he got sick. So, he came into the next stop and says, "I can't go any further." And, he says, "Somebody else is gonna have to take this stage." So, anyway, they, she said, "I'll tell you what, I'll take it to the next stop, which is twenty miles away. But, I'm not going any further." So, they, then she helped them load up the stage and then she took the stage and going from the one area to the other, which is twenty miles. But, take in consideration, there's no moon out there at night and if you don't have the moon, you gotta see how you're gonna see the way. And, the horses are the ones that knew the up there. So, she turned 'em a loose and she was driving them at a considerable speed. She got five miles to the--away, she turned the bend in the road and there was a big boulder out in front of the, the stage. And, she turned the horses, swerved 'em to keep from running into the sta- running into the rock and the stage hit it and threw the mail off on the ground. The mail was just coming down like that. And, she off there, got up and started picking up the mail. And, all of a sudden it turned dark and out of the woods came the wolves. And, they would leap at her, and she'd take that shotgun and hit 'em across the head, in the teeth and all. And, see, when they, when you hit 'em in teeth, they--a lot of time it doesn't break all the way so they're shock. And, then what they wanna do, they wanna hook you. When they smell that blood, it's too bad for you. But she, she kept on laboring and then the lights started coming through the trees. And, when saw this light, they don't like to attack in the daytime, so they slunk off into the, the distance. And, she picked up the mail, through the mail sack across her shoulder, walked the remaining fifteen miles into town, threw the mail sack across the desk and told the man, "I'm tired. I'm gonna get me some sleep, I've been fighting wolves all night." And, so (laughter), that was the continuation there, but she, she was one of the early mail, mail coach drivers out here. Story_ID: 638972 Speaker 1: And, of course, there's information about the Buffalo Soldiers, and it's very interesting about how the Buffalo Soldiers-- Speaker 2: Got their name (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Got their name. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you know, well, one of the basic ones is because the black man's hair is like the buffalo. We have, if you see the buffalo coat, you'll see it's different grades of hair in the buffalo, see. The Indians [Native Americans] saw him and they said, "Well, he has hair like the buffalo." The other things was, when the, the men would get after the Indian, the Buffalo Soldier, and get after the Indian. They'd trail them through the coldest weather to the hot weather. No matter where he go, they wouldn't--they're relentless. And, so, they said, "Well, we can't get away from him," you know. And then a buffalo can stand out on the, on the, in the weather all winter. He doesn't go in shelter. The only thing that keeps him there is that oil, that thick oil that he has in--under his hid. So, he, they says, "He's tough like the buffalo." And, then when they'd fight 'em, boy (laughter), they said, "He ain't giving up." So, they said, "They just surrendered and go on back." So, that was one of the reasons they called 'em, because they were really, they were tough. Speaker 1: What other items are, that we can see at the, at the museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 2: Well, we also, they've been changing the--well, listen I have Civil War. I have Civil War uniforms. I have the guns, Civil War, bayonets. I have the boots, you know, in such I have Spanish American War, these pictures that go along with them, Spanish American War soldiers' bayonets. I have uniforms. The uniforms of the Buffalo Soldiers I have. I have also uniforms of World War I [WWI] and the hats, and the accoutrements. Then I have in there items that belong to some of the early pioneers. The old black pots that they cooked in. You know, I have some of the biscuits makers made out or iron that they--you put those in. I have, well, I have to try to think the type of plates that they used at that particular time. The little sewing machine. One of the young ladies said she used when she was a little girl. Her mother had a big sewing machine. She had a little small one. I have some of the clothes that we used, the bonnets that they had. The shoes that the pioneers used. I have some of the, the, yeah, I have some of the guns that the people, the pioneers used. I have plows, the single plows that they used to pull--to plow like that, the single ones. And, then I have the big ones, you know, that the horses pull. I have seeders, you put your seeder--your seeds in and you push in down in the ground and then you push the handle and the seeds come out the bottom. And, you walk along and you do the seeding that way. I have the old ice picks, you know, that they used, you know. Story_ID: 638973 Speaker 1: How did you acquire all of these artifacts (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What it is, is just like this, I go to people's house and I get to talking to 'em. And, after I talk to 'em a while, they say, "You know, I got something that you might be interested in." And, they'd come out with this, you know, a pair of leather shoes as their mother buttoned up, you know, or grandmother. And, you know, "Can you think you can use those in the museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado]?" Or, they'll have, well, let's see, I have to think of the dishes, the kind of dishes, the cups, the spotted, the cups that they used to drink out of, ice picks. Speaker 1: So people just have you these items. Speaker 2: And, sometimes I bought them from other places. I go to antique places and I knew that these things were, you know, that they would go along with museum items. So, then I would get those, you know, like that. And, I'd, I'd buy 'em myself, see. And, when I first started out, I was buying things because I like that, the western, you know. Oh, this, you know, old ice tongues. Yeah, I never saw nothing like this, you know, and it's before you knew it, you know, I was getting the unusual things, you know, when you go in there. And, then when people come in, and then, and now there the southern people said, "Yeah, I used to use that tongue to help my father plow (laughter), and plow. You ever seem 'em? Yes, you know what I'm talking about. Yeah, you had to put your (laughter)-- Speaker 1: I've seen it. I've never. Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I'm just saying, you know, you knew what I was saying. So, they would-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --identify, so. Speaker 1: So, what-- Speaker 2: Photographs of towns, black towns that you didn't even know they were around but they're out here in the west, see, you know. And, then like I showed you, the picture that of the lady [Mary Fields] they had the mail--this mail, first mail route outside here, fifty miles from here. And, their daughter--you know, I said, the stagecoach used to come down, you know, that type of thing. A lot of people that--in the area, they don't even know it, you know, because I, I got, I got some picture of the first black settlement, Dearfield [Colorado]. I got a book on it, and I went up there and I interviewed this lady. And, this lady, one of the lady's up there, she said, "I was Marcus Garvey's teacher in Denver [Colorado]. I was a school teacher." I got pictures of her when she got married up there. And, and then how she was telling me how she used to ride on horseback. And, she'd take her dog and, but, snowdrifts would be that deep. And, and she'd spot a jackrabbit and boom know him off. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, the dog go get 'em, bring him over, and she'd throw him on the horse, and they keep on. And, then she made sausage, sausage. I didn't know they made sausage out of jackrabbit; it was sage, see. And, then she'd sell it to the white neighbors. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah, see, so. There's so much that I can get into and I see you-- Speaker 1: I know. Story_ID: 638974 Speaker 1: But what's unusual about the museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado] is that the items are out on display so you can actually--they're not behind glass like in some-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: --in some museums you can't touch anything-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or see anything. But, that's a unique feature of a museum. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know, to close to it, you know. But, we, when the kids come up there, you have to keep them off it-- Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause they, they wanna get into it, you know. Speaker 1: So, the museum does other things also. I know the museum is opened seven days a week. Is that right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, not anymore? Speaker 2: It's Tuesday, Tuesday through Saturday. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Saturday it's a Mon- Tuesday is ten to two [o'clock], to, to Friday. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then Saturday it's ten to five. Speaker 1: Do you still have the Emancipation Proclamation ceremony, or celebration at the museum? Speaker 2: You're talking about the, the, the (laughter), I know, I can't even call it. But, I know what you're talking about, it's the text--I can't even, I can't even say what it is. Speaker 1: Oh, I just thought that the museum was sponsored something like that? Speaker 2: No, it's Juneteenth. Juneteenth, and that's celebrating the, well, you know, that when the blacks found out they were free. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, and so, actually that really came out of Texas. And then when Texas started then we, we also adopted it, see. Speaker 1: Right. So, is that something that the museum does every year, or is that--? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, we participate in that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And, I know you have-- Speaker 2: And, the rodeo. Speaker 1: A youth--oh, a rodeo? Speaker 2: Yeah. Bill Pickett. Yeah, Bill Pickett Rodeo [Bill Pickett Invitational Rodeo]. That started from the museum. And, then, when this guy found it out then he started, you know, affiliating us with it, then bring these groups from Texas and Oklahoma coming up ridding those bulls, and broncos and all that, you know (laughter). And, people come even when they--we had the museum convention of all the black museums in the United States, and they came out here, and they came out just in time for that rodeo. Boy, they--that's all they talk about (laughter). Speaker 1: You also have, the museum is responsible for a youth writing contest. Speaker 2: Yes. They, what they do--oh, I had something here, I take it out to the schools and it's a, a picture of some cowboys and I'm on the picture. And, what it is, is that kids color it and then when they, they take it to, to the organizations that are named on there and they can win a prize if it's all right. Story_ID: 638975 Speaker 1: And you have written three books. Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact, I have another small book that I helped to write. And, there's one that I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You say her, who is her? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You said that I helped her write. Who is her? Speaker 2: When I say that, this is a, it's this book for the schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, what they did is, they did, they did a book on African Americans, Japanese, kids with special needs, you know, Chinese like that, see. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Indians [Native Americans], you know. So, I have a book here that I helped write, and is a write up on-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Me in there, and on Madam Walker (laughter). And, people come here and when I say, well, they didn't know that she got her start here. She worked at--we have in the museum, the old YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] building, she used to fix her, her concoction of hair creams, hand creams, face creams, upstairs. They rented that out to her. And, it say, Colored YMCA. I got a picture of that, see, you know. And, when people come here, they're not aware. She lived in the 1800 block down, downtown. It's downtown now, it's not in the Five Points area [Denver, Colorado]. And, see, in her room that's where she started fixing her concoctions. And, then, and then later on, she went to, to Indianapolis [Indiana] and opened her a factory. I had a photograph and I, and I really shouldn't've gotten rid of it. I thought it said, C.J. Walker [Madam C.J. Walker]. But, it was written in Old English. And, his granddaughter, I mean, her granddaughter called me and she wanted, you know, to know some information on her. And, I, and that picture, I had it but--it's just like when you're writing, you know, maybe it might've been another initial. But, nobody had really have a picture of C--of him, C.J. Walker. See, and, I, and I think about it, and I say, "Oh, boy. I should never have gotten--," I interviewed another lady that went to school with Madam Walker down in, at down in (Unclear) College. I have a picture of her, they went together, you know, together. And, she was telling me about her, you know. But, you don't think you're gonna run into these people, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People. Right. Story_ID: 638976 Speaker 1: Somebody else in your book was E.J. Sunderland [ph.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Sunderland. Speaker 1: Sunderland. Speaker 2: Yeah, E.J. Sunderland, he was a, his father was a rich, a cotton planter in Louisiana. And, he had two families. A black family and a white family. Well, when he divorced his white wife, he moved in and had, had seven children by his black family. And, he's one of the families. So, the white family when he died, he left everything to the black family. And, the white family said, "He's our father, too." So, they split the money up so he released--he received twenty-five thousand dollars of he estate, when to New York [New York], opened up a business. We never knew what--we don't know what the business was. But, while he was there, he heard about the '49er [1949] gold strike in California. He sailed by boat from New York around the tip of South America to San Francisco [California] where he mined gold with the 49ers and became very wealthy. After the gold craves was over, he sailed back to, to New York. And, then he heard about the gold strike in Colorado. He came across from New York in a stagecoach 'cause they couldn't tell who he was. And, and he went up into, into Leadville [Colorado] and he struck it rich up there. Came down here, opened up a bath house, barbershop, and saloon down in LoDo in the Lower Downtown area [Denver, Colorado]. And, also, he, he had a, let's see, in eighteen--let's see, in 1880 he was worth three hundred thousand dollars at that time. And, what he did is, there's a saloon downtown, I have a picture of it, I can't find it right now, but it was one that he owned. But I have in the early books that they, picture they--there's a picture of E.J. Sunderland's bathhouse. But, in the, in my closet I have his diamond dust mirror. It's that tall. You'll see it before you leave. Speaker 1: Okay. So, there, there are just-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm just saying, you know, you're making me-- Speaker 1: Right, I'm making you think of all of these things and there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's so many other people that we didn't information on about like, Ferdinand Shavers. Speaker 2: Yeah, who was [President] Abraham Lincoln's bodyguard. Speaker 1: Didn't know he was-- Speaker 2: Born in-- Speaker 1: Didn't know he was black. Speaker 2: Born in--you wanna know about it? Speaker 1: Well, yeah, you can tell us. Speaker 2: Born in Mendota, Illinois in 1823. He joined up with Abraham Lincoln in Springfield, Illinois. And, he became his first selected bodyguard. He, I, we, a friend of mine has his gold watch, his diamond stickpin, his emerald stickpin, his medals and badges from the Civil War, scissors, combs and razors that he used on Abraham Lincoln. And, I went up to Gunnison [Colorado], and found them in a trunk. And, when I brought 'em down here, I had 'em in the museum [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado], you know, and I thought it was just, you know, too much. So, a friend of mine has these things and he's keeping 'em for me. I have paintings of his, and I have pictures of his. And, he, he, I have upstairs, I have his--a card that says on it, "Ferdinand Shavers," he was--it says, "First selected bodyguard of Abraham Lincoln." And, what it says is that he was the recruiting officer for the colored troops for the State of Indiana, 1863. So, people ask me, "Where was he when Lincoln got killed?" Hear he got killed, you know, you should've been there. And, when I show them that card, he wasn't there then. See, in '65 [1965] that's when he, you know, but I have the first one with his picture on it and you--in that book there, that Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D.C.], they said, they stayed out here a while (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, it took them all week to get all of this information. Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying, it's really there. That's why I wanna write a book. If you know anybody that, that'll help me do a book-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I've got so much information, I forget about it. I mean that's-- Speaker 1: Right. Okay. Speaker 2: --that's true. Story_ID: 638977 Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of your personal life too because we, we haven't talked about your wife or children. When did you get married? Speaker 2: Oh, I've been married a couple of times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well (laughter), I-- Speaker 1: You wanna talk about all of 'em or just the last one (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'll talk about the last-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the last one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. The last one was Marva [Marva Stewart (ph.)]. That's where the children that you see there, and you, you don't have 'em down there but it's on there, you know, Mark [Mark Stewart]. Mark is the oldest boy and he works for securities, a group out here. Oh, what am I doing--a securities group. And, then Tracy [Tracy Stewart], she, she's the second girl, and she went to two law schools. And, right now, she's like, she's not working at it right now, but he's doing a little tele- when people wanna ask questions and all like that. That's what she does. And, I have it on, on here. But, the next boy, Earl [Earl Stewart], he is a, he's, they have an expression, but he's, it's, it's, he's having a mental problem right now, see. And, I got the term there, but we just, you know, we don't disc- he had a, he had a, he had a clothing store. He was selling sports goods, you know, all of these for the, for the basketball, football, and all of those things. But-- Speaker 1: What is your wife's name? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Your wife's name? Speaker 2: You mean, the second one? I mean, the first one, I mean, or his one? Speaker 1: This one? Speaker 2: Johnnie, Johnnie Mae Stewart. Speaker 1: And, she was a singer. Is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How did you meet? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: How did you meet? Speaker 2: Oh, we met, I met her in the church. And I, and I heard her singing, you know. And, I, I--you know, I you, I said, "Well," you know, I liked the voice and music, you know, is something I liked. And, so, we, we went together for a time, and I used to go to concerts that she would play at, you know. And, and then later on, why she, we decided that we, we'd get married and, and then after we got married, why, we saw that that was to be. And, so, we--I'm sorry you didn't see her when--she just walked out the door when you came in. But I'm just sorry that you didn't get a chance to meet her but, wonderful, wonderful person. Speaker 1: Aw, great. Speaker 2: Very supportive. Story_ID: 638978 Speaker 1: Now, you also co-produced the documentary, 'Black Heroes Here and Now' [ph.], for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]. Speaker 2: Yes. I don't even remember when I did that. Speaker 1: I think that was probably about 1972. Speaker 2: I have, I have another line of things if you look at that, you know, you'll see, you know, the, the lectures that I have done, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, and like I'm just saying, if you could go down the line than I can respond to you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then if you want-- Speaker 1: But that's fine. Speaker 2: The Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D.C.], and I just tell 'em they just came out for five, for five days, and they were getting-- Speaker 1: That's probably how long it would take. Speaker 2: I mean, I've got, I've got information-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I really have, really. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, I try to include some of the outline areas, like Pueblo [Colorado] and Boulder [Colorado], and all those, and I have people from those areas and all. And, I wanna, wanna, I wanna put something on you right quick. The Garden of the Gods, you never heard of it. It's one of the, it was one of the five wonders of the world down here in Colorado Springs [Colorado]. And, I, when I found information about it, it was Amelia Bloomer. She was one of the early women rights people with Susan B. Anthony of sorts. She was the first white woman to climb Pikes Peak [Colorado], and she was raised in that Colorado Springs area. She got married to a lawyer, and when she--and they left and went to Europe. Well, the next thing I knew, according to reading, she came back without him; woman's rights. See, so, she, she didn't wanna take what he was dishing out, see. But, when she came back she came down here to the Springs, were the Cave of the Winds [Colorado] which was discovered by and white boy and a black boy and the Garden of the Gods. And, when she came back there she said, "When I left here, it didn't look like this. What happened?" And, this caretaker, in the book, this article that I read, and I can't and I can't get it again, yet, but, it says the caretaker told her that a slave master left Georgia, brought his slaves up--and, I wanna inject this in it. During this particular period of time, cotton was down. So, they were only making five, six hundred dollars a year per all the families were there. So, that's when the gold came in, see. So, they, they starting taking them to the North and to the area where gold was, was prevalent. So, anyway, he took 'em down there to the area outside of the Garden of the Gods, and he was mining gold. They could make, they could make four to five thousand dollars per man. They were only making six hundred dollar for cotton, see. So, that's, and that's why they went to California, all that. Take a man out there, five thousand dollars he got, you know. And, if he had six or seven, you know. So, what happened, and I know a lot of the instances here, the man, James Grant owned the bank downtown. I had, I have talked to the slaves. What they did is instead of paying them, they gave them land up here. So, they didn't get paid for it. So, they own property, but they didn't have money. So, what happened was the people tried to get him to leave these slaves, to turn 'em a loose, said, "There's no slavery here," they said. They said, "Should turn 'em loose." And, he said, he wouldn't do it. Well, after, after the Civil War, he was forced to turn 'em a loose. So, he turned a loose, and loose all except the family of Juno and Jupiter. Well, one day he decided he was gonna go hunting to get some food, meat, you know, deer meat and all. He took the gun down to (unclear), he said, "I'll be back. Take care of everything." What happened, he never came back. So, they, they assumed that what happened, he may have fall off a cliff, was killed, or walked in one of those caves and a bear was just waking up and he had a meal. So, when he didn't come back, they cut down the trees, burned out the stumps, rolled the boulders away, and planted flowers. And, the article was entitled, 'Slaves Plant Garden' [ph.], hence the name, Garden of the Gods. Well, I can't find the article now but I got an article after she died. But, she didn't mention that story. But, I have it somewhere and I will find it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, the thing that I wanna mention is, down there, they said, it was a nat- a natural phenomenal. It just was like that. It was, you know, it wasn't, you know, it wasn't created. And if you go down there in the front, I went down there two years ago, there's a rope ladder and it says Jupiter Drive. So, I asked 'em, "Where did they get the name?" They don't know. But, I found a picture last year of a black man in a cart, he has a mule in front, he has a whip in his hand, and the white people are all standing around down there. And, on the back of picture, this white boy, he let me have a copy of it. It says Jupiter. So, they don't wanna tell the story. But, I'm still digging for it, and I wanna get that article. If I can get that article, then I can prove that it was planted by black slaves. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That, that, that's monumental because people don't--they're coming to see it, and they don't wanna talk about it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 638979 Speaker 1: Tell me, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I, what I'm doing, I'm teaching children in the schools, you know. And, I like, I like to teach young people because by teaching the young people, they're like putting seeds in the ground. They remember what I say. I've seen some of the young people have become doctors. I've seen some of our teachers, some of 'em that are dentists and such, they've gone to school and the classes, they've been in my class. I went up to the University of Wyoming [Laramie, Wyoming] a couple years ago, young African American lady that introduced me to speak at the university, I didn't, I never met her, never saw her before. She stood up and she says, "Mr. Stewart [HistoryMaker Paul Stewart] doesn't know who I am, but he's responsible for me being where I am. I met him in fourth grade." And, she said, "From fourth grade," she said, "he motivated me to come where I am. I have my Ph.D. now, and I owe it to Mr. Stewart." And, this is what I'm running into now, people telling me, "You know, I remember you when I was in school," you know what I mean. And, what I've done and my kids, you know like that. And, that's what I was, that's what I set out to do. I wanted to be able to motivate people, you know, to what they're doing. You asked me about a saying, and I wanna say it again, and it says, I'm trying to say it just right, but, "Age is just a matter of mind. And, if you don't--I don't--you don't mind, it don't matter." Speaker 1: It doesn't matter. Speaker 2: And, I was trying to get it together, you know, and I was having all this things on my mind. But that motivated me because the lady that said that was Miss Senior Denver, African American woman. And, one of the early mining companies, her mother used to, she used to, she used to serve this lady, Taber, Ms-- Horace Tabor's wife, Baby Doe Tabor. And, you know, this lady, her father was George [ph.]. I can--yes, I know--George, oh, I got it, he was, when he was earlier, he was an outlaw like you were, were talking about. And, I didn't know it, and then when I, when I found out I says, "Oh, so, that was your great-grand- your great-grandfather, you know." And, I looked it up and found he was a, he was a, he was a horseman, way back in 1885. And, I can't think of his name, I hate that, right now. Story_ID: 638980 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand, yeah, we know what you, what you'd like your legacy to be, but how do you want to be remembered? How do you want people to remember you? Speaker 2: Just by what I'm doing, creating history that was left out in the early days. This history that I'm doing, getting together, is wasn't--it's not in your history books. You can't got and look it up because it's not there. Even the libraries don't have it, see. And, the thing about it is, I wanna put it where it will be available to people and they know that there was a contribution where we were taught. When I came along, there wasn't a contribution, see, and by them seeing, I say a picture is worth a thousand words. I do slides and when I show these slides, you know what I mean, and I narrate from 'em, then people can get the story from this. They, they don't get it because it's not in your books. The teachers are teaching and it's just like I was telling the teacher yesterday, white teacher, she said, "I never had any of this. So, I don't even know anything about what you're saying, but I'm interested in what it is," and, see. And, so, that's what I'm all about is to let people know what has been left out. That's the whole thing I wanna, "Mr. Stewart [HistoryMaker Paul Stewart] opened the door where we can find out our history and what has been done that we don't know about," see. It's got me into my family tree, yours, you know, like that. And, all along, like Alex Haley, what he's doing. See, he brought about that, and that, and didn't realized he was related to me. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I did not really realize it, if you wanna glance at--I wanna show you a couple of things if you, you know, if you weren't out of time. Story_ID: 638981 Speaker 1: One last question, now, I'm not gonna ask you is there anything else, you'd like to talk about (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Okay, honey. Speaker 1: --because I know, you have so much to talk about. Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: I mean, and it's just, it's just wonderful, wonderful hearing these stories. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But, because this is gonna be information that the future generations, years and years, you know, fifty, a hundred years from now, which will be available for students to actually see you and hear your voice. What would you like to, what message would you like to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: Well, I'd like, I'd like to feel that I'm opening a door. A door for them to see what has been done so that they know what they can do. You see, because, if you don't know that anything was done, then you feel like there wasn't anything done. But, if you see that there has been something done, then from there, you can, you can get a hold of the tail of the wagon and say, yes, I can go up there to that star. I can reach a star, you know. But, if you're looking on the ground, you can't see the star, see. So, what you do is basically, you find out some things that have been done and when you find out they have been done, then you know there's some things that you can do yourself. I have a book on inventions, 'Three Thousand Black Inventions: 1900' [ph.]. To see those inventions, you couldn't believe it. I mean, I wouldn't believe that the typewriter in 1880, you know, that far back, you know what I mean. I would need the deep sea diving suit, 1885. I wouldn't believe like the brakes on the plane or the, or the, or there's so many things that I, that I know that have been created. And see, and through this, the kids say, well this, I can do this because this has been done, see, you know. And, giving him food for thought. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, that's what it is. And, if I, and my dad [Eugene Stewart, Sr.] was an inspiration to me, because seeing what he had done. And, then the great-grandfather had a store in 1900, you know, wow, you know. And, you know, it's something to motivate. And, that's what I wanna do. I wanna motivate these young people, let them know, because what they're, they're hanging on to is we never did anything; our families never did anything. And, so, that's what they figure. So, then they don't wanna do anything. So--but if the motivation, "Oh, I can do something too," you know. And, do it, you know. And, that's, and that's where, where I wanna end the, the conversation. Do something. Story_ID: 638982 Speaker 1: You know what, we really appreciate you filling in all the blank spots in history as far as cowboys, and what has gone on in the west. And, this information is just phenomenal, and you know, I personally wanna thank you for this information. But the history is just so rich, and The HistoryMakers would like to thank you for taking your time to share your story so that the future generations will have this information and be able to really hear your heart and understand what you went through to make sure that we have this information that is made available, to not just our community but for the world to see. So, thank you. Speaker 2: You know what, what I feel like. I feel like I just touched the surface. That's what I feel like. Because I have so much to say, and I realize that I didn't get a chance to say a lot of things that I could've said, you know. Just like mining, blacks and mining, you know, not realizing that out of every five there were two black miners out in the mountains, yes. I have names of the men. Some of 'em made inroads like the argentiferous method of melting lead and rock and getting silver and gold out of it. That was the Bowman [William N. Bowman House, Denver, Colorado], Bowman and the Lee House [Nicki Lee Mansion], the famous Lee House in Central City [Colorado]. That was one of the first mansions built in Central City by a black man. And, he was one of the--he and Professor Bowman had mines up there. And, I've, I found records of the mines but they don't indicate that they were black. But I know their names. So, that's why I'm, I'm able to carry on, I said, "Oh, yes, this." And then in the area that we talked about Clara Brown did we say-- Speaker 1: Clara Brown, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No, we didn't talk about her. Speaker 2: Oh, we didn't talk about Clara Brown. Speaker 1: All right. Go ahead, let's, let's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Clara Brown, Clara Brown was a monumental slave, paid her way out of slavery, came in a wagon train up to, came up to Denver [Colorado]. And, and she worked as a cook and then she opened a laundry and then she helped established the first church in Denver. Not only did she help establish the first church, but she was only woman member to take part in baptisms. Not only that, but how she became the richest woman, not riches black woman, but riches woman in Denver is when she opened her laundry, these gold miners would come down out of the mountains to have their clothes washed. And, they'd say to her, you know, "I have--I know where there is gold up there, but I need a grubstake." That's a pan, a pick, a shovel, and a mule. And, she said, they said, "And I can strike it rich." So, she said, "I'll tell you what," she said, "I'll lend you the money but sign this paper." When she signed the paper, when they signed the paper, when they struck it rich, what it said, was, "If you strike it rich, I get half of your money." So, when they were rich, she was rich. So, with the money she got, she would--she got together--I have a picture of a black wagon train, 1860. She went back to Kentucky and bought her grandfather, grandmother, aunts, uncles, brothers, and cousins out of slavery. Put together this wagon train and brought them to Denver and helped them to find jobs. Two years later, she went back to Kentucky bought the rest of her relatives and friends out of slavery. Put together another wagon train and brought them to Central City. And, while she was in Central City, she helped established the first church there. Not only did she help establish the first church there, that's the St. James Methodist Church [St. James United Methodist Church, Central City, Colorado], but her name was on the church. And, when I took the picture in the '60s [1960s], it's not there now, but in the opera house, Central City Opera House [Central City, Colorado], there was a chair in it and it says, "Aunt Clara Brown, member of the Pioneer Historical Society, 1859." You could only have your, your name on the chair if you were one of the original founder, and she was. In that book--did I show it to you? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes. You see what I mean? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, then on, over on the side (background noise) there was a church with a, you know, they had her name on it, but what I'm trying to say is that, it's not there anymore. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 638983 Speaker 1: (Background noise) So, and then, then Barney Ford, Barney Ford, Barney Ford came up here as a, as a slave in 1859, opened a barbershop, okay; had one of the finest hotels in Denver [Colorado] down in LoDo [Lower Downtown, Denver, Colorado]. They just tore it down a couple year--built another one in Cheyenne, Wyoming, and then a hotel in Breckenridge [Colorado], where they all come to ski from all over the world, the Barney Ford House [Barney Ford House Museum, Breckenridge, Colorado]. And Barney Ford was one of the fifth riches men in Denver. He has his--I have his picture down in the state capitol [Colorado State Capitol, Denver, Colorado] in the window, in the glass. And also, his house. I have a picture of his house, and we have a school out here, Barney Ford school [Barney Ford Elementary School; Denver Center for International Studies at Ford, Denver, Colorado], which I had an exhibit in last year. And, I was out there two weeks ago telling about this wealthy man who came as a slave and then he became a wealthy man. He--they call him the (unclear) of the president maker because he helped two presidents into office. And when they came out here to visit the west, they stayed in his hotels. They had gold bricks from the train station to his hotel, and when they came, and then when they stayed there, and they said, it's, and his restroom was one of the finest in the west. I have an advertisement that I have from this, you know. And, so, like I said, I wish I had started with those people so you could've know that they were men. Downtown where Currigan Hall [Currigan Exhibition Hall, Denver, Colorado] is, right, and the auditorium, John Keganell [ph.] who our first black legislator, his picture is not in the books down there, but he was a slave. His mother took him out of slavery, paid his way out. He and his brother moved to Ohio, fought in the, in the Civil War, married, moved up to Cheyanne, Wyoming for his wife's health. When she got better, he--she moved down to LoDo, down here in Denver, opened a barbershop, ran for the legislature in 1879 and was seated, first black legislator in Colorado. His picture is not there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, there's another two that are not down there. But, like I just saying-- Speaker 2: (Laugher) I know, there's so much information. Speaker 1: Oh, and then you helped me to remember it, see that's the think about it, see. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Well, thank you very much for your, for your time. Speaker 1: Well, I'm glad to meet you, you know what I mean. And, I'm glad what you're into and I know it's a learning thing because I know when I interview people, I mean, it's two or three hours, they don't think they're gonna be hour, but I got some questions to ask 'em. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know, and, when they finish, they think, but, we I didn't remember this, you know, I forgot it, you know. And, and, it's really--ooh, if I was on your team, man, that would be something (laughter). Story_ID: 639003 Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Paul Stewart, 1947 in the Loop of downtown Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. This is a picture in Clinton, Iowa. That's a picture of my, my children. That's Mark, oh, not Mark, not my children. It's a picture of my brothers and sisters and myself. It's my-- Speaker 2: Go from left to right. Speaker 1: Left to right, that's--I gotta see that a little better. That's, yeah, that's a little close, that's a little better. Okay. That's Eugene on the left, that's my oldest brother. Okay. And that's Eugene Stewart [Eugene Stewart, Jr.]. That's in Clinton, Iowa. And, this is my [paternal] grandmother, Alantha, Alantha Stewart [Alantha Glanton Stewart], and this is Elizabeth Stewart, and this is Paul Stewart, me, and this is my brother Richard [Richard Stewart]. And, this is Missouri Slater [Missouri Dozier Slater], my grandmother's cousin. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Go ahead, sir. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. This is Elizabeth Stewart Fisher, my aunt, my father's sister. Speaker 2: What year might this be? Speaker 1: What's that? Speaker 2: What year might it be? Speaker 1: Oh, that's probably in the '30s [1930s], 1930s. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is my great-grandmother, Melissa Glanton [Melissa Glanton]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Wait one second. Speaker 2: Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Illinois], 1944, boot camp. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next one. Speaker 2: And, you know where that was. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hum. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And, this is my mother, Martha Stewart [Martha Moore Stewart]. The baby is Elizabeth Stewart. The boy in the front is, Eugene Stewart, and that's Paul Stewart (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, I must've been, I must been about, let's see, two, four five--I'm probably seven or eight years old there. Speaker 2: Okay. So, that's your father and--? Speaker 1: And, that's my father, Eugene Stewart [Eugene Stewart, Sr.], and then-- Speaker 2: Your brothers and sister. Speaker 1: And, my brother. He looks like he about ten years old there. That's ninth--that's 845 10th Avenue, Clinton, Iowa. Speaker 2: And, that's my father, Eugene Joseph Stewart. That's in Clinton, Iowa. And, that picture is probably in the, looking at it, it looks like 19--it's in the '30s [1930s], 1930s. Speaker 1: Truck--it say, E.J. Stewart, Clinton, Iowa, and that's my aunt. She, she probably drove that truck that day. She could drive a truck, and she would type and she was a musician. Speaker 2: Did you get the (unclear)? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is one of mine, second, dad, dad's second trucks. That's when he was doing, moving people in it. I can tell by the slats in it. That's in the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. This is my father's office [Stewart Transfer Company, Clinton, Iowa] on 5th Avenue, and you can see how long the building is. So, some of his trucks, he had them parked in the back. See how long that building is? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 2: Garage. Now, this is one of the first houses that my family had in Iowa. That, this, this picture was taken about 1900. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Was that in Iowa? Speaker 2: Yes, Clinton, Iowa. Speaker 1: And, this is a picture, you know you're gonna have to, let me see. Yeah, the names I'm--no, that's Saul [Stewart's maternal grandfather, Saul Moore]. This picture was taken, this picture was taken in Evanston, Illinois. I'd say that picture was taken about 1913, or '14 [1914]. And, that's, that's Saul Moore and his wife, Mary [Mary Moore]. Peter [ph.] is in the, the lower picture, that's the son. The picture here, that's Roseanne. And, then my mother is the second from the, I mean, is on the right and then Roseanne Mitchel [Roseanne Moore Mitchel] is second, and next to her is second from the right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is Missouri Slater [Missouri Dozier Slater], and Reverend Slater [George Slater]. That's her husband. And, it looks like this, this picture was probably taken in Clinton, Iowa. Speaker 2: About what year? Was this in 1936? Speaker 1: What's that? Speaker 2: I said 1936. Speaker 1: Oh, '36 [1936]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, that's Mr. T.G. Dozier [ph.] the year that he, that he went to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. He graduated from Wilberforce. He's the brother of Missouri Dozier. I mean, of Missouri Slater. Speaker 2: Now, that's Richard Stewart my young brother. And, this--that picture was taken in Evanston, Illinois probably in the, in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a picture of Paul Stewart on the left front row, at Great Lakes Naval training school, 1944. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Paul Stewart in his barbershop in Denver, Colorado at, on 34th Street, 2110 and he's cutting the hair of Mr. Anderson [ph.] who was one of the early pioneers in Colorado. Speaker 1: This is Paul Stewart in front of his barbershop. And, that, that picture was taken probably in 1970--'78 [1978]. See, my advertisement in the window, I was buying things. Did you see that (laughter)? People see that, they come by. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yep. Wanted. Who's that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's Richard Stewart, my oldest son. And, this was, that was taken in Evans- no, taken here in Denver. That was in probably in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: And, that's Earl Stewart. And, that picture was probably taken the same period of time in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: And, that's my daughter, Tracy Stewart, and that's Paul Stewart with her, her father, and, they all look like they were taken in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: And, that's Linda Stewart, and she's my next oldest daughter. And, that probably was taken in Denver, Colorado in the '70s [1970s] also. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And, this is Paul Stewart and Johnnie Mae Stewart, and that picture, that was in the '80s [1980s], yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: In fact that was-- Speaker 2: And, this is Paul Stewart. What's the time--that, that must've been taken 2000, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, I was receiving an award. I was receiving the Barney Ford award in that photograph. That, that date--I've got the award down there, you know, on the table, but--have the date, remembering. Speaker 1: Okay. And, this, that's a picture of my wife and I up at Red Rocks [Red Rocks Park, Morrison, Colorado]...