 Story_ID: 475172 Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure, and I'm the interviewer this morning. The videographer is Matthew Hickey, and sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My name is [HistoryMaker] Prince Spencer. P-R-I-N-C-E, capital C, Spencer, S-P-E-N-C-E-R. Speaker 1: And can you please give us your date and location of birth? Speaker 2: I was born October 3, 1917 in Jenkinsville, South Carolina. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Today's date is November 3, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we currently? Speaker 2: You're currently at my home and--519 Willowhaven [Avenue], Las Vegas, Nevada in 89120. Speaker 1: And what's your current occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I've had three occupations. My current is casino host at the Silver Nugget [Silver Nugget Casino and Event Center, Las Vegas, Nevada]. Story_ID: 475173 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you a few questions that we call our People magazine questions. This is just for people to get familiar with you on another level. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I tell you, my favorite food is pig feet and black-eyed peas, and corn bread, and buttermilk. Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Oh, I like, the spring. I like the spring of the year, because everything is blooming, and the birds are flowing and singing, and the trees and the flowers are blooming. That's just a lovely time of year. Speaker 1: And your favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't know. I have a variety of colors that I like, but I like brown. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I've been around the world three times, and so I like it all, but I don't know what spot I like the best, I would say--I don't know. I like California. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a phrase or a favorite saying that you live by, that you go by? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase--I don't know--I have a favorite phrase. I know I say something all the time, trying to think what it was--let's see--I wanna say, "It don't mean a thing if you ain't got that swing" ['It Don't Mean a Thing (If It Ain't Got that Swing)'] (laughter). Story_ID: 475174 Speaker 1: What we're gonna do now is we're gonna go into your, your, early years a little bit. We're gonna start with your background, and could you tell me about your mother, and what was her name? Speaker 2: Lottie Spencer. And-- Speaker 1: Where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Jenkinsville [South Carolina], and my father was named Bunyan Spencer. Speaker 1: Now did your mother grow up in Jenkinsville? Speaker 2: No. We all left Jenkinsville when I was very small. Speaker 1: Your mother grow up though, did she grow up in Jenkinsville (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, she grew up in Jenkinsville. Speaker 1: What do you know about her background as a child growing up? What do you know about your mother's background? Speaker 2: Well, her father was white, my grandfather, and she was a light-skinned, good looking, woman. I have a picture in--on--my room, on the other wall, of her, my family. Oh, she was a beautiful woman. She was smart and she a, kind of bossy. Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you about her life growing up? Do you recall any particular stories she told you? Speaker 2: No. I can't because--well yeah, she did tell me that her brothers, who were fair, because her father was white, and most--two of them passed off to the other side, and just never come back. So they--I do remember her telling me that, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned your father, what was his name again? Speaker 2: Bunyan Spencer. Speaker 1: And he was born where? Speaker 2: He was born in Jenkinsville. Speaker 1: That's where he grew up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, we all left there, about a when I was three years old. He was a miner, and so he traveled all the time in different parts. Speaker 1: What do you know about his background? His background growing up--what do you know about your father's? Speaker 2: Very little about my father. I never heard him speak of his father. Speaker 1: How far back can you go in your lineage and your ancestry? Can you go as far back as your grandparents? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: On your mother's side, tell me about your grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Well, they were white. They were very strict and they had a--this tradition in the family that we'd all eat together and, and pray together. Speaker 1: Now you mentioned that your grandparents were white. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You mean the grandfather was white? Speaker 2: My grandfather. I don't know my grandmother--yeah, I did know her. She was black. Speaker 1: What was her name? Do you recall her name? Speaker 2: I don't know her name--Anna [ph.], I think. Speaker 1: And what was his name, your grandfather? Speaker 2: I can't think of it now. Speaker 1: So what was that like, being--having this--like back in those days, the interracial thing? How, how, did they handle that? Speaker 2: Well, the best side was the white side, so they--my mother's brother, he was fair enough to pass for white, and I never did know him well. I just saw him two or three times. Speaker 1: Those--those would have been your uncles? Speaker 2: Uncles, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Do you recall their names or- Speaker 2: No. I can't think of it now, but I may think of it before the--you--(laughter) my interview is over. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you would have family gatherings, dinners and things, and the grandfather would still be there. Everybody knew that he was white. How did he handle that, because I'm sure in, in--what town did you move to after Jenkinsville? You moved to- Speaker 2: I moved to Virginia and then, to Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay so, so you would have, would have gatherings with him in Jenkinsville or, or in Virginia? Speaker 2: Jenkinsville is the only time I met him. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were very young then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a handsome white man with--remind me of Van Buren [President Martin Van Buren], sideburns on, you know. Speaker 1: Did he ever give you any stories, or tell you anything? Speaker 2: No, nothing that I can remember. Story_ID: 475175 Speaker 1: Now how about anybody on your father's [Bunyan Spencer] side? How far back can you go there? Speaker 2: Just my father-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and his brothers. Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us about his brothers. Speaker 2: He had a--I think he had four or five brothers. Speaker 1: Do you recall any of their names? Speaker 2: Sam [Sam Spencer (ph.)], and one named Uncle Prince [Prince Spencer (ph.)], and he named me, and Morris [Morris Spencer (ph.)] and John [John Spencer (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Those are all your uncles-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --on your father's side? And did they give you any stories or anything? Did they used to tell you anything at all? Speaker 2: I can't recall right now but, in fact I think I'm bare, because this stroke has, has hindered my, my, memories. Speaker 1: You're doing good, though. Story_ID: 475176 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your memory for a minute. What's your earliest memory as a child, growing up? What's the earliest thing that you can recall? Speaker 2: When I was about seven years old, I won the Charleston contest, and that's why I know that I was gonna be in show business, and I was gonna be a dancer, and I--they put on a revue they called 'Charleston Is My Business' [ph.]. And I won the contest, and they built a show, well, not around me, but with me--about--was fo- one, two, three, four--four of us. I can't think of their names. I got a clipping of that now. I got a prize for it. Speaker 1: And you were seven years old? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Had you been practicing dancing before that, or did you just just go ahead and say, "I can do that"? Speaker 2: Well, I had been practicing a little bit because I'd practice out in the yard, and I could always flip and split, and, have a finish to my dance. Story_ID: 475177 Speaker 1: What was your life like in your home around that--now by this time, you're in Virginia? Speaker 2: No. I'm in Toledo now. Speaker 1: Oh, you're in Toledo now. Speaker 2: I left Virginia when I was about three and a-half, or four years old, and went to Boston [Massachusetts] and stayed a little while. I have no memories of Boston at all, and moved to Toledo, Ohio. That's where my career started. Speaker 1: And the whole family move to Toledo? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did your father [Bunyan Spencer] was a miner you said, so, so, he followed jobs around different places (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. And when we moved to Toledo, we settled there for good. We bought a house--two houses, one house-we went--we went to a larger house in Toledo, Ohio. Speaker 1: This is just bit outside Detroit [Michigan], seventy-five miles or so. Speaker 2: Yes. Now my father's brothers moved to Detroit--in Inkster [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we'd visit them every summer. Or to visit, we'd stay there three weeks, or two weeks, and one moved to Youngstown, Ohio, Morris [Morris Spencer], his family, so we stayed together, well, closer together. Speaker 1: What was life like in your house? Growing up in Toledo? Speaker 2: Oh, it was exciting. It was five children and--I wish we could take a pi- take a shot of that picture back in my bedroom. Speaker 1: We will. Story_ID: 475178 Speaker 1: Five children, had three boys and two girls. Speaker 2: Could you give us their names and their birth order? Speaker 1: Yes. Theodore Spencer, and I don't know how old he was, but he died in '91 [1991], and the next was Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Spencer Willis], she died in '92 [1992], and the third was Annie, Annie, Annie Spencer [Annie Spencer Jackson], and she's still living in Toledo [Ohio], and she's ninety-three years old, and my brother Fred [Frederick Spencer], he died at eight, eighty-four. He had Alzheimer's, I can remember, loss of memory, and he left me ninety years old and still going. Speaker 2: So you were the baby, so to speak? Speaker 1: Yes. Yes I was. And, go ahead-- Speaker 2: So, are you aware how much in front of you they were--how much your oldest brother was than you? Speaker 1: About eight years. Speaker 2: About eight years? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let me see. There's five of us, so, we were very close together. I was fifteen months younger than my brother, and my sister was two years older than him. My sister was a year old--a year and a half older than her, and Ted, he was about six, seven, years old--I mean, older than I. Speaker 2: Okay. So it seems like, like, your family has longevity and living. They li- Speaker 1: Well, let's hope so, because they lived a pretty good life. Story_ID: 475179 Speaker 1: What street did you live on in Toledo [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Maher Street. M-A-H-E-R, and what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Describe it for us-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Describe Maher Street for us. How was it? Speaker 2: Oh goodness, Maher was a, was a integrated street. We didn't have many blacks on the street, and when I was a young boy, I didn't feel the, the, segregation, and all the kids would be at my house, or I would be at their house. Speaker 1: Who were some of those people? Can you recall names of the family? Speaker 2: John Hinckley [ph.] was one, and Ralph [ph.], I can't think of his last name. John and Ralph and, and I can't think of the name, last name now, it'll come to me. Speaker 1: Now, you said you didn't feel the segregation? Speaker 2: Well I (laughter), I was a cheerleader, at my school, in my class, and I was very popular. I was tap dancing, and trying to tap dance, testing my own way of tap dancing, and I was very popular in school, and I had friends, mostly white friends, boys and girls, and so. Speaker 1: Was Toledo segregated, pretty much, at that point? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. Well, it was, but it, I did--we didn't, feel it, it wasn't where they had signs of colored, white, or (unclear). No, it was pretty, pretty liberated-- Story_ID: 475180 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of the sights, or the sounds, or the smells you used to hear in your neighborhood as a kid, that kind of come to your memory? Speaker 2: Well, we did--when, when, we moved to Toledo [Ohio], the streets wasn't paved, and I remember the horse and wagon going down the street, either, either pulling the ice or coal, and when they go to the bathroom all over the streets, sometimes my parents [Lottie Spencer and Bunyan Spencer] would make me go out and shovel it off or something, I remember that vaguely. Speaker 1: Clean-up duty. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Clean-up duty, huh (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), that's the word. You put it nicely. Story_ID: 475181 Speaker 1: Now you mentioned your elementary school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was the name of that school? Speaker 2: Hamilton. Hamilton High, Hamilton S- Speaker 1: Elementary. Speaker 2: Elementary school [Hamilton School, Toledo, Ohio] and that's where I did, did, the Charleston, when they--and they glorified me, pictures in the paper, I have them now. Speaker 1: You were seven years old, you go to Hamilton, and you win the Charleston contest. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that influenced? Go ahead- Speaker 2: I was born in October, so I was eight when it got started. Speaker 1: You started a little bit- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I have pictures of those and I'll show you before you go. And I liked it so much that, I guess it became--I, I, it became a it became an--I was obsessed with that, you know. I wanted to dance and from high school [Calvin M. Woodward Technical High School, Toledo, Ohio], it was in high school when I became cheerleader, I became independent, or know what I was going to do, or what direction I wanted to go in. Speaker 1: Yeah, we're going to bring you up to that speed in a moment, but we wanna talk about the teachers in your elementary school. Were there any teachers there that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but I can't think of the name now, but I was elected, I was very proud of that--elected house monitor of our class. I had to go and see the hands, and they show me this, and I always dressed very nice, exceptionally well. Speaker 1: And you were in elementary school doing this? Speaker 2: Yes, and they elected me as a class monitor, and I'd see the hands, and I was proud to do that, because my mother [Lottie Spencer] would dress me exceptionally well, being--to be poor, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so you all, you weren't very affluent, you all were a working family? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well what did she do? Speaker 2: She worked as a maid. My father [Bunyan Spencer] worked as a, you know, general workers. Speaker 1: Laborer. Speaker 2: Laborer. Anything to do with labor, he could do it because he believed that, especially, white man could not whip him, he beat any white man in the world. That's what he thought (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) What kind of student were you in school? Speaker 2: Well above average, I was a--I didn't excel, but I passed anything, English. What held me back a little bit was algebra. I had a little tough time with that. Story_ID: 475182 Speaker 1: What kind of child were you? Were you mischievous? Were you well behaved? Speaker 2: I was mischievous (laughter). Speaker 1: You were (laughter)? Tell us about that a little bit. Speaker 2: First of all, I had a learning experience, around about nine, I went down three times in a creek, or Tenmile Creek and I jumped out the bay into the river, and it was a current rush and I couldn't get my balance, and I went down three times. All my thoughts come back to me, mother [Lottie Spencer], father [Bunyan Spencer], school, this and that, everything come back to me, and that I thought I was gone, and God is good. He just washed me, moved the current to the shore, or close to the shore, and I could walk. And I walked out the water, and I don't like water since. I don't like to go on boats even. Speaker 1: Now you mention that you, you, between seven and eight you won that, that, contest. What year would that have been? That would have been about, what? Speaker 2: Let's see, I was born in '17 [1917]-- Speaker 1: Twenty-four [1924], '25 [1925]? Speaker 2: Might have been ten years old--eight years old, about there, '24 [1924], '25 [1925]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you said that you had dreams at that point, you had dreams and aspirations. That's what you wanted to do, you had them, of being a dancer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us more about that, 'cause you won the contest now-- Speaker 2: Well, my brothers [Theodore Spencer and Frederick Spencer] and sisters [Wilhelmina Spencer Willis and Annie Spencer Jackson], well they were all maids and bus boys, and I didn't wanna do that. I, I, didn't do any of that, and my father used to tell me, "You good for nothing, trifling, and you ain't going be nothing." And we was on relief, and he'd buy me shoes and, "You're not dancing in them good shoes are you?" And I had on the one pair, and said, "Yes I am." "Take them shoes off," and I said, "I can't dance barefoot." "Dance." And so, he didn't have much belief in my future, and--but my mother did. She made me costumes, and made me blouses, and I always looked nice on the stage. And I did--I'll talk more about it later, but I'll go on--and I-- Speaker 1: Yeah, go ahead. Speaker 2: There's a white man, a Mr. Howard Feigley, he owned the Rivoli Theatre in Toledo [Ohio] and I be- I wa- I was a usher, and I always got jobs that other guys couldn't get. I got--I didn't make much money, but they gave me like a bellhop uniform to usher in, you know, and later I danced in it, because I didn't (laughter)--I had--that's the closest thing I could get to a costume. Speaker 1: So now this is--now you, you won the contest, when did you actually start The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers]? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't join them 'til--'til '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But in the meantime, I was, I had a career, when I went and finished high school [Calvin M. Woodward Technical High School, Toledo, Ohio], I, I, joined Major Bowes. Speaker 1: Okay, let's back up before we get to high school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 475183 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you just a couple more family questions in the early years. Did your family attend church? Speaker 2: Oh yes, every day, yeah, every Sunday (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about that. Which church was that? Speaker 2: Warren A.M.E. Church in Toledo [Ohio], and we all see, my mother [Lottie Spencer] was a mother at the church, my father [Bunyan Spencer], and we all had to go to church on Sunday. We all got dressed and went to church. Speaker 1: Now how was that, because you probably wanted to dance, how did you enjoy going (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, after church, we're to attend church, so after church, I did the things I wanted to. There was a few things that my parents forbid, but I did them, practiced dancing, see movies with dancers in them. Speaker 1: How did they feel about the, the dance thing? In regard to--you said your mom was supportive, very supportive, your father was kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --not with it. How did people in general, see dancing at that time, just the community and people? Speaker 2: Well, they said that you was working for the devil, but I attended church, I believe in God, and for--but, they didn't accept it, until I become successful. Speaker 1: Do you think that it was that way with a lot of entertainers, black entertainers in that day, with musicians and things, that was always working for the devil? Speaker 2: Well, that's what they thought, yes, a large part of 'em. Speaker 1: But they still liked to see the shows, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, (laughter), they see the show, they enjoyed the shows, but that's what they believed. Story_ID: 475184 Speaker 1: You go to junior high school, what junior high did you go to? Speaker 2: I didn't go to junior high. I went to high school. Speaker 1: So you skipped right over, from elementary [Hamilton School, Toledo, Ohio] to high school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Woodward High School [Calvin M. Woodward Technical High School, Toledo, Ohio], which I became a hall of famer in the high school. I--when I went to high school, I was a good--I was a pretty good dancer, and so I left high school, right out of high school, I didn't get my diploma. I, I, got it, but I didn't go to the ceremony. Speaker 1: To the graduation ceremony? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Let's talk about, between, you know, between, your elementary school and your high school transition. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're going to school, you're being, you know, the average kid in those ways, but now also you're putting together--all right, okay, who's influencing you now--in the dance world? Speaker 2: Well, Tip, Tap, and Toe, Derby [Derby Wilson]. Speaker 1: And who are they, these are what we call the older hoofers, now right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the known, the known older, hoofers. Speaker 1: And now they--since there was no television how are you seeing these people? Speaker 2: I'm seeing them in movies, or either in person. They come to Toledo [Ohio], to a show called the Empire [Empire Theater, Toledo, Ohio], and I saw big dancers there. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: I saw one dancer there. His name is King Rastus Brown, and he could really dance, and he impressed me. And he would--we would sit way up there in the balcony and he said, "You don't have to see me, my feet will tell the story," and so I never forgot that. I saw him and he impressed me. He was a great dancer. Speaker 1: Were you able to meet these people, one on one, and go to and go to them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I, I, didn't meet 'em one on one until I got in show business. But I had a lot admirers, a lot of people impressed me in tap dancing. I had--well I--see, Derby Wilson, Bill Bailey, and Bubbles [John W. Bubbles]. All these dancers are--impressed me, and most impressed me of all was, the act of Tip, Tap, and Toe, and that Raymond Winfield. He did the slides on the drummer, and that just impressed me. Story_ID: 475185 Speaker 1: So you saw these people and you're--so, you decided now that you're in high school [Calvin M. Woodward Technical High School, Toledo, Ohio], and you're dancing in high school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is there a group? Do you have a group at this point? Speaker 2: No. No, no, I didn't have a group until '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I danced by myself. Speaker 1: So, so, you were a solo act? Speaker 2: Yes, and I danced in all the best white places. I didn't--I didn't dance the colored places. They said colored in those days. I didn't dance them. I went to make something of me somehow, and I got a agent, and I dressed exceptionally well, and so he booked me into the white clubs. Speaker 1: So in the world of show business, they would say you had good gigs? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, you're dancing, you're in high school, you're well dressed, you're getting popular--I guess your studies are okay--you're studying, but dancing is your priority right now. Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: What are people saying? What are the teachers there saying about you, about you, in that school? Speaker 2: Well, they knew I was going to be an entertainer, and they said that I should do well, and, "You have the makings of a young man who's going to--who's determined to do well." And, so I joined--oh, Howard Feigley sent me a--when I was in high school, Howard Feigley sent me to do a, audition for Ben Bernie. Story_ID: 475186 Speaker 1: So you're in high school [Calvin M. Woodward Technical High School, Toledo, Ohio] now. You're getting popular, are your parents [Lottie Spencer and Bunyan Spencer] a little more--is your father, especially--is he a little more accepting now that he can see that this is the way this is gonna go? Is he still trying to resist you from doing this? Speaker 2: No. He finally, oh, a little later than that, but he finally gave in to me and supported me, and my mother was a lot bigger supporter, and oh, after the high school, they sent me to Howard Feigley when I was a usher in the--in, the, in the theatre. Speaker 1: Now who was Howard Feigley? Speaker 2: He was owner of the Rivoli Theatre [Toledo, Ohio]. His name is Howard Feigley, and he gave me a recommendation to audition to audition for Ben Bernie. Speaker 1: And Ben Bernie was a--who is Ben Bernie? Speaker 2: Ben Bernie was a bandleader, and was a white bandleader, and he accepted--he was--put me on--with his group, to travel with them for the summer. I traveled four weeks with them, and I got good experience. Speaker 1: Well, where'd you go? Speaker 2: Cleveland [Ohio], Detroit [Michigan]--I don't know--Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I think. Speaker 1: This is interesting because we're talking about--we're probably close to--we're now in the late '20s [1920s], early '30s-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and there's things going on all around, around with African Americans that can't do a lot of stuff, and for some reason-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for some reason, [HistoryMaker] Prince Spencer, is traveling with white bands. How is this possible do you think? Do you think you just-- Speaker 2: Well, it didn't last very long. I joined Major Bowes and I won first prize, and I became a Major Bowes protege, and I joined a show called 'Dixie Jubilee.' Speaker 1: Let's go to that, let's back up one moment, with the band, the Ben Bernie band, so now, you the only white-- I mean, the only black person (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black, yeah. Speaker 1: --in the band. So how, how, did the band accept you? How did the people accept you? Speaker 2: Well, there's certain places, but I just accepted, I guess, some things I couldn't do, you know. I-- Speaker 1: Could you eat with them and sleep with them in the same places and-- Speaker 2: I'm trying to think. I think they found me a place to stay (laughter), I think, and only for about five--four or five days a week, in a week, and we went for four weeks. I found it enjoyable because it didn't matter to me whether I--they was prejudiced or not, on the stage, I, I, was accepted. Speaker 1: So music and dancing was your--what you were about, you didn't care about the other social things, within you. Speaker 2: No I didn't think about it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were about dancing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So back in those days, did most bands carry dancers and people with them? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There was a whole show back in those days. Speaker 2: There was a whole show. Story_ID: 475187 Speaker 1: Did I say about Major Bowes? Speaker 2: Yes. Now who was Major Bowes for the audience? Speaker 1: He was a very famous amateur night ['Major Bowes Amateur Hour'] on the radio. That's where all the people started from, Frank Sinatra started from there. I can't think off hand of who they were, but you start with Major Bowes, and if he said you're okay, you were accepted, and so I won the first prize, I went with Major Bowes, and I joined a show called 'Major Bowes Dixie Jubilee' ['Dixie Jubilee']. Speaker 2: And what was that? Speaker 1: Whew. You wouldn't believe it. We had Bill Robinson's [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson] piano player, Putney Dandridge. He's the one who wrote 'Nagasaki.' Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was a famous song and all the dancers used it, and he was the piano player. And we had the Rhythmettes, three black girls, or colored girls (laughter), colored, and they were famous before, but, but, not real famous, not big time yet. Speaker 2: They were dancers or singers or-- Speaker 1: Dan- dancers, and they had a drummer called Frisco Bowman, he played their drums and he was a excellent drummer. And now, what it was, to get on 'Major Bowes,' you had to be an unknown professional. You haven't reached your climax yet, and so, he passed you off as amateur hour, but all the amateur hours were--these fellows were good. Speaker 2: So these were really people that hadn't had big breaks-- Speaker 1: That's all, they wasn't known. Speaker 2: --but they're a long way from amateur. Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, yeah, and he sent me to three of his shows, the 'World's Fair Revue' ['Major Bowes World's Fair Revue'] and, the 'Second Anniversary' ['Second Anniversary Revue'], and then the Ted Mack, who literally replaced Major Bowes, he had a show. Speaker 2: Ted Mack amateur hour ['The Original Amateur Hour']. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Oh, so we had--and the lindy hoppers were on the show, and we were booked first at the Michigan Theatre [ph.], at Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Now was that your first time that far away from home? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Explain that for us. Speaker 1: And Major Bowes, what they did, they had the blacks come in, go up in the balcony, and then we come out with our tux and sing. They undressed us after the first show. They took off all the tails and the tops, and the dress, fancy dresses and put us in overalls. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And the show was--they tell me to go on and not (unclear) 'cause it's our living, so we all dressed down to overalls, especially the boys, and the girl wear, you know, gingham dresses and what not. Speaker 2: Did they say why they did that? Speaker 1: No, they didn't say why. They just told us to do it. Speaker 2: And did anybody buck it, and answer (laughter)? Speaker 1: No, you get no back talk out of us. Speaker 2: Because now, because now, the, the, there's a little money being made- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and you got a good, steady, gig. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So it's fine, so just the costumes, and they were all costumes to you all, right? It didn't matter. Speaker 1: It didn't matter. Speaker 2: But now, in retrospect, do you have an idea what it was, that they didn't want blacks in those nice, sophisticated-- Speaker 1: Tha- that's exactly what it was. They didn't want no blacks looking this good, working for us or dancing on the stage, and we accepted. Speaker 2: So that was like 19--what was that? What year would that have been? Speaker 1: Thirty-eight [1938], wouldn't it, about '38 [1938]? Speaker 2: About '38 [1938]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, you're on the road, your parents [Lottie Spencer and Bunyan Spencer] know this is what you're gonna do now. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You're--you been--now you got about at this point, about possibly what--about ten to fifteen years of dancing experience in-- Speaker 1: Just about, yeah. Speaker 2: --in. So, how long did you stay, stay, with the Ted Mack and Major Bowes thing? Speaker 1: I stayed with them three years. Speaker 2: Three years, up and through the for- the early '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 475188 Speaker 1: Then what happened? Speaker 2: Then I went out on tour by myself, and I wore white tails and white shoes and maroon vest, and white--give it some color, and I imitated Cab Calloway, and I did the flips, and splits, and what not. Speaker 1: Did he ever see you doing the show, did Cab ever see you? Speaker 2: I don't think so, but I (unclear). I worked with him. Speaker 1: So, you're doing your own solo act-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for about a couple of years now, then you run into Maceo Anderson, tell us about this? Speaker 2: Well, his thing was very short--now we had the, The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers], had one of the greatest dancers of his time, Freddie James. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He could dance. He could dance on his hands and flips, and splits, and make his feet like run like [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover, just so marvelous. And they approached me, I was working with [HistoryMaker] Alice Key, I think I was working with, at the Club Alabam. Speaker 1: That's in Los Angeles [California], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So this time, you traveled the world. Speaker 2: Not the world, but the cities. Speaker 1: Yeah, the cities around, around, in the U.S. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You've been around since, so now, as we say in the business, you know you're a road, you know this. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So now you're living in Los Angeles for a while. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And for those who don't know, Club Alabam was a great club, on Central Avenue-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Central Avenue. Speaker 1: --in the mecca of jazz, in the world. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So, Alice is there, Alice Key, another HistoryMaker, and you all are working together? Speaker 2: Alice, and (Unclear), (Unclear), of course Cab, and Wynonie Harris, and this boy looks, this white, but he passed for black. What's his name that played the drums? Can't think of his name, it will come to me. Speaker 1: Not Krupa [Gene Krupa]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Not Rich [Buddy Rich]? Speaker 2: No. I worked them later, both of them, but anyway I-- Speaker 1: Not Bellson [Louie Bellson]? Speaker 2: No. Okay, next one I'll have felt it. Speaker 1: It's in that line, though? Speaker 2: In that line, yeah, and all the girls told me--I didn't wanna join The Step Brothers 'cause, I said well, they, they, they were working on Hollywood at the Music Box [Music Box Theatre, Los Angeles, California], and they said, they come see me perform. And all the girls said, "Go with them 'cause they making movies." Speaker 1: How long had they already been together, The Step Brothers? How long had they been together? Speaker 2: Oh goodness, since the Cotton Club [New York, New York], there with Duke Ellington. Speaker 1: Okay the '20s [1920s] maybe. Speaker 2: Yes, it was '25 [1925], something-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --thirties [1930s], '25 [1925], '30s [1930s] they'd been together, and I didn't particularly care for them, because they were good but, they weren't the ultimate of class that I expected, and I said, "I don't want to join them, if they make it, they got to cut their salary up four ways, and I'll make as much--." Speaker 1: As all of 'em huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And all the girls are saying go with it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and the girls, "Go on Prince [HistoryMaker Prince Spencer]," and I was the favorite of all the girls, I was not--my personality was (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) I understand. Speaker 2: All right, and so I had all the girls tell me, "Go on. Be in the movies, you can always leave them if you want to." So, I, I, joined 'em, and I took Maceo's place. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maceo went to the [U.S.] Army in '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: So, so well tell us about how that, how that occurred that you actually joined them? Were they looking for somebody (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they--yes, yes, 'cause they knew Maceo was, was being inducted, and so they, Happy [Sylvester Johnson], Al [Al Williams], Freddie James, me. Story_ID: 475189 Speaker 1: So you come into new this group [The Four Step Brothers] and it's kind of different when a group is already established, and you're the new man in. Speaker 2: Yeah, but-- Speaker 1: How was that? Speaker 2: I stood out. Speaker 1: Oh, did you? Speaker 2: Yeah. They were gentlemen, cour- courteous and kind, and so I joined 'em, and Freddie James, he could dance, but he would never show me. He would never show me. He--I wanted to do a double wing, and I asked him how to do it, and, "Just like--just get the chair, two chairs, and bum dee, bum, dee, bum de bum." So he would tell me, but he never show me. And he figured if I'm gonna dance with them, steal it if you can. It's there for you, but I'm not gonna show you. Speaker 1: Was that the way it was with a lot of people back those days? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did, did it, make you learn by watching? Speaker 2: Yes, and did that, did that, best you could, and then you would finally, hit the right niche, you know. That's how it go. Speaker 1: So it was still a lesson, but it was a lesson that you had to get yourself. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: It wasn't sit down and show you step by-- Speaker 2: No, they didn't show you step by step. Speaker 1: --and nowadays, there's a lot of step by step instruction. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. That's the only way they learn, step by step. Speaker 1: Yeah. So-- Speaker 2: And some of the stuff you did right and wrong, but it was your way of doing that stuff, and long as it was on time, it was all good. Speaker 1: It was your own expression. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you joined the group, and what do you all do when you join the group? Speaker 2: We--they were working for five hundred dollars a week. Speaker 1: The whole group? Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: Was that a lot of money then? Speaker 2: No, but it was work in Hollywood, and so when I joined the act, and--the manager of Abbott and Costello [William "Budd" Abbott and Lou Costello] came out to see us, Edward, Edward Sherman, and he offered us 1,250 [dollars] to go on, on the road with, with, with his show. Speaker 1: Well, that's almost two and a half times as much money--. Speaker 2: Yes, and so I know I had--even, even though Freddie was a good dancer--better dancer than I'll ever be, and--but I added something to it that Maceo [Maceo Anderson] didn't have, an, elegance, I guess you call it, something that I added to it that made it click, and so our first Saturday at the, at the beginning of the tour with his show was 1,250 [dollars]. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And that was a big jump from five hundred, a big jump for me. Speaker 1: So you all didn't have to think twice about that? Speaker 2: No, no, no. No, no, no, and then they made a movie. The movie was made but Abbott and Costello--can't think of the name now, but it'll come to me. Story_ID: 475190 Speaker 1: So this is like about '43 [1943] -- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) somewhere in that range, so you're doing movies in Hollywood, you got a good life going on. Speaker 2: Yeah, good life. Speaker 1: You're about twenty-six years old, money in your pocket, ladies all around. Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was good. Speaker 1: So, so in '46 [1946], there's--we've got some information on Frank Sinatra, that you performed with Frank Sinatra. Tell us about that. Speaker 2: He saw us dance and he, he, wanted us. He was with The Pied Pipers then, and he, he, was at the Paramount Theatre [Los Angeles, California], and it cost fifty cents to get in before noon at the Paramount, and we were the opening act, and we set the stage on fire. Speaker 1: So back in those days, you had shows all day--you did a show in the daytime? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, show starts at noon, fifty cents at noon, and we pleased him, and he never forgot The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers]. Every show he had, he--when he went to the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] and that, we, we, were honored. Speaker 1: Did you travel with him anywhere, or--? Speaker 2: Yes. We traveled with him San Francisco [California], and I can't think of the other one, but, we were with him constantly on the Strip. Every time he played the Strip, he had us. Speaker 1: Was that the club, the Parisian [Cafe de Paree, London, England]? The Lido [Le Lido, Paris, France]? Or is that overseas? Speaker 2: That's overseas. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 475191 Speaker 1: So you, you [The Four Step Brothers] also went overseas with Frank [Frank Sinatra], or did you go by yourself? Speaker 2: No, we went by our self. We went to Paris [France], and we were explosion over there. People liked us and French girls liked us, and we were just a riot. We stayed in---went to, went to Paris for six months, and we stayed there a year, and then we stayed in Italy for a year, and then traveled around, all over Europe. Speaker 1: So now you're overseas. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is new for you totally, being overseas. Now we know that during that time, during that period, '46 [1946], we know that there's a--in America there's racism and it's obvious, and people know, people know, everybody knows, their place and their role, and it's probably not spoken a lot but, it's felt all the time. But now you're overseas, did you feel any of that tension? Speaker 2: No, no. This is what, what happened, Don Arden produced the shows and he had embedded in them the, you know, "Don't go with the black guys," but they didn't have no, no, no segregation, so (laughter) we got done on backstage, (unclear), you need to do, you, you don't bring that stuff over here that they do in America. You know, just threaten 'em. So he was very nice, understandable. Speaker 1: So you stayed overseas about year or two? Speaker 2: Stayed two--two years, two and a-half years. Speaker 1: Between Paris, Italy, Spain. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 475192 Speaker 1: So, you're twenty-nine years old so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: -- now you're getting ready to hit thirty, and there was a role that you played and they said it was uncredited, in 'That's My Gal,' or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: That was with (Unclear), and--I got it written down somewhere. Speaker 1: So, you had come back from Europe at that point, so about '47 [1947], you came back? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And you were in that, and in that movie, just you, or all of The Brothers [The Four Step Brothers]? Speaker 2: Me, all four of us. Speaker 1: All four of you. Speaker 2: Oh, by that time Maceo [Maceo Anderson] had rejoined the act. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Freddie James quit. He quit, he, he was hyper, he smoke a little weed and, and, he just didn't feel like going to work. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: "I ain't going today." Speaker 1: Oh, he would do that to you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And you all have a show, so what would you do? Speaker 2: Try to do his part, as much as I could, and the three of us, and we got through it most times, but-- Speaker 1: And you only took that for so long, though, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, but--and Maceo was out there, I mean, and he came back, and we--oh, forgot to (unclear) about--when Freddie James quit, we got Flash, Flash McDonald [Rufus McDonald]. He was a good man, he loved the Nicholas brothers, with the hands and movement, and head, in up-- Speaker 1: So now, Fayard [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas] and Harold [Harold Nicholas] are out there on their own, but their own act too, right? Speaker 2: Yes, but they are, they are, were in the movies and--they just weren't effective on the stage, as they were in the movies. The movies, they were the best I've ever seen, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, there's the one scene with the steps-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --I think that Gene Kelly said it, or Fred Astaire, said, it was best dance act-- Speaker 2: Yes, best dance-- Speaker 1: --ever. We've all seen the one scene where they do the double splits, down, down the steps-- Speaker 2: Steps, that was phenomenal. Speaker 1: I think that it was, it was from a movie with--Cab Calloway movie, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I forgot the name of the film. Speaker 2: 'Stormy Weather.' Speaker 1: Right, 'Stormy Weather.' Story_ID: 475193 Speaker 1: So now around the country, there's many different groups-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but you all have that--you all are like the group [The Four Step Brothers] that has the edge, you all can get pretty down (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, we had to fire. We, we, what, what made a difference that we had a opening (unclear) with music, bam. We had a finish, bam. Then we had a part for if we clap our hands, and you ad-lib as much as you want to, see, and made it different every night, mere challenge, you out try to out dance your partner, and the next one, and that next one and that's what--wasn't rehearsed. Speaker 1: So it's like true jazz almost. Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: It, it, was improvised, you all, you didn't know what, and you'd probably fool each other sometimes, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yep, and I would dance last, and it was and at the some point they would, "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, ba, da, da, dum, then, ba, da, da, dum," and it would be there, and the rest was coordinated, and we had a finish, unbelievable. Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about the technical side of things for a moment. Now, back in those days, there was no computer, no click track, there was no tape, you, you had musicians, and especially drummers-- Speaker 2: Yes, oh drummers (unclear). Speaker 1: --that, that, had to be in sync with you all. Speaker 2: They had to be in sync. Speaker 1: So tell us about how that interaction--because as a musician myself, I realize that sometimes, they had to be very attentive, and you had to also know what they were doing, had to be understanding to both. Speaker 2: Well, we had a lot of good drummers. Buddy Rich--forgot his name that quick--he played with a--but the drummers were very good, and we, would, would count off, and on the count of eight, the band would come in and--they, they, this was all music then, and, of course, all choreographed. Speaker 1: All orchestras too, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Oh, we worked with all the orchestras. Erskine Hawkins and he--they had this song out--forgot what it was--Erskine Hawkins and Buddy Rich, and-- Speaker 1: Louis Jordan? Speaker 2: Louis Jordan, Tympany Five, oh he was good. Speaker 1: And there were many groups out at that time, and they were like I--like you said, that if you had to work now, working with a live band, how did you all rehearse? Was it a constant rehearsal, was it a lot of rehearsal all the time? Speaker 2: No, we didn't (laughter). You know musicians; they don't like to rehearse too much. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 2: And this--and we got in with them, and--because most importantly, it was the cue, come in on time, and they were well experienced, good musicians, and good drummers, and we'd give them a cue and they'd come in. Story_ID: 475194 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now at this time of history, there's something else that's going on. You all are dancing kind of at the same time, but music is changing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We're coming 'round to the swing era now-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and we're going into what's called-- Speaker 2: Bebop. Speaker 1: --the bebop era. How is that affecting the steps? Speaker 2: Well, it didn't really affect us [The Four Step Brothers], because we had a part of our act which stayed intact and in unity, and we danced (claps hands) just to that, clap their hands (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so, would it be safe to say that you all were dancing bebop, before they were playing bebop? Speaker 2: Before they (laughter)-- Speaker 1: You all were already dancing bebop. Speaker 2: You could say that, because we didn't have any music, and when, when it did come in, it didn't affect our dance, because we ignored that, that, kind of music and clapped our hands, and that's what we come--identified by, the challenge dance. Speaker 1: And so, do you recall seeing some of the great bebop artists, who were coming through, others like Dizzy [Dizzy Gillespie], Monk [Thelonious Monk], and Bird [Charlie Parker]? Speaker 2: You called them all--Bird. Speaker 1: Any stories and things you can recall seeing them? They were all characters, from what we been told. Speaker 2: Yes. If I had time to think about them, I'd tell you more but, off hand, I--one incident--what's that musician, turn his back to the audience? Speaker 1: Miles Davis? Speaker 2: Miles Davis. Yeah, he had a girl, and she was pretty. I had took a liking to her. I didn't want to go with her or anything, but I wanted to dance with her, and so he came into this club off--on Broadway--I forgot the name of the club. Speaker 1: This is in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: In New York, and he saw her dancing with me, call her, and say, "I don't want you dancing out there with nobody unless there's a hundred people on the floor (laughter). I don't want you out there, you understand that?" Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 475195 Speaker 1: You all went to Spain, and you're doing things all around the country. You were in that movie ['That's My Gal']. Then in '53 [1953], you're about thirty-six. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You all did something with Bob Hope? Speaker 2: Bob Hope and Jerry Lewis, we did 'Here Come the Girls' with Bob. Speaker 1: Tell us about this. Speaker 2: (Sighs) Well, Bob Hope was in his prime then. He and Bing Crosby and himself-- Speaker 1: He was ab- he was about fifty at that point really-- Speaker 2: 'Bout that, yes, and he had us come out to the studio one day, you know, and we danced with him, and he liked it, he liked us, and he said, "I'm gonna make a movie, 'Here Come the Girls'." And we were sultans you know, anything but black (laughter). We were sultans, and he danced with us. It was fun and effective, but we didn't stand out in the movie like I wanted to, or like we wanted to. Speaker 1: There were some great people in that movie. Rosemary Clooney-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --great singer, she was-- Speaker 2: I got a picture of us in there. Speaker 1: So you all were in the movie. How was Bob Hope as a person? Speaker 2: He was nice, oh, he was nice. He didn't never fight for us though, like Jerry Lewis. What's that first television show, what's his name? Speaker 1: Ed Sullivan? Speaker 2: No. The, the, the, star Milton Berle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Milton Berle told 'er- we did the first live, the Texaco show ['Texaco Star Theatre'], and Milton Berle waited five minutes before the show and he says, "If The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers] don't go on, I don't go on." 'Cause they didn't want any blacks to be in the show and Milton Berle says, "If The Step Brothers don't go on, I don't go on." Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So we were on the show. Speaker 1: So you had some champions who were out there for you all Speaker 2: Yeah, and Jerry Lewis told the guys at the Sands [Sands Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada]. We hadn't eaten there--and he says, "Why?" "Well, they don't allow us eat downstairs--." "I'm with you and you're gonna eat today." So, they fed us that night, but they didn't continue but--and, and the approximation to me is that they would applaud for you so greatly on stage and accept you, and you take a bow, gracefully, and bow, thank you, thank you, and then you gotta go out the back door. Speaker 1: (Laughter) As soon as it would be over. Speaker 2: Out the back door, in the back door, on the west side. Speaker 1: So you're in a movie and Bob Hope, what was it you said, he wasn't a fighter for you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. He wasn't. Speaker 1: --but he was nice. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, you know, a nice American. Story_ID: 475196 Speaker 1: So you've been performing. You've been in movies now, and you, you, over the years, you played with the, for the, Queen of England [Elizabeth II], went to Europe again, and then, was this a solo career? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Still Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm still with Step Brothers. Speaker 1: And, and, it said that people like Ed Sullivan and Jack Benny were really into you all. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about Ed Sullivan. Speaker 2: Well, he had a liking for, a certain liking for blacks. In fact, my sister in law, was very friendly with Ed Sullivan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he liked blacks, and so, he gave us a shot on the show. I guess we did more than any other act, at that time, and it was very liberal, and let us go as far as we wanted to, within reason, you know. I could say that he's--he fought and he stood for something, and-- Speaker 1: How about Jack Benny? Speaker 2: I didn't know Jack Benny very well, but I worked with him, but I didn't know him well. Story_ID: 475197 Speaker 1: So this would--now, we're into, we'll say we're going through the, through the mid-'50s [1950s] now. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When did you leave The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers]? Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when I, I, I sold the land I had. Speaker 1: In 1968? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so, for the rest of the '50s [1950s], pretty much you worked with a lot of different people, movies, basically, your dance career. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. It was dance career altogether. Speaker 1: Altogether and since 1960, you all receive a Dance Masters of America award, Lifetime Achievement Award [DMA Lifetime Achievement Award]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so you all kept dancing, 'cause you had been dancing a while now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's 1960, you, you, danced--? Speaker 2: Oh, I danced, I come to Las Vegas [Nevada], first time come to Las Vegas, there was two hotels on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada], the Last Frontier [Last Frontier Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada], and the El Rancho Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], and way down the road was the Hacienda [Hacienda Resort Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], where Mandala- Mandalay Bay [Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], is now and, we, we, we danced at the El Rancho Vegas. I think--I just can't recall his name--but, I think it was, that Latin boy, became a star. He, he, married Lucille Ball. Speaker 1: Desi Arnaz. Speaker 2: Desi Arnaz, he had the band there, a group there, and, we were the opening act. And then, they hadn't built the Frontier yet, they didn't build the Frontier until '47 [1947]. Speaker 1: So the, so the landscape of, of, Las Vegas was very different. Speaker 2: Yes. You had, you had the El Rancho Vegas, and then you had the Last Frontier, and the Silver Slipper [Las Vegas, Nevada]. Speaker 1: Were you around during the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] run when it opened? Tell us about the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Now, I, I, didn't see very much of it because they closed in six months, and we were on tour with Kay Starr. We just had closed, as it opened. Speaker 1: Now you all were like the opening night though, weren't you there opening night, 'cause I think talking to Bob Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey]-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't here. I wasn't here opening night, because the day after, we closed the day before and we had to open somewhere else the day that they-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was a fabulous part of a show biz that I missed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't see none of it. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: It opened and closed and Bob was very prominent in that. Speaker 1: What do you think happened? There's been stories, 'cause they said it was standing room only crowd. Speaker 2: That's right. The stars, I don't know who fed 'em or what, but they had to go out of business, because they were taking all the late spenders from the Strip, and they ended up in Moulin Rouge. Speaker 1: It was the first integrated-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --room. Speaker 2: And they didn't want that, and they didn't have that. Speaker 1: (Laughter) They said it closed mysteriously. So you all danced--you danced through the '50s [1950s], you danced in Vegas here on the Strip, and-- Speaker 2: Every act you can think of, Sophie Tucker, Milton Berle, Ed Wynn, you name it, we done, Danny Kaye. We did a dance with Danny Kaye, and he wanted me and Flash [Rufus McDonald], just two of us, to dance with him, and so Flash and I dance with him, and that was featured in his show, as a highlight in his show. Speaker 1: It seems like back in those days, shows were a lot more thorough, a lot put together, things really worked, there, there, was music. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you think that because of all the technology, people have gotten less talented? Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, that's what it is. They've gotten less talented as the time moved 'cause, I don't know what, what they substitute for it, but they, they found some substitutions for, for talent. I mean now, that talent is accepted by the people and they like 'em, but to performers, who are old, at my age, ninety years old, it's not performing best of their ability. Speaker 1: I can understand what you're saying. I've, you know, being able to catch the tail end of training from older musicians. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I guess you can elaborate more on this. They will tell you, "No, that's not it." Speaker 2: That's not it (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) They will really tell you quickly, "That's not it," or you go to jam session and you couldn't play, they stop the music, tell you to sit down. So, those, those were the kind of trainings you all were under, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 475198 Speaker 1: Now, how about Sammy during this time period? Sammy Davis, Jr., when you all were-- Speaker 2: Oh, I knew him well. Speaker 1: Let's talk about Sammy for a minute. Speaker 2: I met Sammy when he was about twelve years old, and he and I took a liking to each other. He, he, his father called me, "On too long," (laughter). That's when I had a--dancing by myself, and I had, an opening, and had a closing, and then, and then the middle, and I'd just go and ad-lib, just dance, dance, dance, his father said, "Sam, Sam, no, no, no, let this guy nowhere near us, because he's on too long," (laughter). "He don't know when to come off the stage." But I had a act arranged that way. I had an opening, choreographed, and then I had a middle, that's why I was good in the challenge dance. Speaker 1: You had a show? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So now, what was the name of that group with Sammy's father, the Will-- Speaker 2: The Will Mastin Trio. Speaker 1: Will Mastin Trio, yeah. Speaker 2: And, he was sensational with them. Speaker 1: How was Sammy as a person? Speaker 2: Oh, he was-- Speaker 1: He's been described, described, as a very loving, giving, person- Speaker 2: Loving, giving person, he--a picture I gotta show you on the wall, he--my wife would go with--had ask me, and I let her go, to, to, so they'd company 'cause a lot of times, Frank [Frank Sinatra] and the boys and (unclear)--they didn't treat (unclear) boys with respect. They, they, didn't, and he asked me could my wife go and when they made 'Sergeants 3' up in Utah, she went with 'em, and they did some unfavorable things talking with, always kidding though, but respect standing-- Speaker 1: It was always in a joking manner? Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: Do you think he was misunderstood though, because he used to get called Uncle Tom and stuff? Do you think he was misunderstood a lot? Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause he knew the value of working and being accepted on the stage. And I just know that he was a better performer than they--in their heart they knew it--but they play all kind of tricks on him. Put ice down his neck on the plane, unfavorable what--he was a good guy. He--I know when I--he went to Europe with them, in the later s- in the early '60s [1960s], or something, yeah, in the '60s [1960s], because I had a supermarket [in Chicago, Illinois], and he borrowed two thousand dollars from me, and he asked me, "Is it cool if--?" Yeah--so I give it to him and when he come back, I was in the front row, (laughter) waiting on my money and him, but he was a good guy. Speaker 1: Tell us about-- Speaker 2: He was--came to my house for dinner and Jerri [Jeraldyn Spencer], my wife's a good cook all the band loved her cooking. Speaker 1: The bands would come here to eat, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. Count [Count Basie] and Dizzy [Dizzy Gillespie], and--you just name 'em. Story_ID: 475199 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when, when, did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: I met her in 19- about '53 [1953], and she was a model in California, and--oh, and she had a house in California, apartment in California, and a car and was attractive (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you could get around when you got to California (laughter). Speaker 2: And so, (laughter), yes, and I saw her, and I put my clothes in her, in the closet of the house, and the apartment, was fairly, very empty, so I put my clothes right out there, and that's where I stayed. I stayed in the apartment, and then-- Speaker 1: And her name is, when you through, so you can get back-- Speaker 2: Jeraldyn S- Jeraldyn [Jeraldyn Spencer], J-E-R-A-L-D-Y-N. Speaker 1: And she was Jeraldyn who, at that point? Speaker 2: Roch- Anderson [Eddie "Rochester" Anderson], she married Rochester's son, and I moved in with her, and just--reminded me of a story (laughter). Count Basie told his valet, "Put my girl--my clothes in that girl's house that I stay with for the--when I'm in town." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So, so, when I came in town and I stay with Jeraldyn, but--what was I talking about? Speaker 1: You told your wife how you met her? Speaker 2: And so we were married fifty, fifty-two years. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And, I--she got sick in the '50s [1950s] and so I put her in Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota], and I didn't have no money to get her out, no money, that time was a slow period or something, and so I always had friends, and rich guys (laughter), I made friends with him, and so the number, the number man in Chicago [Illinois] is--oh, I forget his name--and I couldn't--her hospital bill was something like $1,500 or something. I didn't have it. Speaker 1: Which was a lot of money back then. Speaker 2: Yes. And I told him, I had to get my wife out of Mayo Clinic, and he said, "I didn't put her--." I said, "I know, but you gotta help me." And I was gonna do 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' and I said, "I'm gonna do this Ed Sullivan show. It's going on tour, and I'll have some money." And when I was paid, first thing I do is, I paid him off, 'cause he was good and timely, and so we moved to, to Florida, and I went to Florida with a show--I forget what it was--Kinko [ph.] was in the show and, and I met her in Florida '52 [1952], and I married-- Speaker 1: And it's been history since then. Speaker 2: History. Story_ID: 475200 Speaker 1: So now, when did you settle down? Well, we'll get to that in a minute. When did you really settle down though, in Las Vegas [Nevada]? Speaker 2: Well, all the work was here. I had dance, and that was good. Oh, Redd Foxx come and got me from my store. He says-- Speaker 1: Okay, just a second, we'll get to the store in a minute, so now, you had bought some property somewhere-- Speaker 2: That's it, on Creech Road. Speaker 1: --out here. Speaker 2: Creech Road, and Nellis where Air Force [Nellis Air Force Base, Nevada] is. Speaker 1: So you were living in Las Vegas at that time, or just working here? Speaker 2: Just working here-- Speaker 1: But you still invested? Speaker 2: Invested-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I invested in the ninety-eight acres, and I went to my boss at the Sahara Hotel [Sahara Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada]. I was appearing there with Kay Starr, and I told him, we wanted to borrow some money 'cause you know we're good and reliable with Kay Starr, and he says, "That's not a lot in Vegas, this is, this is--a casino." I said, "Please, we need it," so he said, "I'll give you a $1,000." I said, "That's good," and we paid a $1000, down, and-- Speaker 1: So you were a real estate investor long before Vegas- Speaker 2: Long time, yeah. Speaker 1: I guess you had a feeling that something was gonna happen around here? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.], I'll never forget, one of the shows and he said, I been coming to Vegas all these years, and haven't got nothing, and this Prince [HistoryMaker Prince Spencer] (laughter), with a little old dancer, came and invested. Speaker 1: So you came in and you, you, you, now, it's the beginning through the '60s [1960s], and you're starting to wind down the dancing career. Well not really wind it down-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --but you're doing different things. Speaker 2: I, I, I left The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers]. I gave a formal notice, and left them. Speaker 1: In '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], yeah. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], okay. So you been dancing even now, about twenty-- Speaker 2: Twenty something years. Speaker 1: Twenty something years, and you've been dancing as a group thirty-five, forty years, as a whole group. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So now, '67 [1967], you started to have different aspirations. So what did you do? Speaker 2: I, I bought National Can [ph.], Reno [Nevada], health club in Reno. His son was going with Kay Starr, and he says, "Boys, I'll tell you something, want you to spend a few bucks [dollars] with National Can." And the other boys didn't hear it at all. Speaker 1: And National Can was what now, a grocery? Speaker 2: A stock. No, a stock on the--listed on the, the board. Mine is Sunshine Mining [Sunshine Mining and Refining Company, Inc.] and National Can, and so I--oh, and he says, know when to sell because--if you get greedy, you'll get hurt. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So I invested in National Can and I think it was eight dollars a share or something, and it went to a hundred and I sold it before, because he told me to sell it. I didn't know what he meant by know when to sell. And so, but I made a big profit, I was like 'Deal or No Deal,' (laughter) I didn't know when to quit. And I made money, but I could've made more. Story_ID: 475201 Speaker 1: And then Redd Foxx came to my store-- Speaker 2: Now, now, let's get to the store--how you got the store, because we haven't got people, a lot of people up to snuff about the store yet. Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: In '68 [1968], when you quit The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers], in '67 [1967], you bought a grocery store? Speaker 1: Not a grocery store, a supermarket. Speaker 2: Okay, tell us about it. Speaker 1: Ernest Collins [Ernest T. Collins] is well known in Chicago [Illinois], good businessman, and he was (unclear) spot, and I look back at it, I didn't get a fair deal, but it was a good deal, and he told me, invest in this. He was gonna open self--all night, like, like they had in California, open all night. What's that place- Speaker 2: One of the grocery stores, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the supermarkets, and he said, "I'm gonna open a supermarket." It was the first black supermarket in Chi- in Chicago, Illinois, and so I put all my trust in him. I trusted him, when it was almost a $100,00. Speaker 2: So you sold some land that you had? Speaker 1: I had, then eighty acres, I had, and I got $250,000, and a $125,000 was mine and a $125,000 was Al's [Al Williams]. Speaker 2: And back in 1968 [1968], that was a lot of money too for a piece of real estate. Speaker 1: Yeah, yes it was, and I bought the land unseen. It was nighttime and he drove by, and (gesture), "All this gonna be yours." (Laughter) I was lucky, I accepted it, his word and, later they began to develop the land and my land was important, and I never saw the land though, later in the daytime, I just bought it. Speaker 2: So you, so you used the money from that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to invest in the supermarket? Speaker 1: Yes, and so I had a supermarket for ten years. Speaker 2: What was the name of the supermarket? Speaker 1: Food Basket [Food Basket, Inc.]. Speaker 2: That was in Chicago? Speaker 1: In Chicago and Ernest Collins was the president. Speaker 2: What side of town was it on? Speaker 1: South Side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was also chairman of the Seaway National Bank [Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois], and he had a, marvelous sense for business. Speaker 2: Is he still living? Speaker 1: No, he's died. He died of a broken leg, then he went to the hospital and died. Somewhere he had a heart attack. Ernest Collins and I, we opened a supermarket and we did fabulous business for about eight years, and then they started building a ghetto around there, and they come and steal and taking and losing--and so Redd Foxx came in one day and said, "Why don't you close this place and come work for me?" I said, "I'm making money here, how close it, how--?" "I'll give you a better deal than this." Speaker 2: I'm sure he said it in his own way, too. Speaker 1: Yeah, and so I thought about it, I closed down and took his advice and went to California, and I stayed with him for a week, I said, this guy is not for me. Now remember--no, later I'll tell you that--remember now, I'm the boss, there are no Step Brothers up here, just Redd Foxx, and we'll get along fine, if you do what I say do. And he was a hard man to work for (sighs), and so I stayed about a week and I left, and I came back to Chicago, and I can't work for a guy this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what's-- Story_ID: 475202 Speaker 1: What were you doing for Redd [Redd Foxx] at that point, dancing or you--? Speaker 2: Well, I was his assistant. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And finally I became the president, I'll tell you that, and I said, I can't dance for him, and so he called me up: "Damn, I, I, offer you a good job as a--damn money's good, what's wrong with you?" I said, "I don't know, I can't please you, I don't think--." He says, "Well, give it another try." So I went back, and he said, "No you can please me. You're not The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers] no more. You're not working for The Step Brothers. I'm the star, I'm the Redd Foxx, you do what I tell you to do, and you get the money I want you to get, and you got a job." I say, "All right," and, so long story short, we made 'Harlem Nights.' He says, "Tell Eddie Murphy I want five hundred thousand dollars." And my heart with my mouth, "Jesus." And he says, "I know from being in Las Vegas [Nevada] with him, him and Bill Cosby were gambling at night time, at 3:00, 4:00, 2:30." And he says, "Prince [HistoryMaker Prince Spencer], go get me two thousand dollars from the Hacienda [Hacienda Resort Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada]." I couldn't get that together, I had business, that's impossible to get two thousand dollars when you want it, any time of night, and I'm--Redd says he want two thousand dollars, and expect the people in the cage to know me and-- Speaker 1: So you were his kind of manager at this point? Were you like his assistant? Speaker 2: Yeah--I was assistant. Speaker 1: And he's coming up with all kind of stuff to go through. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so he later says, "Run my business for me, but you do what I tell you to do, and do what I say do, and if you don't do that, you, you're no good to me. Well, what good are you?" And so I had my family here with me, and three--two children, and so--I said, "Redd want--Eddie Murphy, Redd want five hundred thousand dollars." Oh, Eddie Murphy laughed so hard, and fell all down, "Five hundred thousand dollars? I don't give Eddie--Richard Pryor but a million [dollars], and he did movies and everything." Speaker 1: And then, this is after 'Sanford and Son' though-this is, this is, pa-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, so, let's go back further now, so you were with him before 'Sanford and Son,' right? Speaker 2: No, during 'Sanford and Son.' Speaker 1: During, 'Sanford and Son,' okay. Speaker 2: In the, in the late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: So, now you're, you come out, you closed your store [in Chicago, Illinois] because it was, it was becoming, not a profit center for you-- Speaker 2: Not a profit there. Speaker 1: So, now you been used to being the boss in one way or the other-- Speaker 2: Yes, for a long time, yeah. Speaker 1: So now, you're out here, you're out here, you've moved to Vegas now-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and he's got this role on 'Sanford and Son' and you're his assistant? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now how is that day to day? Speaker 2: Well, he put me in about in five episodes or something, six or something, and, we, we, came in dancing--expect me to do something--and 'cause I'm a have sweet words, and sometimes atmosphere, and so, that went down pretty good. Speaker 1: How were the other people like Demond Wilson and-- Speaker 2: They was pretty nice, they-- Speaker 1: --Whitman Mayo. Speaker 2: Yeah, Whitman Mayo, and Demond, there, there, those guys are gentlemen, and they different than day and night, in Redd Foxx- Speaker 1: And LaWanda Page? Speaker 2: And LaWanda Page and Bubba [Donald T. Bexley]. Speaker 1: Now wasn't see--now, now, didn't you know her from maybe back, back in the day? Wasn't she a dancer too? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she was a dancer, but I didn't know her well, and--Bubba, I didn't know him but, he, he, was a ex-vaudeville, you know. And Redd, I gotta tell you this. Later when I became more prominent, with Redd Foxx, and he put more responsibility on me, I was known as his manager, but not for a long time. And one day, I bring this record out to him every night, after he'd do his act, and he'd say, "I'm gonna plug my album now," and so, I missed the cue. "And I'm gonna plug my album now," and I missed it. He say, "I got the dumbest nigger working for me." And then this time--and oh forgot their names--Fred Flynn's [ph.] people, who knew me from The Step Brothers, and knew me from dancing and the Paramount [Paramount Theatre, Los Angeles, California] thing, they felt so, so bad for me, and I just went down to give it to him and come back, and, and, show business you call it you're, milking it, because, I know how to get sympathy, he insult you on the stage--and put my head down and looked--but--he, he, was a good guy. And we lived in the best place, we lived in the Waldorf Astoria [New York, New York], he had a suite, I had an adjoining room. Speaker 1: How would you describe him? You said he was a good guy, was, was, it kind of like a two sided thing? Speaker 2: Two sided guy he is, yeah, and you really didn't know him because, he wanted what he wanted, he wanted impossible things. Story_ID: 475203 Speaker 1: And so, I didn't finish telling you, I asked Eddie Murphy for $500,000, and he got it, and he was behind in his taxes, about $3 million, and Miss Davis [ph.] come out and said, "Well, where's the money you made from 'Harlem Nights'? You got $500,000." And he said, "I drank it up, and I gambled it away." (Claps hands) That's it--the next day she had seven cars at his house to take his stuff away. Speaker 2: So, so, rather than be humble about it-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --he was in her face about it. Speaker 1: And so, now that's where Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett] come in. Now he got a break and, do, do, to do, 'The Royal Family.' It's Della Reese and Redd Foxx, and--I forgot the names, but they were the major two, and when he died, he died, and I knew he was gone because, he, he, made it on himself--and fell out--I was on the right side and-- Speaker 2: Tell us about this, because you're on the set of 'The Royal Family'--before we get to that--that part of his demise--let's talk about the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] thing, because--do you think it was just--you were managing, but it wasn't--but you couldn't manage someone that can't be managed, right? Speaker 1: That's right. That's exactly right, right, right (claps hand) thank you. You said the right word. I was manager in name only, because I didn't have the complete control. If he didn't like it, he'd ask--I negotiated a bad deal. Speaker 2: Do you think that he--were there a lot of artist like that who'd made a lot of money, but it just didn't see the future, was it a lack of planning or just didn't care? What do you think it was? Speaker 1: Lack of planning, 'cause I always did plan and negotiate for the best and the ultimate goal, but he, he didn't, he just took it. And so, he wasn't way there--Redd, you owe $3 million. Now what it was, he paid his taxes, but he didn't pay some taxes, that, that, state tax that goes up every year. He did 'Sanford and Son' for a number of years, and he didn't pay no money on that, and so that was his taxes also, and so that added onto what he owed, and it came to $3 million. And Miss Davis washed her hands, she said, "That's it." Speaker 2: Now was she his accountant, or-- Speaker 1: No, she was Internal Revenue. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah--representative. Speaker 2: And that wa- we recall--I recall as a young man, the pictures of, of the news, of, him standing outside-- Speaker 1: Outside crying. Speaker 2: Yeah, and all that, and that was at that point, that he realized that he had really messed up, at that point? Speaker 1: Well now, he didn't because, Eddie Murphy had got him a second shot. Eddie Murphy made the plans for him to pay off the internal revenue, so much per month, per week, and he was on his way back, and everything was looking, looking up. Story_ID: 475204 Speaker 1: So that fateful day, we're outside. We see all, it's all in Jet magazine, it's everywhere, Redd Foxx outside crying. People are asking the question, "How did Redd Foxx go broke?" Because all we know is 'Sanford and Son,' it's all good, so what happened after that? Speaker 2: He paid taxes, but he didn't pay all the taxes that was due. He ignored paying those state taxes, and something was that--he did, he owed this money--they didn't put it on him. Speaker 1: So he started getting second chances from Eddie Murphy, people helping him (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Eddie Murphy was awfully good to him. Eddie Murphy buried him and, when he died, he was on his comeback. Speaker 1: So his show, the, 'The Royal Family'? Speaker 2: Yeah, he had made one or two episodes. Speaker 1: Tell us about that day. Speaker 2: That, that morning I went to the studio, and he was jumping and jovial, and, "All right dancer, why you, you ain't got me--you didn't get me no, ice cream? I want some Haagen-Dazs. Damn, (unclear), get that thing for me there." How would I know he wanted Haagen-Dazs? But guessing, it wasn't even (unclear) (laugher), but it wasn't his fault, it was my fault. Speaker 1: It's always your fault. Speaker 2: And so, I said, all right, I'll get it, and so I took about two steps from him, and he grabbed his heart and everybody thought he was playing. Speaker 1: He had been doing that for years. Speaker 2: Yeah. "This is the big one, Elizabeth." Speaker 1: Who was there? Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett]? Speaker 2: Della Reese, his wife, Ka Ho Cho, and me and Slappy White, I think was in, in, the show and, and, Reynaldo. Speaker 1: Reynaldo Rey. Speaker 2: (Nods head) And, when he fell out on the stage, and, urinated on himself, I knew that was it. Speaker 1: You knew inside that that was it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So the ambulance, the ambulance came and-- Speaker 2: And took him and tried to revive him. I didn't see 'em now, but they say they revived him for about some short while, and that was it. Speaker 1: So that, that, changed your life a little bit-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh-- Speaker 1: --because now what's happening (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now, I got a resume I got to show you, you could see it. I had to get a resume to join the casinos, so I became the casino host, but I had a first class resume. You gotta see it, I had the governor sign it, and I had Jerry Lewis sign it, and I had--can't think of it--I'll show it to you--and it was first class. And, "What do you wanna be a casino host for?" Well, Major Riddle, before the--Redd died, we was doing a show at, at, the Silver, Silverbird [Silverbird Hotel, Winchester, Nevada], he said to me, "Why don't you be a slot host, a may- casino host?" Speaker 1: So let me ask you, Redd was still doing his show sometimes, along with 'Sanford and Son'? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I do, I remember being in Detroit [Michigan], the Fisher Theatre, and I remember a comment where he came out on stage. I wasn't supposed to be there, I was too young, I wasn't supposed to be there, and I think my aunt took me in though, snuck me in. But anyway, I remember him saying now, "Those of you all that's waiting for 'Sanford and Son'--,"-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --"you--it's not going to be that tonight." Speaker 2: (Laughter) Forget it, yeah. Speaker 1: And he proceeded to start cussing. Speaker 2: Yep, yep. That's exactly it. Speaker 1: So, so, so, he asked you to be a casino boss? Speaker 2: A casino host. Speaker 1: Or, why, why, why, you wanna be a host? Speaker 2: And Redd say, "What do you mean a host?" No--yes, the man said--because Redd was saying something to me, and I said, "Well, I can always be a casino host." "What's a casino host? That ain't nothing." So I didn't mention that no more. And, I had it in the back of my head that I'd be a casino host, and when Redd died, that's the first thing I could do, a job, with fairly good money. Story_ID: 475205 Speaker 1: --You came back home and thought about it for a minute, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I became a casino host, and-- Speaker 1: What does a casino host actually do? Speaker 2: Comp people, who gamble a lot, free dinner, and special privileges are due, giving money according to how much they played and you see they bought they record, we give 'em free money, like a hundred dollars a week, or something, or five hun- five dollars a week, or how, how, according to how they gamble. Speaker 1: So your job is to know who's who. Speaker 2: Who's who, yeah, and then me being on 'Sanford and Son' and Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers] and everything--I'll show you--I was just in the right place, at the right time. And so that became my second, second love, you know--being a casino. Speaker 1: Let's back up before--let's back up just a little bit before we go back, back, to the casino host. Do you have a small role in Harlem, in 'Harlem Nights' yourself? Speaker 2: They cut it out. The, the, the casino caught on fire, in that scene, and somebody did--didn't particularly like, or something, and Redd [Redd Foxx] said, "Just wipe the whole thing out." I still get paid for it, though; every, every, month I get a check. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now in that movie, you had Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett], you had Redd Foxx, I think Richard Pryor was in that? Speaker 2: Richard Pryor? Speaker 1: Yeah, almost every major comedian-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: How was it working with all--how was the set on that? Speaker 2: Oh, they were, they were just--all laughter from day to day to, to, to end of, end of the day. They were wonderful. Redd Foxx was telling jokes and Richard Pryor was telling jokes, Eddie Murphy was telling jokes. Speaker 1: Della Reese? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And Della Reese says people don't know that she's a minister now, but she's a very funny lady. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: She's a--she has a very dry kind of humor and she's a HistoryMaker also. Speaker 2: I knew Della Reese when I was dancing with The Step Brothers. Speaker 1: She's a Detroit [Michigan] native-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which is very close to Toledo [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So now, you come through all this, you had a great career, you've seen a lot since the--I mean, you're now come through dancing, you had a supermarket, you worked for icon--iconic figure Redd Foxx, so now you're a casino host, in the casinos, now how was that when you first started? Speaker 2: Well, it was favorable, because I got--it's like show business, you make people know you, and be nice to them, and you offer 'em as much as you can, you know. And if it's too much, the boss will tell you, you give 'em too much. They spend--don't spend no money, look at what they spend. They, they got a record of it. Speaker 1: Now, now, did many of your friends from the past come in and see you, like Jerry Lewis and people see you? Speaker 2: Well, I got a--what's it, what's it--Karate Kid, come see me, sign autographs, and, and people know my face, and so it's a pleasure. So now, now, it died down, and I had a stroke, and they still kept me, so I really don't--not as active as I used to be, but I was good at that because it's part of show business. Story_ID: 475206 Speaker 1: Let's talk about dancing today and, and, how you see and view the talent. Even if it's just music and dancing, the whole thing, do you think that--now, now we addressed it earlier, about technology, but do you think that--what, what, would it take to save the things back to the way they were? Speaker 2: I don't--I don't know. [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover, he's unpredictable, his feet are the best I've ever seen. He just move 'em and they can do, but they took it, a step further, out, out, of the concept that people could see and enjoy what they're doing. This guy makes so many taps, he's, he's, he's, just great, great. Speaker 1: You can't even see it though, it's so many-- Speaker 2: That's right, you can't believe it, and I believe that sometimes, you get past the people. You are good, you are great, you're marvelous, but it's not brought to the point that it's acceptable and you understand it. Speaker 1: What do you think that--what yeah--so we're, even like live and jazz music, got too far of the people sometimes. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What do you think, is--has the audience changed too, where, where, they accept things that aren't necessarily up to par? Speaker 2: Partly. Now some of 'em have, some of it's gone, because they think that way, they accept this, and they see this, but you got a large part that're still squares, and it's over their head. They don't understand it, but they know it's good, but they don't understand it from, from, their heart. Speaker 1: So you have to have a, to be able to bridge the gap-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's it. Speaker 1: --between the squares and those, those, that do, the hipsters. Speaker 2: You have to reason--you have to bridge the gap. Speaker 1: Why do you think that the interest--I'm sure that there are circles of people that still are into tap, and understand hoofing, but why isn't there more? I mean nowadays, you don't see--you see a lot of dancing, or movement, I'll call it movement, but the refinement of tap dancers--why do you think it's not as much interest nowadays? Speaker 2: That's a-- Speaker 1: I was gonna say, outside of Savion, is there anyone of note that you like right now? Speaker 2: There's a lot of unknowns that dance their head off, they're dancing really good. I, I, Robert Reed [Robert L. Reed] got this dancing [St. Louis Tap Festival] in St. Louis [Missouri] every year, and I was invited last year and my pupil who I taught dancing, he was a teacher-- Speaker 1: And his name is? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: It's okay. Speaker 2: I got a book there. Yeah--he's teaching dancing, and sometimes they, they, they, go beyond--they haven't acquired yet, the, the, technique of understanding dancing, make it simple. Some point or place, some part of your routine, gotta be simple so they understand it, and everything can't be pushed together, and say here it is. Speaker 1: I've heard that from artists across the board when it comes to visual arts to, to--'cause it's all connected some way--that the musician, you, you, next have the same thing in jazz, where they get too far, far out, and people didn't know (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, some point bebop got that way, and it got so people didn't quite understand it. Speaker 1: I've heard stories, I think my grandfather told me one time we was in New York [New York], and the people were lined up--Coltrane [John Coltrane] was playing and it was three people in there-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --but Cannonball [Cannonball Adderley] had a line around the corner, 'cause Cannonball's music felt different. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, so, it's that kind of, kind of relationship. Speaker 2: Yes, that's it, that's how it is (simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 475207 Speaker 1: Now you all received a star on the Hol- on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, you have a star, and was that for The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers]? Speaker 2: Yes. We was the first black, Step Brothers to have a star--dancers, before the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas], they give us ours. Speaker 1: You got that in '88 [1988], 1988 you received that. I'm gonna look for that when I get back to-- Speaker 2: Yes, do, right in front of the--that hotel, right across the street from the-- Speaker 1: Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Roosevelt, right in front of the Roosevelt Hotel [Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Now is there anything else that, that, you'd like to add--add, to, to, our discussion? Speaker 2: Well, I--named all the careers I, single, Step Brothers, supermarket, Redd Foxx, and casino host, so-- Story_ID: 475208 Speaker 1: So you named your careers and you--how do you feel about the way you lived your life, and what's really important to you now? How do you, how do you, when you look back? Speaker 2: Oh, I could have saved more money. I didn't--I had the knowledge and the brains, but I, I, didn't. I threw away a lot of money, and I, I, there's amazing part about it, I found God and I quit gambling, quit smoking, quit drinking, so I have no desire. I work in the casino, and I have no desire at all to gamble. Speaker 1: I read somewhere you were even like a minister or something, for, for, a while here. Speaker 2: No, I never did, but, I would enjoy that. Speaker 1: Well right now you are in a way, because you are ministering by telling me stories. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: For those going into the field of dancing, or entertainment, what suggestion would you have for them? Speaker 2: Know your craft, do it well, rehearse, and when you go on the stage, know what you're going to do. Plus, be good at it. Story_ID: 475209 Speaker 1: What hopes and aspirations do you have for the African American community in the future? Speaker 2: That we would support one another, have faith in 'em and advise 'em to do their best. Don't think your talent is wasted or throwed away, nurture it, cultivate it, as something you'd be proud to pass on. Speaker 1: What value do you consider most important in a person? Speaker 2: Haven't a word, be honest. Speaker 1: Can we say integrity? Speaker 2: Beautiful word. Story_ID: 475210 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered, Mr., Mr. Spencer [HistoryMaker Prince Spencer], and what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: He was honest man. He was a good man and he showed sympathy for others. And a large, large, part of that, is, I didn't learn that 'til later years, 'til I got to be much older--believe in God. All things are possible with God. Speaker 1: Is there anything that you want to do that you haven't done yet? Speaker 2: (Laughter) No I don't think so. I never went fishing in my life. I don't wanna be--I don't wanna go out and sit for a hour, I can buy a whole bail of fish for seven dollars. Speaker 1: And do you have a message to children and young people today, your message? It can, it can, relate to entertainment or just in general. What message would you like to say to them? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, "Honor your mother and father that your days may be long upon the earth, which the Lord thy God, give thee." Have integrity and be truthful, and the rest will come. Speaker 1: I want to thank you for this interview; it's been very good, you've taught us a lot, and you really gave us a great glimpse into what was going on, back in those days, we appreciate the interview, and we appreciate your life that you've lead, so you're helping us all be better people. Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 475211 Speaker 1: This is from 'Harlem Nights' that they cut out, night club scene burned down and something didn't please Eddie [Eddie Murphy], so I get the residual check, but I don't--I didn't appear in the movie. I get all the credits on the screen, but no [HistoryMaker] Prince Spencer in person. Speaker 2: My--on the, on the left is my brother, Theodore Spencer, and next to him is my mother Lottie Spencer, and next to her is my dad Bunyan Spencer, and on the right, is my sister Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Spencer Willis], and under Wilhelmina, is Prince Spencer, and on my left is my brother Fred Spencer [Frederick Spencer]. That picture was taken in 1927, and that's our car, first car that we ever owned. Speaker 1: Do you know what kind of car that was? Speaker 2: I think it was a Dodge. I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.], and my wife Jeraldyn [Jeraldyn Spencer], and Prince Spencer. And there's a bit we were doing, he's hugging my wife, and I'm telling her I'm gonna beat her. Speaker 1: Oh, now that's one of the scenes from 'Harlem Nights,' and that's Eddie Murphy, on my left, I'm in the middle, Prince Spencer, and on my right is the unpredictable Redd Foxx. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's Prince Spencer and Richard Pryor, on the set of 'Harlem Nights.' Speaker 2: That's the queen of Iran and me bowing to her. Speaker 1: That's my lovely wife, Jeraldyn Spencer. Speaker 2: And dad, and me, and my mother, Bunyan Spencer, Prince Spencer, and Lottie Spencer. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) And that's when we received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. We was known as the best opening act in show business, The Four Step Brothers. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Oh, that's your wife, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Roy Campanella, that's Roy Campanella and your wife. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): (Unclear). Speaker 1: Um-hm. All of us right there--did you see her? Speaker 2: Yes, she's here. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): All right, ready. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): So, who, who's in this photo? Speaker 2: That's--Jerry-- Speaker 1: Who's the actress? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Jane Powell? Speaker 1: Yeah--Jane Powell. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Can you, name The Step Brothers for us? Speaker 1: Al, Al Williams, Flash McDonald [Rufus McDonald], Jane Powell, Prince Spencer, and Maceo Anderson. Spencer-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, I missed the beginning. Speaker 1: Tony Bennett and Prince Spencer. Speaker 2: And these are The Step Brothers, from bottom up is Prince Spencer, Rufus McDonald, Maceo Anderson, and Al Williams...