 Story_ID: 661021 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Markhum Leon Stansbury, Sr. [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury]. That's M-A-R-K-H-U-M, Leon, L-E-O-N, S-T-A-N-S-B-U-R-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind Markhum? Speaker 2: Well Markhum is my family name and I guess I was the first one. Actually I was the first one to go to college, but my mother [Eliza Markham Stansbury] was kind enough to give me that name and I go by the name of Mark now. Because of, after I went into radio, they changed it, shortened. Said it was easier to say Mark than Markhum. Speaker 1: So when you were, when you were growing up, people called you Markhum? Speaker 2: They called me Markhum, and right now if I see anyone they may say, "There is Markhum, hey Markhum." I know then that it's someone who has known me for a long, long time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. It seems to be a tendency in the black community to call people by their full name unless it's a nickname too or something. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But if you're a William, you're usually called William instead of Bill. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And sir what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is April 5th, 1942. I was born in Memphis, Tennessee, also known as Shelby County, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: My occupation is a retired educator. Retired from the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] as assistant to the president, and I'm also a on air personality on AM 1070, WDIA Radio [Memphis, Tennessee] playing gospel music on the weekends. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April the 25th, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at--in the studios of AM 1070, WDIA at 2650 Thousand Oaks Boulevard [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. You say it very professionally. Story_ID: 661022 Speaker 1: So before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they're kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one being do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Yeah, I would probably say it's hamburger. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color, purple. Speaker 1: All right. Favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: New Orleans [Louisiana] and Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I guess my favorite saying would be, "Lost somewhere between sunrise and sunset. Sixty golden minutes each set with sixty golden seconds. No reward is offered for they're gone forever." That's the way I used to close my radio program. I've been doing that for years. Story_ID: 661023 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right now I'm going to ask about your family history. On your mother's side of the family and your father's [Willie Stansbury] side. I'll start with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know anything about my father's side, okay. Well we can do it--okay, okay. Speaker 1: But there might be something. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Eliza, E-L-I-Z-A, Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R, Markham, M-A-R-K-H-A-M, Stansbury, S-T-A-N-S-B-U-R-Y [Eliza Markham Stansbury]. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her birthday is September and you would ask me that, and unfortunately I don't know. I would have to look on my materials to find out. And she was born down in Mississippi. Speaker 1: What, what part, what town? Speaker 2: Morgan City, Mississippi. That's a little south of Greenwood [Mississippi]. Everybody knows about Greenwood, a little south of Greenwood. Speaker 1: Okay. South of Greenwood and do you think she was--was she born in the 1920s, or-- Speaker 2: She was because she--right now she would have been I believe a hundred, about 106 years of age. Speaker 1: So she was born actually in 1910. She, she was born in--yeah I think she's born in maybe 19-- Speaker 2: Okay, cause I would have to look at-- Speaker 1: Nineteen o' eight [1908]. Speaker 2: That's what I was gonna say. I believe it was 1908 when she was born. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a little older when she had you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what do you--what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and are there any stories about, about them and any stories about emancipation that go all the way back to, you know, the Reconstruction of slavery or, or any remarkable people in the family? Speaker 2: No. I can just go back to my grandmother and grandfather who would be my mother's mother and my mother's father. They didn't live on a farm. They lived down in the country as we refer to it. And back in the day, my sister [Claudine Stansbury] and I would go and visit them from time to time. They raised pigs as I can recall. And also there were chickens, and that's just about it. They were church going people. And my mother used to keep me in church [Saint Andrew A.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee]. When I was coming up, I used to dread--because every, almost every time the church doors opened, she would have my sister and me there at church. And not just there, but participating and now that I have become an adult and a father and a grandfather, it's the best thing that could have ever happened to me. Because now time you see these young people and they all out in gangs and don't even think about church and back when I was growing up you never heard of anyone working on a Sunday. When I mean working, I mean doing yard work and painting and all of those kinds of things. And now I can drive from home going to church and on a Sunday I can see at least maybe ten or fifteen gentlemen out cutting the grass and painting or whatever. But I just thank God for my family. For having me in church on Sunday. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now what were your grandparents' names? Speaker 2: My grandparents were named Eddie Markham [Ed Markham], E-D-D-I-E, M-A-R-K-H-A-M. And my grandmother was Mary [Mary Carter Markham], M-A-R-Y, Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R, Markham, M-A-R-K-H-A-M. Speaker 1: Okay, and you say they, they really weren't farmers, but they did raise pigs and chickens. Speaker 2: Right, as far as I can recall that was the only-- Speaker 1: So what did they do for a living? Did they work in the town there? Speaker 2: My mother, grandmother did not work, but my grandfather did that and also he picked cotton. Speaker 1: Sort of like hired out as labor. Speaker 2: Right, right, absolutely, that was it. Speaker 1: All right, so this is--so, so your mother grew up now in, in--right near (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Morgan City, Mississippi near Greenwood, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 661024 Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about growing up in those days? This is-- Speaker 2: No, because--at least I just don't recall it if it were. She worked all the time when we were coming up as children. We were around--our [maternal] grandmother [Mary Carter Markham] raised us while my mother [Eliza Markham Stansbury] was out doing domestic work. And as I tell everybody, she never made more than five dollars a day, not an hour. When you say day, somebody would say, "Did I understand you right?" Say, "You're absolutely right." She never made more than five dollars a day, not an hour, doing domestic work and then one of the families that I recall that she worked for had a store, a clothing store. And sometimes they would pull her from the home, take her to the store and she would do work in the store. She always taught my sister [Claudine Stansbury] and me to never buy anything unless it's on sale because it's eventually gonna go on sale. And things that you need like shirts or underclothes, you buy them, buy them all the time when they on sale. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, good advice. So did she work for the same family for a long time? Speaker 2: She worked for the same family for a long time. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay so, so she had no--was she able to get an ed- education growing up out there, Morgan City [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: As far as I can recall, my mother never went any further than the sixth grade in school, never. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as I was about to say earlier, I was the first in my entire family to attend high school and graduate from college. I was the first. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a, a story about--or did your mother ever tell, tell you about how she came to come to Memphis [Tennessee]? Speaker 2: No, no I don't recall that. It's no sense in me just fabricating, I just don't recall. Speaker 1: But do you have a sense that they thought it was a better opportunity than Morgan City? Speaker 2: Absolutely. In fact, most people--Memphis was the big city. A lot of people would leave Memphis and go to Chicago [Illinois]. But Memphis was always the first stop. And they would come and she, like other people that I know, came to Memphis to find better opportunities. Although she went to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania for a while, and then she came back and spent the rest of her life--she died young. I think he was sixty-two when she died. Speaker 1: Okay. So she came to Memphis first, then to Philadelphia. Speaker 2: Right, and then back to Memphis. Speaker 1: And then back to Memphis. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you know what brought her--what took her to Philadelphia? Speaker 2: No I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Her employer didn't move there or anything. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It wasn't that kind of thing. And were you alive? I mean--(unclear) to Memphis? Speaker 2: No, when she came back from Philadelphia, because the way it seems as though she got pregnant with me while she was in Philadelphia. She came here and had me and then stayed. And then after my [maternal] grandfather [Ed Markham] died, my grandmother moved up to help her raise my sister and me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So it's just you and your sister? Speaker 2: Just me and my sister, right. Story_ID: 661025 Speaker 1: All right. Well, okay. Now let me ask you about your father's side. You say you don't know anything--do you know his name? Speaker 2: His name was Willie [Willie Stansbury], W-I-L-L-I-E, Stansbury. Speaker 1: Okay. And was he from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: I believe he was. And my mother [Eliza Markham Stansbury] said he was always abusive and I think that's the reason she left Philadelphia and came back to Memphis [Tennessee]. Here recently, when I say recently, maybe within the last ten years or so, I met some people who were relatives of his. And they see me and now they always call me Cuz. "Hi Cuz, how you doing?" Real, real nice. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did you ever-- Speaker 2: Go around? No. Speaker 1: Come into contact with him when you were growing up? Speaker 2: With him? No, never. No if he, if were to-- Speaker 1: Call or anything. Speaker 2: No. If he were to walk in here right now and you told me, "Well Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury] if you can point your father out, I'd give you a million dollars." I'd lose the dollars. Speaker 1: No, you'd probably get it 'cause you'd look for a guy that's over 100 years old. Speaker 2: Pretty good. Speaker 1: That's about the only (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, but that's--so you--once--yeah that's a, that's a considerable distance from Philadelphia to Memphis. Speaker 2: To Memphis, right. Speaker 1: And it's not a familiar route. People don't go back and forth-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --between Memphis and Philadelphia a lot. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, so okay. So your mother comes back and now is your--are you older than your sister [Claudine Stansbury]? Speaker 2: Yes, thirteen months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thirteen months. Speaker 1: All right, so your sister has another father. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well is there a, a story? I hate to keep dragging your father in, but is there a story about how they met or did she talk about him at all? Speaker 2: Never did talk about him. Never did talk about him and in fact, you know when I was growing up, a lot of the kids who were growing up did not have--we came from single families. And then there were others who did have a father. But nobody ever, you know, jabbed me. "Mark, your daddy So and So and So and So," never had anything like that. I was blessed along those lines. When you see now times when you see a lot of families don't have a father and they become despondent and all. Because I have two sons [Markhum Stansbury, Jr. and Marlon Stansbury] and I tell them they were extremely fortunate to have a mother and a father in the house. And both my wife [Lucy Barber] and I at the time, because their mother and I have divorced, but we still remain friends and communicate. And I respect her because I say she will always be the mother of my sons. And I thank her for giving me those two sons. When my kids were growing up, they played baseball, basketball, football and some music. And my wife and I were there for everything that they did. And I tell them now that they were very, very blessed to have that kind of support from both a father and a mother. Speaker 1: That's true, that's true. So is--now I know that--is there anything that--is there any characteristic or talent or anything you think you got maybe from your father at all? Speaker 2: Like I said, I don't know anything about my father, nothing. Not one thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Sometime you know a mother say, "Oh you're just like your father--." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in that aspect or that aspect, even if they like or don't like the father. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: Especially if you don't like him. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. She never said, she never said that. You know in fact like I said, she very seldom mentioned him. And I guess I was a bookworm. I liked to read when I was growing up, growing up. Go to the library and spend time in the library. Like I said, didn't have the father there to do what I did for my kids and I was just blessed and happy to be in the library, to be someplace. Story_ID: 661026 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did you take anything after your mother [Eliza Markham Stansbury]? Speaker 2: Being a kind, gentle person, I think I did. And being a sincere person, a no nonsense person. Always about doing the right thing and about business. I think I took that quality from my mother. Believe in treating people right and being family oriented because my mother was from a large family. I believe there were ten sisters and brothers. And we just was always family. You know my uncles and aunts would come to visit as long as my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Carter Markham] was living with my mother, and long as she was living. When she came to Memphis [Tennessee], she stayed with us. And for all the time we had an aunt or an uncle coming to visit her. Story_ID: 661027 Speaker 1: Did you learn a lot from your aunts and uncles coming? Speaker 2: Well I, well I, well I, I think I did, and, and that was the honesty and, and treating people right. Being Christian oriented. None of my uncles and aunts as I recall, were alcoholics or drinkers. Socially, yes they did. I don't have a problem with anybody drinking myself. But you know you just do it in what-- Speaker 1: Moderation I guess. Speaker 2: Moderation is the word. You do it in moderation. I think both of my sons [Markhum Standsbury, Jr. and Marlon Stansbury] drink, and they do it in moderation. You know I remember my oldest son, he went to college. And that was the first time he had had a drink. And he said he went out one night and he just decided he wanted to get drunk. And I said, "What?" He said, "Yes I wanted to get drunk to see what it felt like." And he said, "And since, I've never gotten drunk again." He said, "I will not lie to you Dad," he said, "but when I go out, I will get me a--in moderation, a drink." And that's it--and I think that's good, you know. Story_ID: 661028 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So now--so well tell us about your sister. Now she's thirteen months-- Speaker 2: She's thirteen months--her name is Claudine [Claudine Stansbury], C-L-A-U-D-I-N-E. And she is a retired educator also. She taught science for I think close to forty years in the Memphis city school system [Memphis City Schools; Shelby County School District]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so she taught science, that's great. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 661029 Speaker 1: So do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember I first went off to--first went to school, I went to Leath Elementary School [Memphis, Tennessee]. And it was in walking distance. They didn't have bussing at the time. And I remember Mrs. Cora Blackman [ph.] was my teacher. And I can remember once taking an apple from a student, eating his apple. And Mrs. Blackman called my mother [Eliza Markham Stansbury]. And my mother came over to the school to see what was going on, why did I take--you know a fellow student's apple. She tore my butt up right there when I was in the first grade. I shall never forget it. And that taught me not to take anything that didn't belong to me. She whipped me right there in front of her. She didn't take me outside the door, but she whipped me right there. That's one thing. I can remember when I was in the second grade, Mrs. Santas [ph.]. I had this teacher. And when she would call the role, she would say "(pronunciation) Markhum Stansbury [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury]." Markhum because it's spelled M-A-R-K-H-A-M, Mark Ham. But then even in the second grade I started a U, Markhum, M-A-R-K-H-U-M. And used my name as Markhum because I did not want to be called Mark Ham. Speaker 1: I was gonna--I intended to ask you about that 'cause I saw it spelled with a U, you know, and the original with an A-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so I wondered why it got Markhum. So made sure that it's um (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right it was an um instead of ham. Story_ID: 661030 Speaker 1: I remember in the fifth grade [at Leath Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee] I had a teacher, Mrs. Voice [ph.]. She married, became a Strong. Back then we had thirty some people in the class. I think in the State of Tennessee now it's, twenty-eight is the maximum. It was about thirty-five in the class. So they had to divide the classes. They started reducing the number when I was in the fifth grade going to the sixth grade. She said some people are going to have to go to Mrs. Brewster's [Juanita Brewster Crenshaw] class. You've heard of Dr. W. Herbert Brewster I know, the great orator, minister. Wrote for Mahalia Jackson, the Ward Singers [The Famous Ward Singers]. And I said, "Please Ms. Voice, I don't want to go to Miss Brewster's class. I'll do anything. Don't, don't send me to Miss Brewster's class." I was one of Mrs. Voice's favorite students. When it came time to be assigned to go to Miss Brewster's class, she said, "Markhum Stansbury [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury]," I cried. But Mrs. Brewster became, became one of the best teachers I ever had in my life. And being the daughter of the great legend Dr. W. Herbert Brewster, or William Herbert Brewster. It was a blessing. And here again, I became one of her favorites and I had a friend named Kenneth Duncan. And we would go and wash her windows. She hired us in the summer to wash her windows. We would wash all day. We made five dollars for the whole day. We'd catch the bus and go out to North Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] part of town to Reverend Brewster's. And around twelve or one o'clock, Reverend Brewster came home to have lunch, and we had an opportunity to sit down in his house and having lunch with a great man, but didn't realize it then. But now it's one of the greatest things ever happened. And then Mrs. Brewster was killed. I was on the air one Sunday evening [at WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] and I--she was on my mind. I called her and we had a long conversation. Two days later, read in the paper where she had been killed by a handyman. And of all the students that she had, I was one that the family requested to speak at her home going celebration. And those are some stories that I can remem- another thing-- Speaker 2: About, about what year was that, the year that Brewster was killed? Speaker 1: It had to be back in the '80s [1980s]. Had to be in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Okay, that's a sad story. Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely. Story_ID: 661031 Speaker 1: And when I was in Miss, Miss Brewster's [Juanita Brewster Crenshaw] class, I was in the sixth grade. And I remember getting on my bicycle riding down busy Union Avenue to a, to an address that was 2074 Union, which was the address of the first WDIA Radio [Memphis, Tennessee] studios. And I rode my bicycle down, and Nat D. Williams was on the air. And I remember living in-- Speaker 2: He was the first black radio personality. Speaker 1: Right, he was the first of all, Nat D. Williams was. And I remember looking in the door and he was, you know, beckoning me to come on in, come on in. And then he came out, talked to me. And then he invited me to come into the studio and set down and he interviewed me on the air. Speaker 2: Now wait a minute. You were just looking, you were just look, looking in the window. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he just said, "Come on in." Speaker 1: Right, right, right. I was six years old. I'm in the six- sixth grade. Speaker 2: Grade, okay so you're twelve. Speaker 1: Twelve years old at the time. Speaker 2: And so you-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You're on the air. Speaker 1: Right, right. He, he interviewed me on the air. And you know when I got back to school, kids were talking about they heard me on the radio, heard me on the radio you know. Back in the day you were somebody. I mean you were a celebrity if you're on the air. Everybody--we loved Nat D. Williams, A.C. Williams, Rufus Thomas, Martha Jean [Martha Jean Steinberg], Ford Nelson, all of those people. We loved coming up--we looked up to them. And then other friends of mine and neighbors, church people, start looking up to me because here it was I was on the radio. That was before I started working in radio. But just because they heard me on the radio. Speaker 2: So this boosted your stock in the community. Speaker 1: It did, it did, it did. Speaker 2: So were you a good student in school at the Leath [Leath Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee]? Speaker 1: I was a real good student. And, and then when I went over to high school, I was honor roll student, I was in Who's Who [Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges]. Speaker 2: This is at Booker T. Washington? Speaker 1: Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee], yes (simultaneous). Story_ID: 661032 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. I always ask people what was the name of their community? Did, did your community have a special name or-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was called the Foote Homes [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Foote Homes, F-O-O-T-E, H-O-M-E-S. It was named after a fellow by the name of William F. [William F. Foote], and it was called William F. Foote Homes. And it was a housing project. We used to call them the condos after we got older. Because it, it was like being in--those of us who lived in the Foote Homes, we had much better housing than our counterparts who had homes. Because the homes were run down because you must think, remember during the time I was growing up, it was very, very segregated in Memphis, Tennessee, very segregated. And blacks didn't do anything but they taught, they had a few policemen, a few firemen. And then you had all these domestic people. Lot of fathers were garbage workers who were the--who went on strike back in '68 [1968]; the reason Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Memphis [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: So blacks had the lower level jobs. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But unlike a lot of places in the South, you could actually vote in Memphis (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right. And then, and then you also had waiters. A lot of people who were waiters here in Memphis. Speaker 1: Different service jobs like that, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 661033 Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm just talking off camera about--well we were talking about the projects first of all. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I don't want to lose that, but, but there's a lot of the conversations we have where people who were raised in a projects when projects were first built. In fact they stayed that way in some cities. They were, they were better housing. Speaker 2: No doubt, and that's the way it was in Memphis [Tennessee]. It was much better. You had indoor facilities. We didn't have air conditioning. Speaker 1: Now this is important, just indoor facilities. So you could go to the bathroom. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That, that--a lot of the, the-- Speaker 2: A lot of the people who didn't live in the projects-- Speaker 1: Right, a lot of frame houses in Memphis, little houses in the neighborhoods. Yeah, they go to outhouses. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And you know the older you get, you can just look back over your life and you can say you know, that was a real blessing for me to live in the Foote Homes [Memphis, Tennessee] condos rather than my friend over here who had this, but they didn't have the same facilities. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so were these brick? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were brick, they were brick. And you didn't have parking because they weren't built for people with cars. I would say you know you had to park on the street. You know it was no such thing as--you know like if you live in the condo now, you have usually two car spaces reserved for each resident. But no we--you had to park--and unfortunately, my mother [Eliza Markham Stansbury] didn't have a car. Story_ID: 661034 Speaker 1: And the way we got around, we rode the bus; public transportation. And I remember we lived about a--maybe a mile and a half from church [Saint Andrew A.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee]. And one of the officers at my church, he was a steward. I'm trying to think of whether he was a steward at church. He was a steward and he told us if you can be out here by 9:15, I'll take you to church. Sunday school started at 9:30. And definitely we would walk and be there waiting. And that was one thing that I learned from my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Carter Markham], to always be on time if someone is going to do something for you, don't have them waiting. If he told us to be there at 9:00, 9:15, nine times out of ten we was there no later than five after 9:00 because there's a possibility he could have finished early. And that's a problem that I have today with my wife [Imogene Sayles Stansbury]. She always want to cut it right on time. And I say, "No, if I'm due someplace--," like due here with you at twelve, nine times out of ten, I'm going to be here at a quarter to twelve. My watch is kept fifteen minutes ahead of time. And I don't look at it as it being fast, I look at it--if my watch says twelve, I say, "Golly I'm almost late; I should be there." I don't look at it as I got fifteen minutes to spare. People are riding in my car--we're going somewhere, taking and they say, "Golly, we gonna be late, we gonna be late." I say, "Oh, we'll make it, we'll make it," because I know I'm--but my grandmother, after I was grown and fortunate enough to have a car, she would ask me to pick her up to go to the doctor. And let's say she had a ten o'clock appointment. And I say I would pick her up at nine, she would be ready at eight because she wouldn't--and, and, and I'm that way now. When I'm going somewhere, most people if you have a meeting, I'm the first one at the meeting. Whatever meeting, they always say, and they say, "Well Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury] is going to be there." And that's another thing that I learned from my grandmother and I also learned from A.C. Williams who was one of my mentors here at the radio station [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. Mr. Williams had and you may have heard of a group called the Teen Town Singers. And being in the group, he didn't care whether you could sing or not. But he taught you values about being a man or being a lady. And also being truthful. If you have an appointment with somebody, you say you keep it under any circumstances. You don't call at five minutes to twelve and say, "Larry, I won't be able to make it, you know." Like I go to the barbershop. I have a standing appointment at the barber every Thursday at 9:30. When I leave the chiropractor, nine times out of ten, I get to the barbershop fifteen minutes prior. And I'm sitting there waiting on him because I don't want him to wait on me because that's down time for him where he could be making money. And like I wasn't able to go yesterday because I was out of town. But when I send him a text I say, "Do you have anything Friday morning before twelve o'clock?" And he told me, "Yes, nine o'clock." So I had a nine o'clock appointment this morning at the barbershop. Story_ID: 661035 Speaker 1: I've read that this is how you sign in--I mean this is how you open your radio show [at WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], by playing a record about being on time. Speaker 2: On time, yeah 'On Time God,' yeah, right. And, and everybody who knows me will say, "I know, [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury is gonna be on time." I remember once when I was assistant to the governor, and I remember one legislator was riding home with me one evening. And I was doing--they had a telethon at the local public television station. And I was hosting. And that particular evening, I was due there at a particular time, I can't remember the time now, but I was running a little late and I didn't think I was gonna make it on time. And then I called and told them I was running a little late. But when I got there, I had about five minutes to spare. And the producers say, "Oh I wasn't worried at all." 'Cause I asked him if he got somebody--he said, "No, I didn't get--because I knew if there was any way in the world Mark Stansbury could be here, he would be here." And you know and I think that's a good reputation to have. You know, at church [Saint Andrew A.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee] I'm on the finance committee. And I'm the treasurer of my church. And every Monday we have finance meeting at 5:30. When I was interim president of Shelby State Community College [Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis, Tennessee], I didn't do anything on Monday night, regardless of what it was. It would have to be after eight o'clock before I would agree to do anything on Monday because being a trustee at my church, my pastor thinks enough of me to put my name down as a trustee. And you as a member of the church vote for me. And I feel if you think enough of me to vote for me, I should carry out the responsibility. And my responsibility to you is to be there so I can, you know I'm on this finance committee, and I'm gonna be there. And my wife [Imogene Sayles Stansbury] always tell me, "Well you know, you not the pastor, you not getting paid." I say, "No, but I have a commitment, I have a commitment," you know. And, and that's one of the great things I learned from A.C. "Moohah" Williams [A.C. Williams] and I'm grateful and thankful to God that I came under his leadership training. Story_ID: 661036 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now we were discussing off camera some of the features of life in Memphis [Tennessee]. You know, you know you almost think of 'The Twilight Zone' between the country and the city in some ways. It's a urban--the, the urban aspect of black life gives black people power. I mean people vote here. Speaker 2: Right, and they always have been, been voting here. Speaker 1: And, and yet you know, a truck pull up and take you to the cotton fields-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know to work for wages. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You were talking about some of those dynamics. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Memphis? Speaker 2: The park. We had a place here called Lincoln Park [Memphis, Tennessee]. And everybody wanted to go to Lincoln Park. Then there was another place called T.O. Fuller State Park [Memphis, Tennessee] that would always want to go to. The Foote Homes [Memphis, Tennessee] where I grew up, we had a park called Foote Homes Park. And WDIA Radio [Memphis, Tennessee] would have a truck, and they would bring movies out to the park. I can't remember what evening it was and everybody would want to get around and watch the movie because the station was you know, relating to the community in doing that. Speaker 1: What kind of movies--this when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was growing up, like cartoons and all--cartoons and-- Speaker 1: Almost like going to the drive in or something. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. But those of us who lived--very few had transportation to go to a drive in, you know. And then the next thing--you didn't have money. The first job I got, I was twelve years of age. I was a delivery boy at a sundry store. Rode my bicycle. Dollar a day working all day and--but I enjoyed it, you know. It was giving me something to do. It was helping me to be a man. When I grew up, I could take care of my family. But a lot of kids never get an opportunity to go from that community, if I'm communicating with you. They never get an opportunity. Speaker 1: So that job gave you a responsibility actually to, to go around the rest of the city (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: So how, how far would you range? Would you range all over the city? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. I would say it would be probably two mile radius, you know. You're riding it on the bicycle and you know people give you a tip, maybe, a nickel, a dime or so. But it was a lot, it was a lot. Speaker 1: Mostly in the black community? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, all, all in the black community. Not mostly; all in the black community. And I remember when I would get paid, I would go to the post office and buy stamps. Where you would buy toward a bond. You could buy a savings bond for $18.75 in stamps. But it would end up after you keep it for it to mature, I think it took five years. You get $25. That's what I used to do, you know, I think I was a man helping my mom [Eliza Markham Stansbury] doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some of the other things from my culture and smells--barbeque. They used to have the Cotton Makers Jubilee [Memphis, Tennessee], which was a carnival atmosphere. And would have nice parades downtown, down the Beale Street area. And you would have you know the high school bands competition. Speaker 1: Okay. Were the--did the black bands take part in this too? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, we had the Cotton Makers Jubilee. That was the black parade, that was the black parade. Speaker 1: That was the black parade. Speaker 2: Right. But you also had a Cotton Carnival [Memphis, Tennessee], which was the white counterpart. Speaker 1: So you couldn't go to that one. Speaker 2: You could go to the parade, yeah, you could go to the parade, but you didn't participate in it. You didn't participate in it. Story_ID: 661037 Speaker 1: How did they give you the signals here in Memphis [Tennessee]? I suppose they--downtown they had like white, I mean and colored fountains and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah when I was growing up, you know like if you went to the store, which is Macy's [Macy's, Inc.] now. It was Goldsmith's when I was coming up. They would have one water fountain here say colored, and here it say white. And the dressing rooms at the store, nine times out of ten, you couldn't try the things on. You had to take them home and come back, bring them back 'cause you didn't have no place to try on, the dressing room. But you just drink that colored and white water. Speaker 1: Okay, but you couldn't try, try clothes on without having to buy it and try it on. Speaker 2: Yeah you'd take it--well you could take it home and if you didn't, didn't fit or whatever, you'd bring it back and they'd give you your money back. But at the time--I can remember times when you couldn't even try them on. You would just buy them. Speaker 1: Yeah I know in some towns if you tried on something, you bought it. Speaker 2: You bought it. Speaker 1: 'Cause you're not supposed to try it on at all. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That was a--my dad had an incident with a hat like that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so I had a question--yeah, well so events like the Cotton-- Speaker 2: Carnival and Cotton Makers Jubilee [Memphis, Tennessee]-- Speaker 1: You just knew you, you weren't supposed to be there. Speaker 2: Right, right, absolutely. Speaker 1: Through word of mouth more. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They didn't have to stop you. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: 'Cause nobody's gonna try. Speaker 2: Nobody's gonna try, right. And in fact the Cotton Carnival [Memphis, Tennessee] was downtown, down on the river. And then they had the Cotton Makers Jubilee down on Beale Street, down on Beale Street. We had Church's park and auditorium [Robert R. Church Park, Memphis, Tennessee]. And that's where the carnival was there. And as blacks, we knew that's where we were welcomed. We were not welcome downtown. You went downtown, you took a good chance of getting arrested or getting beat up. Speaker 1: By, by the police? Or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, by the police. And the community, yeah. But more so by the police than anything else. Story_ID: 661038 Speaker 1: So, at high--okay Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. So you were, you, you continued to be a good student there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I was on the, on the, I was honor roll. Speaker 1: And you got involved in the--you were the editor of the school paper I read. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was editor of the school paper, and then I also was the editor of the yearbook. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I think that, that being the editor of the newspaper, the Washingtonian, it gave me a desire to be a journalist. And I worked at the Tri-State Defender, was a part of the Defender publications, the Chicago Defender in Chicago [Illinois] there. And I worked for the Tri-State writing and then I also later on after learning photography, I shot a lot of photographs for the Tri-State Defender. And then through my mentor [HistoryMaker] Ernest Withers, the late Ernest Withers, he hooked me up with Johnson Publishing Company [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] and I shot pictures for Jet and Ebony, assignments for them. Speaker 1: So that's much later though, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 661039 Speaker 1: But now a couple things, I want to get to Mr. Withers [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers], but now just tell me what happened first. Did you get involved in the Teen Town Singers first, or with Mr. Withers? Speaker 2: I was with the Teen Towns first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Teen Town was first, yeah. Speaker 1: Tell us how you got involved with Teen Town? Cause you, you get a chance to be on the radio that day. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: This is when you're twelve. So-- Speaker 2: Right. Now Teen Town was after I went--got on the radio when I was twelve, visiting, I was in the sixth grade. I was in the tenth grade as I recall when I got into Teen Town. I was just sitting--you know you always have a free period usually in, in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. And one of the teachers, Mrs. Catherine Rivers Johnson, just walked up and touched and said, "Over there." Touched another student, said, "Over there." And she wants you--and then I was wondering what have I done because I knew I wasn't acting up. You know sometimes I would, but that particular time I wasn't. And she just sent us up to her room. She was a director of the St. Cecilia Glee Club. And she was selecting people that she thought would be good representatives of the glee club. And then she tried us out for the glee club. And then later on she said, "I want you to go with me on Wednesday, I want you to go with me on Wednesday." And I said, "Where are we going?" "That's okay." And Mr. Williams [A.C. Williams] would be outside waiting and we'll go get in his car and he'll take us down to the Abe Scharff YMCA [Memphis, Tennessee]. And that's how we got into Teen Town is in--at that particular time there was really no audition and stuff. Like I said, Mr. Williams just wanted people who could harmonize. Mostly everyone in the Teen Towners had a solo, or led a song. But my friend whose an attorney now, attorney Samuel Perkins and I--people always tease us, say we were the only two in the group that never had a solo, you know. But as another mentor, Ford Nelson, wrote a story in the paper about our forty-fifth anniversary. And he was talking about me being a Teen Town Singer. And I--we had a program that came on after the Teen--Teen Towners came on Saturday from 10:00 until 10:30. And then afterwards, we had what we call the Big Star Talent Show. Now I do remember Mrs. Johnson picking me to sing on the talent show once. Not on the Teen Towners, but on the talent show. And I sang an Elvis Presley number. I was trying to think and can't remember whether it was 'Peace in the Valley' or 'Lead Me, Guide Me.' The Teen Town Singers, Carla Thomas was in the group during the time I was-- Speaker 1: Carla Thomas-- Speaker 2: Carla Thomas, that was Rufus's [Rufus Thomas] daughter. She had the big hit called 'Gee Whiz' on Stax Records. Speaker 1: She had a lot of hits. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Remember we--she's really-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Everybody, everybody who heard of black music in those days-- Speaker 2: Right, knew Carla Thomas. And she was Rufus's daughter. Rufus, as I said, used to work here [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Rufus Thomas became a huge star. Speaker 2: Right, right. 'Walking the Dog' and 'Funky Chicken.' ['Do The Funky Chicken']. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I think were two of his big numbers. And I was looking over there, there's a picture of--Rufus and Elvis-- Speaker 1: Yeah there he is on the wall (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah, Rufus and Elvis over there on the wall. Story_ID: 661040 Speaker 1: So Rufus Thomas was a, was he a disc jockey? Speaker 2: He was a disc jockey here, yeah, Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I used to--you know after I got hired here as a control board operator, I used to run the board for him like Nat, A.C., Rufus and Martha Jean "The Queen" [Martha Jean Steinberg]. Speaker 1: Just since we--well naming these. Tell us about some of these personalities. I mean you're meeting them as a teenager, right? Speaker 2: Right, right, absolutely. Speaker 1: So A.C. Williams-- Speaker 2: Right. Well A.C. Williams. Why don't we start with Nat D. Williams? Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Because Nat was the first. And Nat was the one who invited me in and interviewed me. Nat was a teacher at Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee], he taught history. He was a member of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, as was A.C. Williams. And as was [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury later on in life became a, an Omega. But A.C. Williams was a professor, he taught at Manassas High School [Memphis, Tennessee], went to Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], as did Nat Williams. And after he taught for a while, he was invited to work at WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] and he became a public relations person for the station. And he encouraged the promote--the program director at the time, fellow by the name of David James, to consider hiring me because I had shown an interest in radio and I remember Brother Theo "Bless My Bones" Wade, who was a character that everybody in the gospel arena knew of Theo "Bless My Bones" Wade, he was a manger for the Spirit of Memphis Quartet at one while. Brother Wade got--had some surgery done on his feet and WDIA hired me to drive him to work every morning. And that was a great opportunity. That's how I you know, got the hookup and-- Speaker 1: So this was when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. This is, this is, this is when I was in high school. And you know I used to, while I was at the Teen Towners [Teen Town Singers], we would be here on Saturdays. I would always look in the studio and just watch the control operator run the board because we back in the time, blacks weren't allowed at this station, WDIA, to spin the records. There were no other blacks at any other station in Memphis [Tennessee]. And in fact we have a great big turntable, I don't know if you saw it when you came in. If not, I'll show it to you out there. Turntable we use, we used to play and I used to just watch him and, "Oh, I can do that, I can do that, I can do that." And then I talked to one of the guys and he said, "Yeah, this button controls this, this does this, this does this." Speaker 1: So, so wait a minute. This is some--this is an important point I think. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Is that even though you had black personalities on the radio, they weren't allowed to touch the, the record turntable. Speaker 2: No, no. They did not do the turntable at the time. Speaker 1: Was that a union thing or, or-- Speaker 2: No it wasn't a union. We weren't in the union. That was just--I guess that was maybe a WDIA thing. Although WDIA was like a family. You know we had blacks and whites working together and you didn't call Larry mister and didn't call Such and Such missus. You called her Barbara or Larry or Joe, just like you would A.C. or Nat. But you didn't play records. They had white control board operators. Then we have a fellow named Bob "Honeymoon" Garner [Robert "Honeymoon" Garner], he's up there on the picture. They hired him as the first black control operator. And then he also did a radio show. And then later on back in 1958 I believe it was, they hired me as a control board operator. So I became the second one, black, playing the records for the announcers, and I was doing the news. Speaker 1: So this is when you're, you're--how old are you? Speaker 2: Sixteen. Speaker 1: Sixteen. Speaker 2: Sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was sixteen. Speaker 1: So you were like sophomore or junior in high school? Speaker 2: I was a sophomore. Speaker 1: Sophomore, okay. Speaker 2: And I remember David James who was the program director at the time, he came one week working the board because the other board operator was on vacation or something. And he--you know I was there because I had to bring, drive Brother Wade to work. So David James who was the program director, was running the board and so I believe maybe like Wednesday or so he said, "Mark, do you know how to run this board?" I said, "I believe I do." You know because I had been watching the other fellow, fellow named David Smith. And he said, "Because you gonna have to do it Friday." I said, "I am?" And just like that, I say, "I am?" He said, "Yeah, because I'm going out of town." And he gave it to me to run. And, and that's the way I got hired. Story_ID: 661041 Speaker 1: All right, so did you continue being in the Teen Town Singers too? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I continued in the Teen Towns, yeah. Speaker 1: And you're working at the station [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So this-- Speaker 2: Right, I was--see I graduated from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] in 1960 and I was in the Teen Towns until 1960. Speaker 1: So this is the station of destiny for you. Speaker 2: Right, absolutely, absolutely. It was--and that's how I got my first wife, working here. My wife's aunt worked for Bert Ferguson who was one of the owners of the station. Speaker 1: Right, Bert Ferguson and-- Speaker 2: And, and John R. Pepper, John R. Pepper [John R. Pepper II]. And she worked--aunt worked for Mr. Ferguson, and she got them to give my first wife a job. She wasn't my wife at the time, but to give her a job at the radio station while she was in college. And I was off in school, at Lincoln University in Jeff City, Missouri [Jefferson City, Missouri]. And when I came home, we would always have a Christmas party. And we would have a party and we had what we called Keel Avenue School [Keel Avenue School for Handicapped Black Children, Memphis, Tennessee], which was a school for crippled children, blacks and whites not going to school together. But they always had things where they took care of the white kids, but WDIA started a bus--in fact we bought two school busses where we would carry the kids to school. And they were having a party when I got home. We were gonna have a party. I think the party was on a Friday and Mr. Ferguson said, "Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], I want you to be sure to go, go to the party. I got somebody I want you to meet." That's what Mr. Ferguson said to me, "I got somebody I want you to meet." And so he introduced me to Lucy [Stansbury's ex-wife, Lucy Barber] who would later become my wife. We didn't hit it off. I mean I didn't, you know I wasn't interested in her at the time, not at all. But later on it did turn into--and we were together for--that's my kids' [Markhum Stansbury, Jr. and Marlon Stansbury] mother. We were together for I think thirty-five or thirty-six years. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's more successful than a lot of marriages. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Thirty-five years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 661042 Speaker 1: So, so we talked, we talked about yeah, Nat D. Williams (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nat. Uh-huh and A.C. Speaker 1: --he was first. Right, A.C. Williams who, who brought you in-- Speaker 2: A.C. Williams, who was my mentor--right, who brought me in-- Speaker 1: --to the Teen Town Singers. Speaker 2: --Teen Town Singers, right. And then there was Rufus Thomas who went on to be the greatest, well I guess he'd come to be the second after B. B. [HistoryMaker B. B. King], because B. B. was a disc jockey here at WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. I did not know--I can remember listening to B. B. when he used to do this thing called, "Pepticon, Pepticon, it sure is good. You can get it anywhere in the neighborhood." That was the spot they used to do. And then Rufus, as you know, was one of the big stars over at Stax [Stax Records]. He was the father of Carla Thomas who did 'Gee Whiz' and Rufus did 'Walking the Dog' and the 'Funky Chicken' ['Do the Funky Chicken']. And I think he was the first big on air personality to have his picture taken with Elvis Presley. And then another fellow by the name of [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury when he was a young--had his picture taken with Elvis. And in fact I got the one on my telephone the other day, a listener who listened to me over in London [England] every Sunday who's a historian like you are. And he's doing a book on Elvis and he's interviewed me for part of a chapter. And he sent me a picture that someone had taken of me a long time ago, I didn't even know that picture existed until about a month ago. Then there was another fella by the name of Robert "Honey Boy" Thomas [Robert Daniel Thomas] who worked here. "Honey Boy" was a real smooth--he was like the ladies' man. And he was on the weekends on a Saturday with Martha Jean 'The Queen" [Martha Jean Steinberg] had a program called 'Boy Meets Girl.' Martha Jean "The Queen" left Memphis [Tennessee] and went on to Detroit [Michigan], and was a mainstay at WCHB Radio station [Detroit, Michigan]. She owned--when she passed several years ago-- Speaker 1: Yeah now this is--a friend of mine actually was on his show. I, I met her at some point. And I thought of her as a Detroit--everybody knew about Martha Jean "The Queen" in Detroit. I was so surprised to find out she was part of the WDIA. Speaker 2: Right, she was part of WDIA. In fact I was looking at--on the board over there. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: "The Queen," yeah, the, "The Queen." And I was telling you I went to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and lo and behold, I was on the plane with her middle daughter Sandra [Sandra Steinberg]. Going to--her daughter lives in Vegas now. And then we had Ford Nelson who played piano for the great [HistoryMaker] B. B. King and Ford is still on the air sounding great every Sunday. He's on now from eight until twelve [o'clock]. They kind of cut everybody's time back, back in February, including me. I'm just on from four until eight now. Used to be on from two until eleven. Ford was on in the mornings from--this is on Sunday I'm speaking of, was on from six until two. Story_ID: 661043 Speaker 1: And then of course we have Bobby O'Jay, who is great. He's our program director now [at WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. He's been with us for about thirty years, almost thirty years. Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard him on the radio this morning. Speaker 1: You did, yeah. He's a character too. And, and does a wonderful job and he's great as a boss. And I don't say that to get brownie points with him because I don't have to because I'm just on Sundays. And--but he's a great guy to work for. He--for Ford Nelson and me, he gives us autonomy. He lets us pick our own music and play whatever we want to play. We are the only two announcers that have that freedom. The others, he select their music. I been here fifty-six years, going on, into my fifty-sixth year, into it now. I never could have done it if I had Bobby or somebody else selecting my music because I have ministers and evangelists and everybody who call me and I have other peers, disc jockeys from around the country call and they say that I do a ministry with my songs that I play on Sunday. It's not the same ones that you hear on our other stations that we call Hallelujah [WHAL Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], which is a gospel oriented station. But I just have a feeling you know the message that God has given me, and I go in my catalog and I pull up this song or that song, or some of the songs that the station has to play, and play. In fact sometimes an individual might call and say, "Hey Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], how about playing Such and Such?" And I say, "Okay, I'll be happy to if I can find it." Knowing all the time I don't have it in the control room with me. And so I'll play something else. And then a few minutes later they'll call and say, "You know what Mr. Stansbury? Say that song you played for me, say it touched more so than the one that I asked for." Say that's great. Say you can feel people and, and I've had so many people and it just make me feel good to know that I'm touching lives and I have people who are--I have one lady who calls me--in fact we have a drop on her. She's ninety-nine years old. And in fact she's getting ready to celebrate her hundredth birthday coming up in May. And she was the first librarian, black librarian in Memphis [Tennessee], and she listens. I have another lady, Ms. Clara [ph.], and everybody who listens to me know these names, you know, Ms. Cooper [ph.] and Ms. Clara. And they call almost every Sunday and wanting me to hear this and hear that. The mayor's, former mayor's mother calls. Bobby Bland's wife [Willie Martin Bland] calls all the time. We try to play and if I can play what they want, what they ask for, I play it. But I don't go out of the way trying to play it. Bobby told us that, "I hired you to be a personality and we want your personality to come into play." But if a listener calls and request a number, if that's something you had planned to play or it's there, I don't have a problem with you playing it. But otherwise you play something. And that's what I have built on and I feel good about playing and you know you hear some of the drops that we have and you hear some of the ministers say how they appreciate doing this and doing that. And I have one fella, I think I mentioned him to you off camera, a fellow in London [England] who listens every Sunday. He used to send me a, a email and say, "Hey Mark, I was listening, that was a great Elvis [Elvis Presley] track that you played--." And then he start sending me now, he say you know, "I used to listen to you because you play Elvis and I wanted to hear Elvis." He say, "But now all those others, Aretha Franklin and the Ward Singers [The Famous Ward Singers] and the things that you play, I really enjoy them, so I listen every Sunday." And I believe they are six hours ahead of us. And I'm gone--and so it's usually at night and I try to--when I come on at four o'clock, I usually try to play an Elvis number between 4:00 and 4:30 or something so he doesn't have to stay up real late, and he's a historian like you. Story_ID: 661044 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now I'm gonna rewind back to high school here. We get, we get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: So, so you're like working at the station [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. \ Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So you, you're running the board for the disc jockeys (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, for the disc jockeys. Speaker 1: Now did we finish the rundown of the personalities, did we finish that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, yeah 'cause I mentioned Martha Jean [Martha Jean Steinberg], yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right so you're running the board and when you're on the--now you're editor of the school paper [the Washingtonian] and yearbook. I mean you really actively--were you involved in sports at all? Speaker 2: No, no, no sports. I was involved in those things more and didn't have time. Didn't have time because my mother [Eliza Markham Stansbury] preached success to us and say, "You can do anything that you want to, but I want you to get an education." She didn't have one, but she drummed and beat the drum, drumming that into my sister [Claudine Stansbury] and me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] as a senior, then you were in Who's Who [Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges], right. So what is your--what did your counselor tell you about college? What, what did they say, or did you have anybody you know, counseling you about going to college? Speaker 2: No, I really didn't. Counseling hadn't become a big deal in the '60s [1960s]. Actually the beginning of the '60s [1960s] when I went in and because of my interest in journalism, I was doing some stuff for the Tri-State Defender, I was writing and taking pictures for the Tri-State Defender. Speaker 1: So, so did you meet Mr. Withers [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers] in high school as well? Speaker 2: I met Mr. Withers--I think I had just finished high school. I had just finished high school. I went down and had, had him to take a picture of me. Speaker 1: All right, let's go on and get you out of high school and then we'll get to that. We try and do it chronologically, so, so when you're on the verge of graduation, are you considering becoming a journalist? That's your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: That's what you're-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. And I went to Lincoln University in Jeff City [Jefferson City, Missouri]. Story_ID: 661045 Speaker 1: I mean did you, I mean how did you choose Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] over the other schools in terms of journalism-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --wanting to be a journalist. Speaker 2: Well I'm trying to remember. Because when I went up to Lincoln, there was no one from Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis Tennessee] that went. Speaker 1: Did you know anybody at Lincoln, or anybody--your teachers know anyone at Lincoln Speaker 2: No, no, I just had heard that Lincoln was a good journalism school. That fella who was a editor once upon a time at the Tri-State Defender was named Burleigh Hines. Speaker 1: Burleigh Hines. Speaker 2: Burleigh Hines. Speaker 1: Became a personality on the air in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Burleigh Hines. Speaker 2: Right, Burleigh. Burleigh Hines. And you know and in talking with Burleigh, he suggested, "Lincoln would be a great school for you to go to, Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury]." So I went to Lincoln, but as you know, it was out of state and you have to pay those out of state fees. And then I didn't have any money, didn't have a scholarship. I think the Teen Town Singers had given me a scholarship, it was a hundred dollar scholarship. And then one of the principals here, Mr. Johnson's [ph.] mother, gave me a scholarship to buy books, it was a hundred dollars, that was two hundred dollars. And so I got what we call a National Student Defense Loan, think that's what it was, called a National Student Defense Loan [sic. National Defense Student Loans; Federal Perkins Loan Program]. And I went to Lincoln and they had given a small amount of people applied for it through Lincoln as I recall. And so they gave a lot of us small amounts of money, you know scholarships, loans rather, to go to Lincoln. And then at the end of my first year, starting my second year, they had said that they were not going to renew my loan. What they had decided to do was take the money that they were giving a lot of us, small amounts, they wanted to concentrate and give fewer people more money where they felt it would make more sense to make sure somebody graduated. And unfortunately, I did not--I was not selected to be one of those. So I had to drop out of school. Story_ID: 661046 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna, I'm gonna freeze here and go back to the summer before you went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this is when, when you meet [HistoryMaker] Ernest Withers, right? Speaker 2: Well I, I met Ernest when I went to Lincoln. I, I think I said that. I think I said that. But I was wrong. I met Ernest when this--when I was dropping out. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when I met Ernest, okay. Speaker 1: But, but at Lincoln, did, did you have any--were there any positive experiences at Lincoln? Good teachers, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, real good teachers and that's where I really became proficient in photography because I took a photography course there and shot a lot of pictures there for the yearbook. And I was known on campus as the campus photographer. Speaker 1: Okay. Had you had shot before? Speaker 2: Well really not that much, not that much. Because I was just shooting just hobby with my camera. Had a little old box camera. Speaker 1: Like a Brownie or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that. It wasn't a Brownie, it was a box camera that I, that I had and then later on--well now when I fell out of Lincoln, I dropped out of Lincoln-- Speaker 1: What did you shoot with at Lincoln? Speaker 2: A 4x5 [inch]. Had a, had a four by--it was a press camera. I said a four by five. That was the size of the film. Speaker 1: A Graflex-- Speaker 2: A Graflex, Graflex, Graflex, Graflex. Because we had--I remember being in photography class and they would give us the camera, tell us to go out and shoot. And we had to process it and have it ready within an hour, you know. And because you had those, you know single film and you slide in the back of the camera, then you go in the darkroom and, and work on it. Speaker 1: No digital then. Speaker 2: No, no, no digital, right. Speaker 1: You had to do chemistry and all that to get that-- Speaker 2: Right, right, and, and using--I was trying to think of the--let's see. I can't think of it. I was trying to think of it--D-76 [Kodak D-76], that was one, D-76 was one. I was trying to think of the other one we used. I know we used--I used Plus-X [Kodak Plus-X] and Tri-X film [Kodak Tri-X], mostly Plus-X. And then doing stuff at night, we'd use Tri-X because it had ASA [film speed] I think of about 400, Plus-X was like 200. And, and after I dropped out, I knew I was coming home, rather, I wrote Mr. Withers a letter and asked him if I could come and do an internship with him. And I can't remember now whether Mr. Withers wrote me back. I think, I think when I got home I called him and he said, "Yes, come on young man." And I came down and used to work with him. Speaker 1: Now was Mr. Withers a well known man as a photographer? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I would guess he was. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: He, he was--he's known now as a photographer of the Civil Rights Movement. Shot a lot of pictures of Elvis [Elvis Presley] and all the Memphis [Tennessee] musicians. Speaker 2: Right, all the Memphis musicians and all. And Mr. Withers had seven sons and one daughter. He took me around with him wherever he went, introduced me to people. I say he introduced me to everybody from the chairman of the board to the janitor, is what I would usually say. And after working with Ernest and you know and learning the darkroom techniques of processing film, and printing the pictures I enjoyed because, you know, I was getting a chance to meet this person and that person. And I wasn't interested in no school. And so he felt--he talked to me once and I think we were at the Harlem House [Memphis, Tennessee] having lunch. And he felt that I had gotten too comfortable just taking pictures and hanging around here. And he say, "Young man, I have seven sons and one daughter and you are just like my eighth son." He said, "We need to get you back in school so you can get some letters behind your name so you can do something to help some people." I shall never forget that. And so he wrote a letter to President Kirkendoll who later became Bishop Kirkendoll, Chester Kirkendoll [Chester Arthur Kirkendoll] at Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee]. And he said, "We have this young man here, he can write, he can speak well, he can take pictures, and he's smart. He needs to be in your school." He got Mr. Nat Williams [Nat D. Williams] to write a letter, and Mr. Thaddeus Stokes [Thaddeus T. Stokes] to write a letter, and Thaddeus Stokes was the editor of the Tri-State Defender. And Mr. A.C. Williams, and they all wrote letters to Lane College, to Dr. Kirkendoll, telling him what a great guy [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury was. Dr. Kirkendoll wrote me a letter and said, "Come on." And I went. Story_ID: 661047 Speaker 1: Now Lane College is a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A C.M.E. school, right, in Jackson, Tennessee, right. Speaker 1: Now when you grew up in--I forgot to ask you what-- Speaker 2: I grew up as an A.M.E. Speaker 1: A.M.E., okay. Speaker 2: African Methodist Episcopal church (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was the name of the church you grew up in? Speaker 2: Saint Andrew [Saint Andrew A.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Saint Andrew. I'm not--wasn't sure if I asked the name of the church. Speaker 2: Yeah, Saint Andrew. You gonna be in town tomorrow? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I'd like to invite you to Saint Andrew. It's a, it's a great church. Speaker 1: Thank you, we'll be doing two interviews. Speaker 2: You'll be doing two interviews--it's a great church. We got Dr. Kenneth Robinson [Kenneth S. Robinson], a great church. And by the way, that's the only church I've ever been a member of my whole life, that church. And-- Speaker 1: So you're off to Lane College. This is a wonderful way to go, with all those recommendations. Speaker 2: Absolutely, some great people, some great people. And while I was working there, I mean while I was working at the--while I was a student, I got a call from the manager over at WJAK Radio [Jackson, Tennessee]. And he says, "Mark, I'd like to talk to you, I'd like to come over, I'd like for you to come over." So okay. I can't remember now how I got out to the station, the station was way out. And I went out and so he said, "We want to give you a job." And I said, "Give me a job?" I said, "I haven't done an audition for you." He said, "You don't need to do an audition." He say, "If you can work for that 50,000 watt WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] over there, then I know you can work for that 1,000 watt here." This is the station where Wink Martindale used to work. I know you've heard of Wink Martindale. Speaker 1: Martindale, right he was a game show host. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. But Wink wasn't there when I was there. But Wink worked there. Speaker 1: This is W-- Speaker 2: WJAK. Speaker 1: --JAK. Speaker 2: And in fact, I think it's on what--is it Wikipedia--it's one of them. But you know if you go on the Internet and if you go under [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury, they spelled my name wrong. They got it S-T-A-N-S-B-E-R-R-Y. But they mention me on there, talk about being at WJAK and starting my career there. But really I got started at WDIA. Just shows you how if somebody puts the wrong thing out, how it get picked up and all over. And so I went to work there. See working here at WDIA, we didn't have to do the meter readings as an on air personality. You didn't have to do the meter readings-- Speaker 1: Arbitron ratings [Nielsen Audio]. Speaker 2: Right, well not the ratings. You would have to decide-- Speaker 1: The sound meters? Speaker 2: Right, right, right. But, but you didn't have to, you didn't have to do them if you were on the air, working on the air because they had the engineer at the radio station, I mean at the transmitter who would do that. But at the small station you had to do it. And I told them, I said, "Well I don't have the license." And he said, "Well that's okay; we want you anyway. We'll just pay the fella who was on the air before you to stay here and babysit you while you're on." Okay, and I remember I was--we were getting ready for our--not spring break, fall break, what do we call fall break. Just before the Christmas break, it's fall break I guess. Speaker 1: Thanksgiving? Speaker 2: Yeah going in, in, into that. And so I was studying for my tests rather than studying for the test that I was supposed to take for the FCC [Federal Communications Commission]. Speaker 1: For the first class license [First Class Radiotelephone Operator License]. Speaker 2: Yeah. So when I came to Memphis [Tennessee], I flunked it because I hadn't had time to study. I was studying, trying to do my school work. I didn't, you know--and he still had them there and, and I think I had to wait six weeks before I could take it again. And then I had to go to Nashville [Tennessee] and take it. I don't know why. I guess at the time evidently there were certain times you could take it in this area or that area. I know I went to Nashville, I went to Nashville and I passed it and I worked at WJAK there for two years. I would come on-- Speaker 1: So you were the host of the gospel show. Speaker 2: At that particular time it was the Top 40. Speaker 1: Top 40. Speaker 2: It was Top 40, Top 40 there, uh-huh. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Top 40, but gospel had been--gospel here--did news here and gospel. And then I did, I did rock and roll here too. Story_ID: 661048 Speaker 1: This is a good time to ask this, then-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know what was the Top 40 like and what did you sound like on the air in those days? Can you replicate your on air delivery--this would have been 1962, '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah because I graduated from up at Lane [Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee] in '66 [1966]. And you know I can remember, you know, playing all the big like Carla Thomas and The Beatles and The Beach Boys and all of those. But I'm trying to see--and that, that I was telling you earlier, I would, I would always sign off with some philosophical saying. And then the one that stuck the most was, "Lost somewhere between sunrise and sunset, sixty golden minutes. Each set was sixty golden seconds. No reward is offered for they are gone forever." And then, "[HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury inviting you to join me again tomorrow morning at five." Speaker 1: Now were you the--you had to be one of the first African American deejays on the Top 40 or integrated station [WJAK Radio, Jackson, Tennessee], right? Speaker 2: Well at that station, it was urban but we were playing Top 40 if I'm making any sense. There were no white--there was a-- Speaker 1: So it was a black--it was an all-black--all the disc jockeys were black, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but we had, yeah but we had--as I can remember, we had two whites at the station, working at the station. Speaker 1: Was the station owned by a black? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. And in fact, see this station is not owned by black. I don't know if you knew that or not, but-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] is still owned by white, white people. Speaker 2: Right. Now once upon a time we were led by a group that was owned--Regan Henry group, Regan Henry was, you know, but he didn't own it. He happened to be the president of that group. And, and you know in Memphis [Tennessee] we have WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] is owned by Art Gilliam [HistoryMaker Art Gilliam, Jr.] and Tom Joyner used to work at WLOK. And in fact Bobby O'Jay used to work at WLOK once in his career. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so you're playing Top 40 in a, in a white owned station, that was mostly black disc jockeys. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it's targeted towards the black community. Speaker 2: Towards the black community, yeah. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, we played The Supremes, The Temptations, and all like I said, and then we played The Osmonds and all of those, Marie Osmond. Speaker 1: You came along at a time when you know, my brother is the same age as you. I remember I was like seven years behind you all. At a time when rock and roll was breaking through. It used to be like the, you know the show tunes, Broadway show tunes on the radio and the big band type. Speaker 2: Right, absolutely. Speaker 1: The crooners like Frank Sinatra. Speaker 2: Frank Sinatra. Speaker 1: And then all of sudden popular culture started to shift, Bill Haley and the Comets [Bill Haley and His Comets]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Elvis Presley. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Fats Domino. Speaker 2: Right, Little Richard. Speaker 1: Yeah, Little Richard, [HistoryMakers] Lloyd Price like that, The Platters. Speaker 2: Yeah, what's her name out of Detroit [Michigan]--Gladys and the Pips [Gladys Knight and the Pips], [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson, The Miracles and all those. Speaker 1: Motown [Tamla Records; Motown Records] started doing hits around 1959 or so. Speaker 2: Right, right, I played, played all them. Speaker 1: Okay. And now what we didn't get--a lot of, and I was surprised. We didn't get a lot of this unless you--I mean we--I think in Cincinnati [Ohio] you can get this. We couldn't get it in Dayton [Ohio]. People like, like Rufus Thomas and The Bar-Kays, The Marquees, the--Otis-- Speaker 2: Redding [Otis Redding]. Speaker 1: --Redding, yeah they--you hear a little bit of them in Dayton, but they didn't, they didn't--you know they were, you know-- Speaker 2: You still had the bands. Speaker 1: (Unclear). We heard more Motown than we heard-- Speaker 2: Period of Stax [Stax Records], right, right. Speaker 1: So, but that's--did, did, did you have a favorite music in those days-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well-- Speaker 1: --from what you heard? Speaker 2: Yeah, in those days I guess Carla Thomas and the Stax sound, Carla Thomas was probably one of my favorite, not one of, but my favorite because we were--had grown up in the Teen Towners [Teen Town Singers] together. And then there's just love for sister and brother that Mr. Williams [A.C. Williams] taught us. I just love some Carla Thomas. The Jacksons, I--you know used to play The Jackson 5 and just sit here looking at their picture. Story_ID: 661049 Speaker 1: So did, did you meet a lot of the local musicians in those days? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did because going over to Stax [Stax Records] when I was working round there with Ernest [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers], we would go to Stax and Ernest would do a lot of shooting. I did a little. I remember when Isaac got his Cadillac, that gold, they called it the Gold Cadillac. It was gold plated and all. It was kind of like turquoise in color. And Ernest and I rode in his limousine. His limousine driver rode us to shoot pictures. And you know and pull up beside where we could get some of Isaac driving and all. And met Otis [Otis Redding]. You know I knew David Porter, David was in school a year behind me at Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. And so was Booker T. Jones. They were in the same class. Speaker 1: Now he was-- Speaker 2: He was Booker T and the M.G.'s. Speaker 1: Yeah now he's, you know I was surprised to find out he was as--he's as young as he is because I thought he was a older guy who came out with 'Green Onions.' But he was in high school then. Speaker 2: He was in high school then, yeah. But Booker T. has to be seventy now. He has to be-- Speaker 1: He's a little--I'm sixty-four, he's just a little older than I am, about sixty-seven, sixty-eight. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was shocked. I heard in, in Detroit [Michigan] a couple of years ago. Speaker 2: Yeah, because Booker, Booker T. and David I'm almost positive was in the class with my sister [Claudine Stansbury]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my sister, like I said, thirteen months behind me. And I, and I, and I remember I shot a picture of Booker T.--graduate from Booker Washington in his--not at the commencement, but what do they call it--one before the commencement. They don't have them--baccalaureate, baccalaureate. And I shot it because he played, as I recall he played a piano, a musical selection and I shot it and submitted it to Jet. And they used it. And that was the first national publicity that Stax got; the picture of Booker T. Jones. Speaker 1: Now do you have any explanation for why there's so much talent in Memphis [Tennessee] in those days? I don't know if it's still here, but in those days it was a lot of talent. Speaker 2: We still got good talent. I, I, no I really don't. Me not being musically inclined other than doing it on the radio, wish I were. Speaker 1: Yeah, Booker T. Johnson [sic.] got, yeah--yeah I'd forgotten you got [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes you got a lot of musicians. Speaker 2: The Bar-Kays, yeah all of those and Carla Thomas, and you know Willie Mitchell was here. He had a lot of people over there. And in fact they have something going right now called the Stax--Soulsville school [Soulsville Charter School, Memphis, Tennessee], they got a charter school. And the kids over there are just very musically inclined, and they were invited earlier last year to play at the White House [Washington, D.C.] for president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and First Lady Michelle Obama. Speaker 1: So they teach the, the instrumentation-- Speaker 2: They teach it, yeah. Speaker 1: --from, from that era. Speaker 2: Yeah, and in fact Whalum, Kirk, Kirk Whalum is the musical director over there, CEO and musical director. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Kirk Whalum, you know Kirk used to play with Whitney Houston and some of the bigger ones. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you're in a place with a lot of talent and you're, you know, exposed to all this music. Speaker 2: Right. And WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] and WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] are both been given credit by Stax as the one who was really--was responsible for their career blossoming because they would give the jocks at LOK and DIA more so--the jocks had more freedom to, to, to play that music than they did here. LOK did a whole lot of that Stax, breaking their songs. Story_ID: 661050 Speaker 1: Now, now back to Lane [Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee]. Now was there any significant mentors--or mentors or teachers at Lane? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a lady named Mrs. Edna Cawthorn. She was an education, she was my education teacher. I majored in history and minored in education. But Ms. Cawthorn was just a jewel. And she was one of those that taught you how to be real men and women just like I mentioned earlier, Mr. A.C. Williams. If you were in Mrs. Cawthorn's class, you didn't come to class with brogans and blue jeans on. She made you wear a shirt and a tie because that's what she was training you for, to be a teacher. And she wanted you to, you know, dress. And then a lot of times they would come and wouldn't be dressed properly, but they would go and get a tie from somewhere and put a tie on you know 'cause Ms. Cawthorn didn't stand for that bull. Speaker 1: Okay, so she--you had to wear a tie to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to wear a tie to her class. And she taught us principles of education. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a history major. That, now that's surprising considering everything you've talked about so far. Speaker 2: Yeah, but see we didn't have journalism at Lane and history was the closest to it, and that's why I was a history major. And then we had Mr. George Thacker who was there, he was the registrar. And then Mr. William Jones--you were talking about mentors at the college. Mr. William Jones, he was the advisor, he taught French, plus he was the advisor to Omega Psi Phi Fraternity. And that's the way I pledged when I was in school, an Omega, I became an Omega Psi Phi. And later on I became bacillus. Are you Greek? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And of course the president, Dr. Kirkin--Chester A. Kirkendoll [Chester Arthur Kirkendoll], who later became bishop, he was a bishop in the C.M.E. church [Christian Methodist Episcopal]. And then there's another lady, Mrs. Anna Cooke [Anne L. Cooke], who was a librarian and she's kind of a historian too. She wrote the story, a book about the story of Lane College ['Lane College: It's Heritage and Outreach,' Anna L. Cooke] and she's in her nineties now and I go up there, I always make it a point to go by to see her. Story_ID: 661051 Speaker 1: Now is there a good story behind Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Yes. As I said you know, I wouldn't be [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury had it not been for Bishop Chester Kirkendoll [Chester Arthur Kirkendoll] and Lane College you know telling me to come on up. I made Who's Who in America college and university students [Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges] when I was there. I did my student teaching at Westwood High School [Memphis, Tennessee] when I was in Jackson [Tennessee]. And I just celebrated my seventy-second birthday on April the 5th and we had a couple of former students, college mates, were at the party and they were talking about how I would--had a old jalopy and I would drive them home and always made sure I got a dollar or two for gas. You know and that was really prior to the interstate, they were building the interstate at the time when I was at Lane. And then I remember one fella, Myles Wilson, who was a superintendent of Fayette County schools [Fayette County Public Schools]. I took him under my arms when he came and was--served as his big brother and did a lot, paid for him to go through the fraternity. And he was talking about you know, how growing up under me, I took him around and brought him over to Memphis [Tennessee] when I would come and introduced him to A.C. Williams and all the who's who people in Memphis. But he laughed and said he remembered one thing, that the students had talked to me and talked me into having a contest, and having a ugly contest. Who was the ugliest girl on campus. And--which like he said nowadays you would have been sued and all. And he thought the president was gonna put me out of school because the girl just got upset and went raising all kinds of sand about it. And--but we had a good time at Lane. I remember you know going through the fraternity, back in the day they still allowed hazing and all. And you know and beating you with the paddle and all. But it helped to make me who I am and I enjoyed it and I'm active even today in the Lane College Alumni Association [Lane College National Alumni Association] and support the college and try to go back each year for homecoming, make contributions to the college every year. And I think it was back in 2008 they honored me with an Alumnus of the Year Award at the college. Story_ID: 661052 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now all the while that you were in college, there was, the Civil Rights Movement, is boiling up in Memphis [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Is that the attorney, A.W. Willis. Speaker 2: A.W. Willis, right, right. And Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] and all. And in fact-- Speaker 1: Most of them (unclear), the two that mentioned before in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Maxine Smith and Vasco Smith. Speaker 1: Vasco Smith. Speaker 2: Right, and you had Judge Lockett, H.T. Lockett was all active in the Civil Rights Movement. Cause we mentioned Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] and Reverend Billy Kyles [HistoryMaker Samuel Billy Kyles]. But-- Speaker 1: And Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.] the mayor. That the--was that the mayor then? Ivan Allen? Speaker 2: Mayor Jackson [sic.]? Memphis? Speaker 1: Memphis, yeah. Speaker 2: No, back in the civil rights, during the civil rights we had Henry Loeb. Speaker 1: Yeah, Loeb. Speaker 2: We had Henry Loeb, Henry Loeb. Speaker 1: Had the barbecue joints. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Loeb, right. Speaker 2: Right. They had laundries too, the Loebs, the brothers [Henry Loeb and William "Bill" Loeb]. I--you know I worked at Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee] and I remember in '68 [1968] I was working when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got killed. I remember I was in the faculty lounge and some student came in and said, "Have you all heard Dr. King had been shot?" Said, "No, no, did he get hurt bad?" "Yeah, he's dead," you know. And then I--Mrs. Cawthorn [Edna Cawthorn], the lady I was telling you about, the teacher. I remember going down to her house because she had a television. I remember we had one TV on campus at the time and just in the lobby. But I went down to her house because I could switch channels. I'm one of those persons that's a flipper. I go to this channel, this channel to try to watch. And while I was down to her house I got a call from Frank Ahlgren [Frank R. Ahlgren] who was the editor of The Commercial Appeal. And he called to see if I had been in Memphis when Dr. King was shot, he said because they had--this was about ten o'clock at night and Dr. King as I recall, it was six o'clock that evening. And he said that they'd gotten reports that there was one photographer around that had taken pictures and the way they described him is his complexion and all and it fit my, fit, fit me. And I told him no. And he said, "Well Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], I wanted to offer you fifty dollars," I believe he said, fifty dollars for the shots or something like that. And I said to myself ain't no way in the world, you know, that I would give those shots to you or anybody for fifty. And then you recall there was a fella by the name of Jim Lowe who was the one who shot those pictures, yeah, who shot those-- Speaker 1: Now is this a black photographer? Speaker 2: He's a black photographer. Speaker 1: Did you know him? Speaker 2: No, I did not know him. And in fact he found his way around to [HistoryMaker] Ernest Withers' studio. Ernest was telling me because see I was in Jackson [Tennessee] that night when he was killed. The next day, which was the 5th, which was my birthday, I went home and I went down to 427, 426 Main, South Main [Main Street] in the rooming house where James Earl Ray supposedly shot Dr. King. And I went in and shot a picture and in fact I have it in there to show you. A picture that I shot. And right after I got in they stopped everybody from going into, into that room. When I got a chance to take the photograph. Story_ID: 661053 Speaker 1: I did--on the week before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, he spoke at Mason's Temple [sic. Mason Temple, Memphis, Tennessee]. Not--he was there. They had something going on that night (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Jackson [Tennessee]? Speaker 1: No, in Memphis [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: In Memphis, okay. Speaker 1: In, in Memphis, in Memphis. I remember being--it must have been on a Friday, the reason I was at home. And I shot some--a picture of Dr. King, Bishop McEwen [A.B. McEwen, Sr.] with the Church of God in Christ, and Jim Lawson [James Lawson]. You probably heard of Jim Lawson, he was the one who invited Dr. King to Memphis. I have that picture. Speaker 2: Lawson who was in Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Right, he was in Nashville. He's in California somewhere now I believe. And I got that picture. He was sitting up in Mason's Temple. Speaker 2: So you, you were there that night. Speaker 1: I wasn't, I wasn't there the night that he did 'I Have a Dream' speech, but I was there--it was a couple weeks prior that he was there. It was sometime-- Speaker 2: What did you think about the garbage workers' strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike] and the--did you--were, were most people in the city sympathetic-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the black community. Speaker 1: Black community--most of them was. But you know, as in everything, a lot of them--the families were fearful of retaliation and something was going to happen. And it was a lot of retaliation, you know, and a lot of them were terminated. You know they brought in the people who crossed picket lines, what you call them? You know and hired people. Speaker 2: Yeah, they accused the Invaders of being people that were brought in try to bring--create a violent response to disrupt the-- Speaker 1: Right, right, to disrupt, right. Speaker 2: It was Jerry [Jerry Wurf]--I think his name was Jerry--can't think of his last name now. Speaker 1: There was a fella, one of the Invaders, it was, Coby Smith was one. Jerry doesn't ring a bell. I know Colby Smith was one of the Invaders. And this fellow who died that you were telling me about, he was one. And I'm just--just can't think of his name right now. Speaker 2: But did--they have a lot of discussion in those days--now this is '68 [1968] and people were starting to question Dr. King's strategy, was it gonna work. Was that, was that discussed here in Memphis like that? Discussed at all? Speaker 1: Right, now I don't, I don't think they did. But they--what I remember them discussing here was the preachers, and said there was a lot of jealousy among the preachers, you know, with Dr. King. Speaker 2: They didn't want him to get-- Speaker 1: Right, a lot of the preachers didn't, you know. Speaker 2: Okay so, so this is--so, so were you around for, for the funeral and everything? Speaker 1: No, you know the funeral was down in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: The funeral was down in Atlanta, I didn't go. Ernest [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers] did go. Ernest went, you know, and Dr. Hooks, Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] went. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-hm. But, I did not go. Speaker 2: Okay. So after that, you know, we had Poor People's Campaign. A lot of, you know--goes on--this was a year with a lot of turmoil and strife. So did things change in Memphis any after-- Speaker 1: I, I think it did tremendously. One thing though at Stax [Stax Records], you know Stax had then blacks and whites working together. But after Dr. King was assassinated, the people over at Stax kind of fell apart because it was so much tension, you know about Dr. King being killed. And talking to my friends at Stax, they said it was never the same over there again after--and, and then I also had read a couple of books. In fact, I was reading a book now by--was it Robert Gordon, not Robert Gordon, 'Respect,' 'Respect Yourself' ['Respect Yourself: Stax Records and the Soul Explosion'] is the book that I'm reading and it talks about that also. Speaker 2: 'Respect Yourself,' that's like--like a song by The Staple Singers. Speaker 1: By The Staple Singers, and that's, and that's the book. I believe it's Robert Gordon-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --is the one who did that book. But anyway it just came out maybe six or seven months ago. Story_ID: 661054 Speaker 1: Okay. Meanwhile, you, you--but you had graduated from Lane [Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee] in '67 [1967] and you were working on campus when it, when, when-- Speaker 2: When Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], yeah when Dr. King was killed. Speaker 1: All right, so in--okay now did you ever work for the Memphis World? Speaker 2: I, yeah freelancing for the Memphis World and the Tri-State Defender. Actually I did like probably more shots for the Tri-State than the Memphis World. I remember--in fact I got a--one of pictures--dealing with the Memphis World in my bag to show you. I remember taking a picture of James Meredith's wife [Mary June Wiggins Meredith] that was in the Tri--that was in the Memphis World. I remember that. James Meredith stayed at a house. I remember he had a cousin lived here. The night before he went to, before he went to Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi]. Ernest [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers] again, my mentor, went down to Ole Miss. I never went to Ole Miss to shoot any pictures, but--and I don't remember the year now. James Meredith had a march [March Against Fear] from Memphis [Tennessee] going--he got shot down in Hernando, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Right, I remember that. Speaker 2: And I remember a young man who later on became a friend of mine. We worked together at the University of Memphis [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]. He was in the newsroom and he heard somebody say James Meredith had been shot. He thought by being shot he was killed. And he put out a bulletin that James Meredith had been killed, and went all--and I can remember Walter Cronkite now when they came on with the news that evening, saying that reports have it that James Meredith has been killed in Memphis, Tennessee. But we have, I don't remember the reporter's name, standing by at William Bowld Hospital [William F. Bowld Hospital; University of Tennessee Bowld Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee] to say it's not--it was just not shrapnel--can't remember, recall the word now, from a gun you know, the little shrapnel that came from it. I can't remember the word I'm looking for. And this fella named Butch Alford [Ronald Alford] was the one who they--and used to tease him saying he's the one who killed James Meredith and James Meredith is still alive. And I--at that time I went--I was doing reporting I think for WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. And we went down and went on into Jackson, Mississippi where James Meredith--cause Dr. King picked up the march and that, that picture is in there too of me covering Dr. King (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is before sixty--this is before Dr. King was killed in '68 [1968], yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 661055 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about that. You're--you--when you graduated you were, you were a public relations director for Lane (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee], right. Speaker 1: For--and you, you--I guess you were there for a year or two? Speaker 2: I think I was there for two years. Speaker 1: Two years, okay. And-- Speaker 2: And then I went on to Holiday Inns [Holiday Inns, Inc.; Holiday Inn]. Speaker 1: Okay, now was that because of better pay or what, what happened? Speaker 2: Well I'd gotten married and my wife [Stansbury's ex-wife, Lucy Barber] was a teacher in Memphis [Tennessee] and I was there. I was in Jackson [Tennessee] and for us to get together, I decided to go. Plus it was a little better pay, wasn't much paying--much money being made then. And Brother Theo "Bless My Bones" Wade, the gospel disc jockey here, suggested--he said, "Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], why don't you go to Holiday Inns? I think they looking for somebody over there." And I went in and put in an application at Holiday Inns. But in the meantime, LeMoyne-Owen College [Memphis, Tennessee]--somebody told me about a job over there and so I went to LeMoyne-Owen College and Dr. Hollis Price [Hollis F. Price] offered me a job. And he sent me to somewhere in Virginia to observe somebody who was doing the same kind of work to let me know what I would be doing. And I was just about ready to accept the job at LeMoyne because when I had been interviewed at Holiday Inns, Holiday Inns said they really couldn't pay me but whatever it was, I can't remember. That's been a long time ago. And I was about to say yes, 'cause I had gone to Virginia and came back from going up there for LeMoyne-Owen and then Holiday Inns called and asked me if I could come out that afternoon for an interview and I said yeah. And we talked and so we decided that they would hire me. And I became the second black at Holiday Inns. And as I would tell Kemmons Wilson's sons. Kemmons was the founder of Holiday Inns. And I told his sons and all them--plus I wrote a letter to the--to The Commercial Appeal after Mr. Wilson died saying I was the second black not pushing a broom or a mop. And because they saw my genuineness and honesty, I had a lot of input on a lot of other blacks that came to Holiday Inns in the day. You know it goes back to what [HistoryMaker] Ernest Withers said to me, "Go back and get some letters behind your name so you can help some people." And I've had an opportunity to help a lot of people, you know, starting with Holiday Inns. One of the most--I know you have heard of the National Civil Rights Museum here in Memphis, is Beverly Robertson. My first wife taught Beverly when she was a student at Melrose [Melrose High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. And I recommended Beverly for her job at Holiday Inn and that was her first job. Speaker 1: So now you were there until 1981? Speaker 2: I think, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you--and but you, you kept the radio. Speaker 2: Radio, all the time, the same time. Speaker 1: So you did the, the weekend show here at-- Speaker 2: WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: And did you have any other radio shows during this period? Speaker 2: Unh-uh (shakes head). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I remember when boss said to me, you know the--during, during the evaluation. He says, "You need to give up that WDIA job." I said, "Why?" I said, "It's not interfering with my work here. Long as it's not interfering, I don't see why I need to give it up," you know and so needless--nevertheless, we were a little restrained afterwards. But I kept my job here, yeah. Story_ID: 661056 Speaker 1: And in those days your, your radio show was from two in the after- you said from two-- Speaker 2: I came on in the afternoons. Well we, we change. I had that two o'clock shift. I been on there for about thirty years. Speaker 1: Two to eleven? Speaker 2: Two to eleven, that's a long shift. A long shift. A long shift. And-- Speaker 1: Now I suppose everybody coming out of church and--or after they got home from church, they would listen to you. Speaker 2: Right, absolutely, absolutely, absolutely and, and that's why--because I had good ratings, because as you very well know being a historian, being in radio or in television if you don't have good ratings, you gone. Ratings is the name of the game. Speaker 1: Okay, so your ratings were always up there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, was there ever any, any suggestion by WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] that you or--you know, work, you know, full time? Speaker 2: Yeah, they offered me a full time job, but I just didn't want it because I was, you know, wanted something else. I was interested in education more or less and, and somewhere along the line--I don't know if I'm jumping the board, but you know I got a job at the University of Memphis [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's way down. Speaker 2: Okay we haven't gotten there yet, okay. Speaker 1: But I think--now in the--so you're working, working for Holiday Inn [Holiday Inns, Inc.; Holiday Inn] until '81 [1981]. And-- Speaker 2: And then I sold insurance there for a few years, think maybe four years or so, maybe four or five years. Sold insurance when I left Holiday Inns. And I didn't leave Holiday Inns on my own because I was making a decent salary and I had a wife [Stansbury's ex-wife, Lucy Barber] and had a son [Markhum Stansbury, Jr.] by that time. And I thought I would retire from Holiday Inn because it was a clean job, it was a good job. And then I had good benefits and when we went on vacation, we got 50 percent off of the Holiday Inns and they were nice hotels, you know. Like I just came from Las Vegas [Nevada] today and I was staying in the Hilton Garden hotel [Hilton Garden Inn Las Vegas] down there. Beautiful, beautiful. And the Holiday Inns couldn't even touch the Hilton now. But the Holiday Inn was it back in the day. Speaker 1: Yeah it was, it was top. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was manager of community relations as I recall. I was editor of a magazine, not magazine, newspaper that we had that came out weekly. And then all of a sudden, you know I heard rumors that, "Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], I understand you're not gonna be here next year." You know my boss hadn't told me this, this was rumors I had heard. And then I had one good friend who was in finance and worked with the budget who happened to be a minority. He said, "Mark I want to tell you something, but you can't say anything about it." And to show you how he believed in me, he was in a position where he could have lost his job because they knew he was the one who would have told me. And so I said, "Well I guarantee you I won't say anything about it." And then after we opened up--the city opened up Mud Island amusement park [Mississippi River Park, Memphis, Tennessee]. As a community affairs person, it was my responsibility to do things for our employees. And I remember getting tickets for our employees to go. And while we were--employees were in line to get tickets, they had to--we didn't just pass them out. You had to come. And I remember as they were coming in, somebody said, "Mark I understand you won't be here next year." I said, "I don't know anything about that." And so that gave me an opportunity to go to my boss, you know, to keep putting this other fellow on the spot who had been kind enough. And I said, "I was standing up the other day, Bill [ph.]." Bill was my boss. And I said, "And they said I won't be here." And he said, "Yes that is true, but you weren't supposed to hear it like that. I was supposed to call you in and talk to you." And they said that they gonna have to do some cutting back. And not only did they eliminate my job, but they eliminated my boss' job (laughter), eliminated my boss' job. And that's when I--after that that's when I sold the insurance. Story_ID: 661057 Speaker 1: Okay so, so did--when you left Holiday Inn [Holiday Inns, Inc.; Holiday Inn] in '81 [1981], did you spend a period of time without a job or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was without a job for about eighteen months I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. Now during this period of time I think there--Save the Lorraine campaign was going on in '82 [1982]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was that, that going--did you participate in that? Speaker 2: I didn't participate. No, that was Chuck Scruggs who's the general manager here, and A.C. Williams and Catherine Rivers Johnson, those people with the Teen Town Singers. I was not involved in that. Speaker 1: Okay, but you still had a job here at the radio station [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Yes, I had a job at the radio station. And then also as a little hustle job taking pictures. You know that was--kept, pay the bills. And then Congressman Harold Ford [Harold Ford, Sr.], who's a senior, he was the first congressman from this area, African American congressman. He and speaker pro temps [sic. speaker pro-tempore] Lois DeBerry who recently passed, who was very influential. She was the one who second, who nominated Al Gore for vice president. They both said to me, "Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], you need to go to work for Governor Mcwherter [Ned McWherter] because he's going to win," you know just like that. And I had worked in so many campaigns working, you know just volunteering. I never got a dime for any campaign that I worked in. But when Governor Mcwherter won, Lois DeBerry who was very close to him and Harold Ford who had been close to him before he left the legislature and ran, had spoken to Governor Mcwherter about me personally. And then they asked me to put in a resume, an applicant's resume, and which I did. And then when I would see Governor Mcwherter after he'd gotten in, he would always refer to me as, "My Holiday Inn man, my Holiday Inn man." And then make a long story short, they hired me to work for the governor in his Memphis [Tennessee] office. Speaker 1: Okay, this is in '87 [1987], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Ned Ray-- Speaker 2: Ned Ray Mcwherter, Ned Ray Mcwherter. Speaker 1: Governor of Tennessee and he, okay so, so were you doing PR [public relations]? Speaker 2: I was kind of PR. It was called field director and I was looking out for his interests in Memphis and to make the governor look good in responding to any questions or problems they had. And you know if people needed a letter from the governor, I would make sure they got it. And then after working that job for a while, another person on his staff was moved up and then he appointed me as assistant to the governor. And then I had responsibilities across the state to do these things. And so I got an opportunity to meet and know people, and the next thing I know, a friend of mine who had been a teacher of mine at the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee]. He was the--actually it was Memphis State [Memphis State University] then. He was a teacher of mine. He was not an African American, but he was a former reporter and we were friends and he called and said, "Dr. Carpenter [Thomas G. Carpenter] would like to offer me a job. Wants to offer me a job." Said, "Yeah." I said, "A job as what?" And because I knew I had been critical of the university, actually Memphis State. Yeah, I'd been critical of them for not having blacks in positions and doing this and even criticized the president, but said he wanted to give me a job. I said, "What?" He said, "As assistant to the president." I said, "Okay I'll think about it." And then I went in and talked with him and everything and they decided to hire me. But see here I wanted to go to the University of Memphis, or actually Memphis State when I was coming up but I couldn't get in; they wouldn't let me in. But yet they hired me as assistant to the president. And then I ended up working about nineteen years and serving as assistant to four different presidents. And that's when I retired in 2008 from the University of Memphis as assistant to the president. Story_ID: 661058 Speaker 1: But in there, I would have to look at my resume on the dates, you know, years. The commissioner of education--I happened to be on a trip for the City of Memphis [Tennessee]. I was on the 9-1-1 board [Shelby County Emergency Communications District]. I think I may have been chair at the time, and I was out in of all places, Las Vegas [Nevada]. And we were observing at a 911 convention and looking at some things that California was doing. Speaker 2: 9-1-1 in terms of, the terrorist attacks (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nine eleven [September 11, 2001], the emergency communications, yeah. And this was called the emergency communication, we had 9-1-1 here and the chancellor of the board of regents in Tennessee [Tennessee Board of Regents] called and I was down at a meeting and my wife [Stansbury's ex-wife, Lucy Barber] came down to get me. She said, "I think you need to call. You got a long distance call from Chancellor Smith." I said, "What Chancellor Smith doing calling me?" She said, "I don't know." Say, "He didn't say." So I called him back and he says, "Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], this is Charles, Charles Smith [Charles K. Smith]. Say I would-how would you like to be president of Shelby State Community College [Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis Tennessee]?" And I laughed. I said, "How would I like to be president of Shelby State?" I said, "I've never thought about it." He said, "Well I want you to think about it." And, and I said, "Well I have to--," I said, "I really have to do some thinking on that one." And then he said, "Well think about it and call me back tomorrow." So before I could call him back, he called me back. And said, "What's your decision?" I said, "Chancellor I just can't give you a decision right now," blah, blah, blah. And he said, "Well--." I said, "Because I haven't talked to my boss." He said, "Well believe me, I have already talked to him because the chancellor--the presidents report to the chancellor anyway. So I want you to talk to him." And then the next thing I know he says, "Well how about coming back to Tennessee?" Because I was out there in Vegas. He said, "How about coming back to Tennessee?" And I said, "Well okay, soon as I can get a flight back." And I finally got back and he made a trip from Nashville [Tennessee]. Came down, took me out to lunch and talked to me and you know to see. And we decided what I could do and if I could do this. I said, "Well how long will it take? I mean how long do you want me to be there?" He say, "For about six months." And so I said, "Well, let me make a few more talks." And so I talked to--the mayor was a good friend of mine and I talked to him and some of my political-- Speaker 2: This is Herenton [W.W. Herenton]? Speaker 1: Herenton, yeah, a good friend of mine. And they were all very supportive of me. And they said, "You have always worked in the background doing things for others and I think this is probably your time." So long story short, I accepted it and thought I would be there for six months. We had a search for a president, and as I recall there was about--either fifty-six or fifty-eight candidates that were interviewed. And then when it came time, the chancellor made a report that nobody fit the bill or could do it as well as I was doing it, trying to relate to the community and uphold the name of Shelby State. And so they decided they was gonna keep me there longer. And so long story short, I ended up being there two years, supposed to be there six months as president of Shelby State. Speaker 2: Now did, did you enjoy being the president? Speaker 1: I enjoyed it, I enjoyed it. And everybody wanted me--the people in the community and at the college wanted me to accept the president, be president. And I said no, I had made that commitment and I was kind the kind of person that if I make a commitment, I'm gonna live to my commitment, regardless. I mean and being president--I don't know if you've been president, but there's a lot of pressure. I mean it might be good. I mean you get dinners to go here and do this and you hobnob with the big fund raisers and the people who give you money. But also there's a lot of pressure on you, you know. Speaker 2: Now what's the--give us some sense of the demographics of Shelby State and what were some of the issues there when you became president? Speaker 1: We--the demographics, we had about six thousand students. There was a workforce of about five hundred as I recall. The problems--the president had done--enrolling students--I can't remember exactly. Enrolling students, telling them they could do this and they didn't have to do that. It was just a big controversy and they had to let him go. They had paid their money and they were registering and it was just a whole lot of chaos among the faculty and the students. And I was then able to quell that and get them back--people in a working mode. There was--had lost confidence in the previous president. Story_ID: 661059 Speaker 1: At Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] you won like the campus Unity Award I think after you were there about four years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Were you, were you seen basically as someone who could galvanize the community? Speaker 2: Right, the people, yeah. And then I remember after Dr. Rawlins [V. Lane Rawlins] came to Memphis as the president, he succeeded Dr. Carpenter [Thomas G. Carpenter] who was the one who had invited me to the campus. And I took Dr. Rawlins to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] to meet our congressional delegation. Harold Ford [Harold Ford, Sr.] as I said, you know he was a Democrat. And then the others, we had--let's see who was the congressman at the time? Later Rawlins became governor [sic.]. But he told Dr. Rawlins--he said, "You have a good man," he's a Republican. He says, "You have a good man working for you in [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury." He said, "Mark Stansbury can relate to everybody, regardless of whether they black, white, Republican or Democrat. And he worked across the aisle and we all believe him, Republicans and Democrats. So you have a great man." And I thought that was great coming from a congressman at the time, talking to you know, my president. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you know you were talking about the, the campus Unity Award and in the same way I always believed in working and I believe that the student was our number one customer. And I would talk to the faculty and the employees that if it were not for the students, we wouldn't have a job. And--but everybody on campus didn't feel that way. They felt that they were in control and that the students were there because of them. And I said, "No, it's the other way around. If it were not for the students, you wouldn't have this job." And I remember even our legal counsel, who's deceased now, she felt very strongly opposed to what I was doing. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah that's often the--so in terms of the, the student body, of the six thousand how many were African American? Speaker 2: I would say about 65, about 65 percent. Speaker 1: Okay, that's pretty good figure, yeah. So--and was there, was there, was retention of students an issue? Speaker 2: Yeah it was, it was, it was. Because financial aid you know, they weren't getting the financial aid. Although we were cheap--we were saying--what did we use it? Sleeping jewel I think it was. We were a sleeping jewel. I think that was the tag line that we were using at the time. But you know although it was low, they still needed help in order to go. Am I communicating with you? Speaker 1: Yeah, they still needed tuition help to go to school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, absolutely. Speaker 1: Those were the days, as I remember Chicago [Illinois]--there were issues of students taking initial grant for something and just not coming back, back, back to school anymore. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right. And we had some of that going on over there, you know. They would get it. But you know when I was doing--back in the days when I was at Lane [Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee] when you were trying to get it--they didn't give us the checks. We had to sign them and it right there to the college. But when, when I got at Shelby State [Shelby State Community College; Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis, Tennessee], they were you know, getting them and they would go and use it to pay down on a car, or help pay an apartment note where they was staying and all this. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So--and not easy to, to deal with some of the issues. So now what--when you look on back on those days as a interim president, what are you the most proud of? Speaker 2: Well I guess getting legislation and getting, getting--number one was getting the city council to close off a part of Beale Street where Manassas [Street] and I can't think of the other street now next to Memphis--like gas and water--wanted to cut it, to cut the traffic from going through you know. Speaker 1: Through the campus? Speaker 2: Yeah. That was one of the great one, and then another one was being able to get the legislature to support building a library and administration building. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so a new library was built and an administration building, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, and then an administration building. Story_ID: 661060 Speaker 1: All right, okay. So now were you involved in the Herenton [W.W. Herenton] campaign? Speaker 2: Well yes, here again it was a volunteer. And did--working in that and then also getting ready for his inauguration, working the inauguration probably more than anything, working with a lady named Jo Bridges. I called her and just asked her a question and that taught me a lesson. The way it is when you in church you have to keep your mouth shut because when said, "Well pastor, what about So and So and So and So?" And he says, "That's a good question Brother Stansbury [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury]. We need a committee and we're going to appoint you chairman," you know. I wasn't doing it to take a major role, I was just wondering if she had thought about this and a booklet and everything. I ended up doing--Josephine Bridges was in charge of the inauguration and I helped her and we came up with tickets and came up with a tee shirt and all designed with the mayor's--with a ticket on it. It was--I'm gonna say myself it was real nice keepsake. Speaker 1: Now this is a--now Memphis [Tennessee] is--what percentage was the African American population when Mayor Herenton was elected? Speaker 2: It was, it was not as great as it is now. Speaker 1: Were African Americans the majority in the city? Speaker 2: If not his first year, if not his first term, by the second term it was. I think by the second term it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Traditionally, Memphis was--about half the city was African American? Speaker 2: Right, right. And now I think we're about 60, 65 percent I believe we are now. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 661061 Speaker 1: So well when you left Shelby County Community College [sic.] you went back to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Shelby State [Shelby State Community College; Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Shelby State. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You went back to-- Speaker 2: To the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See when I left it was Memphis State, and it--and then in '94 [1994] I believe it was '94 [1994] the name was changed to Memphis State, it was changed from Memphis State University to the University of Memphis. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know I always get confused I call it Memphis State. Speaker 2: Right, right and it's still a lot of people call it--that's like you date a person, you know when we call it Memphis State and as assistant to the president, I had a lot of legislative responsibility that I had to deal with the legislators and Mr. Holmes [ph.] who was my mentor and teacher and invited me over to have lunch with the president, wanted to offer me the job. He and I both were working in the legislature, not working for the legislature, but working for the university in the legislature. And we had to fraternize with the members of the delegation, get them to join hands to change the name. And that was one of the few times that they had ever been you know everybody in the delegation supported something from Memphis. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you won a Arthur Holman-- Speaker 2: Arthur Holman Lifetime Achievement Award [Arthur S. Holman Lifetime Achievement Award]. Speaker 1: Who was Arthur Holman? Speaker 2: Arthur Holman was a dean of black students, who was an associate dean because at that particular time they never let blacks get up to be the dean. He was an associate dean. And he had worked there for about thirty years and then about five years ago they changed the name of it to Arthur S. Holman. They used to be just Lifetime Achievement Award presented by the Black Student Association. But now they name it after Dean Holman. Story_ID: 661062 Speaker 1: Okay, all right I thought I--I'm glad I asked 'cause you know you get history in here too, which is good (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. Speaker 1: I didn't know what it was. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So now in 2009 you served as an interim president of LeMoyne-Owen [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Not president of LeMoyne, I, I told them--made a change. It was changed. I was vice president of advancement of LeMoyne. In fact that happened about five, about five months after I retired from the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee]. Dr. Johnnie B. Watson called me and actually he's not doctor, he's just Mr. Watson. He called me and going to church one night, told me he wanted me to come over and be vice president. I said, "What?" Speaker 1: So how was that experience. Speaker 2: Can I take a break? Speaker 1: Okay, yes, yes sir. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERUPTION) Speaker 2: I think during the break we were discussing the fact that you know--how, how you felt about the job. Speaker 1: Yeah you know, you know everybody--the alumni were all happy to see the announcement that I was joining the college because I was as they said an icon in the community and people could relate to me and everybody was coming, they was so proud that I was going to do something to help LeMoyne-Owen. But the president unfortunately was not supportive like he should. Had another individual there that hadn't even finished college--was running and he wouldn't share with me information that I needed to be successful. And as I would tell him all the time, I said, "I didn't come looking for this job, they came and offered me the job." I said, "All I want to do is help because I attended HBCU [historical black colleges and universities] myself and I know what it is and I just want to give back to the community and giving to LeMoyne too is what I want to do." And I would ask him things and he wouldn't do and I remember we did an event once and he paid a photographer six thousand dollars, and I said, "Now this doesn't make any sense." And I went in--because I'm a photographer myself and I talked to the president and told him that I wanted some itemized billing, you know for all of this stuff and I never did get it. And so I just told the president I just couldn't handle it and left. You know that wasn't, wasn't for me. I had been working at the University of Memphis for almost twenty years. I guess it's a different in culture working there and maybe this is not good PR [public relations] for me to say. There's a difference in working at a traditional college than it is an urban college. Do I need to say more? Speaker 2: Well I think you know--would you think is the difference is due to the level of scrutiny that, you know I mean you ask for things at LeMoyne-Owen, you never got the-- Speaker 1: Right, you wouldn't get any support. Speaker 2: But if you asked for it at the University of Memphis, they would-- Speaker 1: Abso (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) be compelled to give--they have to give it to you. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Story_ID: 661063 Speaker 1: And it's good you, you bring up the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] there. I, I believe it was in 2006 the University of Memphis was having a conference on history and the young graduate person who was working with it, came to me to get some advice. And I asked him, I said, "Have you all ever considered recognizing, honoring the Memphis State Eight?" And he said, "I don't think so." And then I said, "Well that would be a good idea for us to repre- you know to do something for the Memphis State Eight." And he said, "Well I would need to talk to my advisor." And he said, "Could you give me a, a day or so?" And I said, "Sure." And so he went and talked to his advisor and his advisor said, "You know, that would be a good idea." And so then I'm assistant to the president, Dr. Shirley Raines. So I went in and told her, I said, "You know Dr. Raines, the Memphis State Eight has been almost fifty years and we have never recognized them." I said, "And to be honest with you, they have never been back on the campus I don't think." I said, "I think we need to do something for them." Speaker 2: Just for, for, for the record here, tell us, you know who the Memphis State Eight is. Speaker 1: Okay, the Memphis State Eight were eight young ladies and gentlemen who integrated Memphis State University back in 1959. Things as I said earlier were well segregated in Memphis, you couldn't go to the University of Memphis and they got some of the cream of the crop, some valedictorians, salutatorians from the various high schools. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was behind the movement to get them to go to the University of Memphis. They were let into the University of Memphis. You heard about the Little Rock Nine, most of the people, Minnijean Brown [Minnijean Brown Trickey] and that group over there, but you didn't hear too much about Memphis State. And that's what it was, the Memphis State Eight. Story_ID: 661064 Speaker 1: All over the country there were groups like that, that young men and women who endured a lot of-- Speaker 2: Right, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know discrimination I mean a lot of-- Speaker 2: Right, and-- Speaker 1: --personal discomfort. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely, absolutely, and you had the Klu Klux Klan [KKK], you had the police who had to guard them. In fact in Memphis [Tennessee] you had them going to classes with them. But things were really not real bad at the university. The dean upon you know, usually the dean talks with the student, dean of students talk with the students, welcome you to class. And my sister, my former wife [Lucy Barber] was in the second group and my sister [Claudine Stansbury] was in the third group to go to the University of Memphis [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]. They said that the dean would say, "We didn't want you here, you're here but we didn't want you here. You know you're only here because you know they said we had to let you come. But I'll give you some rules and regulations. You can't be on campus after twelve o'clock in the day time. You can't go to the student union building. You can't enter the cafeteria. You can't play basketball, you can't do this, you can't do that." And so the students who came, they didn't feel a closeness to the university because they were gone. And as I said, I had recommended to Dr. Shirley Raines who was the president at the time, that we do something. And she said, "Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], you think we should?" I said, "By all means." And she said, "Well I'm going to give you that responsibility." And so I coordinated bringing them back to campus and doing something. And now each one of them will tell you that they feel like the University of Memphis is a school and they can feel that they have a school that they call their school. I believe, in fact Luther McClellan was the first one to graduate. We have Bertha Rogers Looney who graduated and she's teaching at Shelby State Community College [Memphis, Tennessee]. Actually, the name has been changed to Southwest Tennessee [Southwest Tennessee Community College]. She retired two years ago, but she's back doing some work. We got LaVerne Jones [Marvis LaVerne Kneeland Jones]. We got Rose Blackney Love, and then we had Sammie Burnett Johnson. Sammy Burnett died in 2008. She's the only one of the seven, of the eight that's deceased. And then we have Luther, I said Luther, we have Ralph Prater who's out in San Francisco [California]. And John Simpson right here in Memphis. But LaVerne, Bertha and Luther, I believe those were--and Eleanor Gandy, Eleanor Gandy, that--and Eleanor graduated from the University of Memphis. I think four of them did. Luther was the first. Ralph didn't. John Simpson didn't. We had either four or five to graduate. But they came back and Dr. Raines and the whole administration made them feel very welcome. The students got on TV and said they were very grateful to what the University of Memphis had done. And in fact in 2008 they were given the Arthur S. Holman Lifetime Achievement Award, which I thought was great. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I thought was great. Speaker 1: All right. So this is an example for the students that are at University of Memphis today. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And in fact Ms. Bertha Rogers-Looney, Bertha Looney-Rogers, her granddaughter is at the University of Memphis. And I think it says a great for that thread going through. Story_ID: 661065 Speaker 1: So the, the, the Memphis State Nine [sic.]-- Speaker 2: Memphis State Eight. Speaker 1: Eight, they, they were recognized in 2006. Speaker 2: Right, right. They were recognized in 2006, and then they came back and we gave them the Arthur S. Holman Lifetime Achievement Award in 2008. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this can't--just to go back up to the end of LeMoyne-Owen [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee]. Some things just did not seem right, out in the open. Speaker 2: Right, absolutely. And I just decided it was time for me to go. Speaker 1: 'Cause you were--to stay would have lent credibility to something that-- Speaker 2: Right, that was going on and I was just not me-- Speaker 1: --where there's any question at least. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so did you retire at this point, or did you go into another project? Speaker 2: No. I, I retired at the end of that with the exception of WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], I'm still at WDIA. But I don't have to get up and go to work every day. I can just stay at home and do what my wife [Imogene Sayles Stansbury] says to do. Speaker 1: Okay. So the only workday is actually Sunday. Speaker 2: Is Sunday, right. Speaker 1: Which is--okay. Well you're not actually--physical labor, so--so now do you have a project that you, you would like to be involved in, or a big-- Speaker 2: Well I am involved in a couple of projects. I'm involved with the Shelby Farms conservancy [Shelby Farms Park]. We have a park in Memphis [Tennessee], we have forty five hundred acres. And in fact it's much larger than New York's [New York] Grand Central, not grand--Central, Central Park, it's larger than Central Park. And I'm on the committee that hopefully we can make that one of the nation's great parks. We are developing it right now. And then also a couple of years ago the Shelby County [Tennessee] mayor [Mark Luttrell] appointed me to the Shelby County, excuse me, to the Shelby County Historical Commission. And that is a committee where we approve historical markers. We go out and talk to people in the community and if you want a historical marker, we'll be more than happy to consider it, you know you write the copy and present it to us and we check out to make sure that it's validated where we can validate it. And we have a certain amount of characters we have to have in the copy. And then we try to edit it down, but you have to pay for it. But that's the way, way you get it. Speaker 1: Okay so you all the raise the money yourself? Speaker 2: Right, you would, yeah, right. Speaker 1: All right. So community groups or churches or civic groups, you know, do they submit ideas? Speaker 2: We had one fraternity we've done since and then we have a neighborhood. Actually we approved one yesterday. We did one at the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] and another organization is requested one where Elvis [Elvis Presley] used to record, American Studios [American Sound Studio] here in Memphis. And we're working on that one. And that's about it right now. But yeah I am also on the Hooks Institute for Social Change [Benjamin L. Hooks Institute for Social Change, Memphis, Tennessee]. That's a institute over at the University of Memphis named after Dr. Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks]. Benjamin Hooks was a great--I almost said an educator, but he's just a great all around individual. He was the first African American appointed judge after Reconstruction. He was the first on the FCC, Federal Communication Commission, and then he was executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People [NAACP] for fifteen years, plus he was a fraternity brother of mine and a friend of mine. And I was happy that they asked me to serve on that board of directors. Story_ID: 661066 Speaker 1: So at WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] today your show is still being broadcast. You, do you having any thoughts of retiring from the show or you gone do it as long as you can? Speaker 2: No, I'm gonna do it as long as I can. In fact my wife [Imogene Sayles Stansbury] tells everybody they'll take me out feet first. But I'm working for a good guy, Bobby O'Jay and gives me an opportunity to do the things that I want to do and to help keep the community informed and I just do things just within you know, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], Federal Communication guidelines. I enjoy it and enjoy making people happy each Sunday. Speaker 1: Okay. Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.] came in and cut a lot of jobs at WDIA. Speaker 2: Right, and in fact my job wasn't cut but my hours were cut. I'm down to four hours now on Sundays from four o'clock until eight o'clock. I'm really on the air from four until seven and then from seven until eight I'm there because we have a church called Mount Vernon Baptist Church Westwood [Memphis, Tennessee], which is pastured by the Reverend James L. Netters who has been documented as the longest serving pastor of any church in Memphis, Tennessee. He's been the pastor for fifty-eight years. And so I'm on the board when his church is on and when his church goes off the air, then supposedly I go home. I don't go home, but I'm off the air. But I do some production work afterwards. Speaker 1: Okay so do you stay around until eleven? Speaker 2: No, no. But you know they say out of everything bad comes some good. The bad thing is that my hours were cut. But the good part was that it gives me an opportunity to go home and spend some time with my wife because for almost thirty years I was never at home on Sunday evening. Have to go to church, I would rush home, change clothes and to the radio station because I was there at two. So out of everything bad comes some good. Speaker 1: Yes sir, okay. Well some of your--the personalities on WDIA now include Stan Bell, Bobby O'Jay, Stormy, Nelson [Ford Nelson]. Speaker 2: Bev Johnson and Janis Fullilove. Speaker 1: Okay, now she was a city councilman? Speaker 2: She is city councilwoman now, she is now. And in fact city council [Memphis City Council] meets on Tuesday and she's off on Tuesdays. They usually bring in a substitute for her so she can do that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So WDIA continues on. I mean you--has it--I've looked around on the walls and there've been plenty of--I think the papers covered the history of WDIA over and over again. Have there been books written about WDIA? Speaker 2: To my knowledge there's only been one book ['Wheelin' on Beale: How WDAI-Memphis Became the Nation's First All-Black Radio Station and Created the Sound That Changed America,' Louis Cantor] and it's--I was trying to think of it--there's been one book. Only one book has been written about and I just can't think of the name of it right now. Story_ID: 661067 Speaker 1: What's the, the history of WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] meant to you and do you think that there ought to be something else published about it? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, by all means I think there should be a book, a movie. In fact once there was some talk and I don't know, don't know what happened but there had been some talk. Because this is we could say the template for black radio. And back in the day we used to have people coming from all around the country to observe and see what was going on at WDIA because WDIA was not founded as a black station, it was a country station. It wasn't doing well in the market and two fellas, John R. Pepper and Bert Ferguson, decided that they would change the format and they hired Nat D. Williams who was an educator over at Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. And then the ratings just changed. Arbitron, we were talking about Arbitron ratings [Nielsen Audio] earlier, Arbitron ratings we were boom, like that, went up to number two and then we were number one in the market for many, many years. So WDIA was called the goodwill station. It still is as far as I'm concerned, the goodwill station because we were talking. It was good, it played a major part in the life of [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury. It gave me my first wife [Lucy Barber] and has given me an opportunity to bond with the citizens of Memphis [Tennessee] and the Mid-South. And now through the Internet, you can hear us anywhere you go by using an app on your smartphone that's called iHeartRadio. And almost every Sunday I get a call, not a call, a text from a fella over in the UK [United Kingdom] in London [England], listening to my program. And that makes me feel good. And not only he, but people across the country. Story_ID: 661068 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do different in your career? Speaker 2: I don't know because I am about helping people. I believe that everybody is somebody and goes back to Mr. Withers [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers] when he had that talk with me and he says, "Mark [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], we need to get you in school, back in school to get some letters behind your name so you can help some people." And I think that I've helped a lot of people. So I don't think there's anything in my career that I would have done differently. Maybe the insurance part, selling the insurance. And that's one of the reasons I got out of it because it was one of those sales jobs and ones you put pressure on people to buy and I'm not a pressure kind of a guy. And then I guess the last stage in my career was accepting and going over to LeMoyne-Owen [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] and that particular situation. I don't think I would do that again. You know knowing what I know now because I didn't have the support in, in order to be successful. You have to have the support of the person that you report to. Story_ID: 661069 Speaker 1: Okay. In terms of Mr. Withers I think we discussed this off camera, but you know since The HistoryMakers interviewed him you know I guess maybe three years, three or four years ago there was a report in The Commercial Appeal that he was a paid informant for the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] during the times that he, he--during the time that he was the photographer of the Civil Rights Movement here in Memphis [Tennessee]. How do you feel about that? Speaker 2: Well as I said off camera, I was just like a son to Mr. Withers, Mr. Withers was just like a father to me. Had it not been for Ernest C. Withers, [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury definitely would not be the individual that he is today. I never felt Mr. Withers did anything wrong, unscrupulous. As I was listening to [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young who was an aid to Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], he was interviewed on CNN regarding Mr. Withers and this same story. And he said as far as he was concerned, he didn't have a problem with it, if that indeed was what Mr. Withers was doing. I personally can support Andrew Young and would not have a problem with it. Mr. Withers had to support his children in that day and time as I heard a reporter also say, I think he was from the New York Times, he said that if the police came to you asking you something and if you didn't respond in a positive manner, they would do something to discredit you. So Mr. Withers had eight children and a wife [Dorothy Withers]. And whatever he did, the most important he did was chronicle the civil rights era. And had it not been for [HistoryMaker] Ernest Withers, we would not have the icon images of Dr. King on the bus, he and Dr. Ralph Abernathy down in I believe it was in, it was in Georgia I believe where that was. And so many things at the National Civil Rights Museum [Memphis, Tennessee], lying across the bed reading the newspaper. With Dr. King at Mason's Temple [sic. Mason Temple, Memphis, Tennessee]. The night prior to his assassination, it was Ernest Withers who took that iconic photograph and so many others. So I applaud Mr. Withers, personally, for what he has done for the Civil Rights Movement, for what he did for Mark Stansbury, for what he did for his family. And if it took the FBI paying him, then God bless him. Story_ID: 661070 Speaker 1: So now once again if you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: Well I think helping a lot of students, especially at Memphis State and the University of Memphis [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]. See back in the day when I first went to University of Memphis, the, the African American students didn't have anyone that they could really look up to and could talk to that was in a position of influence, that could do something. And if a person came to me as I said all the time, I looked at students are the reason for me being at the university, not students being there because of me. And so I did everything I could to help, and I've had parents who would see me on the street that I didn't even know would come up to me and say, "Mr. Stansbury [HistoryMaker Mark Stansbury], I want to thank you for what you did for my son or what you did for my daughter." And I said, "What did I do?" And they said, "Well you gave them their first job or they were having problems in a particular class and you stood up and went and talked and we got things worked out." And that I would consider my greatest legacy. When someone comes to me and recognize me that I don't even know and say that I did something to help them or their families, that I did something to help their son or daughter. It would be a different thing if that was my sister or sister-in-law or my friend telling me, "Mark, thank you for what you did for Larry or for what you did for Such and Such." But for somebody that I don't even know to come and say it, that, I would say would be my biggest legacy. Story_ID: 661071 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well you have two children and you remarried. Tell us about your family. Speaker 2: Well I had from my previous marriage to Lucy Barber who was a graduate of Manassas High School [Memphis, Tennessee], we were together for about thirty-six or thirty-seven years. We had two sons, Markhum Jr. [Markhum Stansbury, Jr.] who's an actor out in Hollywood. And Marlon [Marlon Stansbury], who's a teacher with the Memphis City Schools. Actually it's Shelby County schools [Shelby County School District] now they changed it. And he's been a teacher for about fifteen years and he has a son, which is my grandson, name is Mitchell [ph.]. This is his first year in school. And then when I became a blended family with Imogene Sayles Stansbury now, she had two sons, Kenneth [ph.] and Keith [ph.]. Keith is a--has a job in Nashville [Tennessee] and he has a company where he designs and produces tee shirts. And then his brother Keith, I'm sorry Kenneth is also a teacher in the Memphis City school system. Did I say Keith, Ken is a teacher in the Memphis City school system. Keith is the one who has the business and he has three, he has a wife and three children, which would be our grandchildren. He has a set of twins, Janice [sic.] and Juwayne [ph.], Jasmine [ph.] and Juwayne. Juwayne is a graphic art designer. He graduated from Tusculum College [Greeneville, Tennessee]. The same way with his twin sister Jasmine, who was an award winning basketball player and a record breaking basketball player for Tusculum University [sic.], which was the first college in the State of Tennessee. She broke all kinds of records, and she's in the Women's Basketball Hall of Fame there in Knoxville [Tennessee]. And they also have a baby brother, Juwayne, who's his first year at Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee]. Story_ID: 661072 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well I just hope that they will get together like we were back in the '60s [1960s]. I think we were more cohesive. We were together as a group. Now things are so I guess all apart. We are still being discriminated against and in fact personally, I think things are worse now than they were back in the day for African Americans. We have my president, [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama as president. But I think the [U.S.] Congress and the legislative delegation up in Washington [D.C.], they do everything they can to undermine him and a lot of us have had the opportunity to have friends like it should be, who are not African Americans. And when they become a friend or befriend us, we get an opportunity to go out to dinner with them, visit their home, maybe date one of their females. Then we think we have arrived. But we are a long way, or as Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said, we are a long, long, long ways away. I just wish that something, can do something to make us go back and review history so we can't repeat itself. I think--I remember when I went to Holiday Inns [Holiday Inns, Inc.; Holiday Inn] back in the '60s [1960s] I was hired to make sure we had equality in some of the areas. When I went to the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee], also we had the University of Memphis Magazine. I would have to check the University of Memphis Magazine to make sure that we had blacks included in there, photographs, stories about them. The editor would come to me and we would sit down from time to time and I would give suggestions to him that we may need to do a story on such and such. We have Such and Such who is editor, or managing editor of The Commercial Appeal. We have So and So and So and So who's president of the realtor's association. We have Such and Such who's police director. And I would suggest the stories to them and they would do stories. But now you pick up and you can go maybe sometime two or three months and you don't even see a picture of an African American. You can turn on television and you can see commercials where black companies I understand have some influence in the writing like very successful Tyler Perry has a--and I love Tyler Perry and his--the contribution that he has made. But unfortunately, there's only one Tyler Perry. There's one Oprah Winfrey. I hope I'm communicating and hope I have made sense in your res- my response to your question. Story_ID: 661073 Speaker 1: When do your, your radio show [at WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], weekly, do you, do you try to--as you described it earlier as, as more than just a show, it's a ministry. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you, do you--are you conscious about presenting some of the themes that will, you know, move the black community? Speaker 2: I do, I do, I do that. And you know and I'm not a, not a talk show host. It's a gospel program and I do as much as I can to just as a way to just slide things in or say something. I make a comment about things that's going on in the community and like for example I have a, a drop by a young lady. I think she's about four years old. She says, "Papa, I want to vote too." I may have a drop by our former Mayor Herenton [W.W. Herenton], saying, "This is Mayor Herenton urging you to get out and vote." And then I put the other drop in there. She'll say, "Papa I want to vote too." And then I may have a, an artist might say this is Such and Such. Say, "I vote every time I get a chance, you should too." Things like that and you know to call to your attention. You know if church for example, my church, Saint Andrew A.M.E. Church [Memphis, Tennessee]. We do a lot in the community and we just recently opened up a, what we call the Grocer at South Memphis Farmers Market [Memphis, Tennessee]. The farmer's market is usually open every Thursday where they would bring in farmers from around the area to sell fruits and vegetables. Because in the area where my church is located, there's not a grocery store anywhere around where they can get fresh vegetables. And about two weeks ago, actually it'll be three weeks this Monday that we've been open on six days a week, Monday through Saturday from ten a.m. until seven p.m. And not only do we have the vegetables, but we also have food and canned goods, healthy things for them. And I'll mention that on the show, that they're open and all and that's where the people in the community can go. Story_ID: 661074 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now is there anything we haven't discussed that I--we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I think we've covered the rainbow. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as somebody who first was a Christian, loved God, loved people, was honest, I was a man of great character and tried to do what he could to help others. As I say there is no limit to what a man or a woman can achieve if he or she doesn't mind who gets the credit. And most of all, everybody is somebody. Speaker 1: All right. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Okay, thank you. Story_ID: 661075 Speaker 1: Okay, that was a picture of Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee] notes when I was writing for the Tri-State Defender, back in high school. Speaker 2: And that's after I received the Arthur S. Holman Lifetime Achievement Award. Speaker 1: And here I am with Governor Ned McWherter where I served as assistant along with President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], my wife, Imogene [Imogene Sayles Stansbury] and Vice President Al Gore. Speaker 2: That's Judge Bernice Donald [Bernice B. Donald], and the civil rights giant, [HistoryMaker] Maxine Smith. Speaker 1: Along--that's a picture in the rock and roll hall of fame here [Memphis Rock 'n' Soul Museum, Memphis, Tennessee] with John--that's Johnnie Taylor-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In the front? Speaker 1: Johnnie Taylor right there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And then that's Robert "Honeymoon"--"Honey Boy" Thomas [Robert Daniel Thomas], who was a WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] disc jockey, and that's me right there. Speaker 2: And that's me with Mayor A C Wharton [HistoryMaker A C Wharton, Jr.] who's currently the mayor of Memphis [Tennessee], former mayor of Shelby County [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: And that's me along with Ford Nelson, the longest disc jockey here at WDIA. Speaker 2: And that's me along with the president of the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee], Dr. Shirley Raines. I quarterbacked the Memphis State Eight marker [Memphis State Eight Historical Marker]. Speaker 1: And there I am pictured with members of the Memphis State Eight. I believe there is only two missing there. One, Sammie Burnett is deceased, and Ralph Prater was out of town, couldn't make it. Speaker 2: And that's me and my kids. That's my oldest son, Markhum [Markhum Stansbury, Jr.], then Marlon [Marlon Stansbury], and grandson, Mitchell [ph.]. Speaker 1: And there we are during a Christmas break, my grandson with his Christmas gift, along with my two sons, Markhum and Marlon. Speaker 2: And there I am behind the WDIA studio, just right there. Speaker 1: And there I am with other WDIA radio personalities, Bobby O'Jay, at the end. He was our boss, and Ford Nelson next to me. Speaker 2: And that was when I went to work as assistant to President--Governor Ned McWherter. I was an aid to the president at the University of Memphis at the time, Memphis State [Memphis State University]. Speaker 1: And there I am along with the great Dr. Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] and Daphene McFerren [Daphene R. McFerren] who's a director of the Hooks Institute for Social Change [Benjamin L. Hooks Institute for Social Change, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: And there I am with my photo. That's my class reunion, my sixtieth--fiftieth class reunion in 19-- Speaker 1: And there I am in the WDIA Teen Town Singers. Speaker 2: Now, here there was an award at the museum here, pictures taken from the Memphis World newspapers, historical pictures. Speaker 1: And here I am along with Reverend Billy Kyles [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles] and others. We're at the Memphis International Airport [Memphis, Tennessee] with the plane to take Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] body back. Speaker 2: This was a four generation picture at Saint Andrew A.M.E. Church [Memphis, Tennessee] with me, my mother, Eliza Stansbury [Eliza Markham Stansbury], and my [maternal] grandmother, Mary Carter Markham. Speaker 1: And there I am recently emceeing an event for the United Negro College Fund. Speaker 2: Right there with a now deceased member of my church, Dr. Ed Reed [Edward Reed], one of the pioneer surgeons in Memphis. Speaker 1: Here I am with [HistoryMaker] John Lewis. This was a dedication of a marker that his fraternity, Sigma Gamma Rho [sic. Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity], held in Memphis. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me at WJAK Radio in Jackson, Tennessee. Wink Martindale, the game show host also worked at that station. Speaker 1: I like that name, Wink Martindale (laughter). Speaker 2: And this is a picture of the Meredith march [March Against Fear]. He [James Meredith] had gotten shot down in Hernando, Mississippi, and Dr. King, right here, and that's me with the WDIA tape recorder with other news media personnel. Speaker 1: This is 1968, I think it is, early '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: No, it'd be a little before '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think. Speaker 1: And that was me--we need to clean it off a little. That was me at the original WDIA studios. We were playing 45s [45 rpm records] on the big turntable. That's where I learned. Speaker 2: The Beatles were performing here in Memphis, and the Klu Klux Klan [KKK] picketed the event because of-- Speaker 1: John Lennon? Speaker 2: --John Lennon's remark about The Beatles being greater than Jesus. Speaker 1: Popular (unclear). Speaker 2: And that's the great civil rights leader, Ms. Civil Rights in Memphis, Maxine Smith. Speaker 1: And this was the first time we had top blacks, this was a police deputy direct and deputy chief and some majors. Speaker 2: And this was a picture of Dr. Benjamin Lawson Hooks, the great. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Al Green and comedian, Phyllis Diller. She autographed the picture for me. Speaker 2: And this is the great Lena Horne, leaving a concert in Memphis. Speaker 1: The Supremes performed at the Ellis Auditorium [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: And this was Grandma [ph.]--not my grandmother, but Grandma feeding the chickens. Speaker 1: And this is the room in which Dr. King was killed, this view looking over at the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee], which is now the National Civil Rights Museum. Speaker 2: And this was a member of my church, Evangelist Bailey [ph.]. She was eighty-five years and she went to take typing. Speaker 1: This was a police at the corner of Beale and Hernando [sic.], frisking a prisoner, one of the marchers, putting him in what they call the black maria, a patty wagon. Speaker 2: Dr. King came to Memphis for the 1968 garbage strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Stike]. This was on Beale Street with some of the garbage. Speaker 1: This is a picture I took of First Lady Rosalynn Carter, President Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] wife. Speaker 2: And this was a picture I shot of The Beatles in their dressing room at the Mid-South Coliseum [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: And this is my son, Marlon, and this was used on the cover of his book called 'Struggling to be Free' [ph.]. Speaker 2: And this is the first picture I shot of a president. This is President Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]. I have since shot four other presidents, pictures rather. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: This is a picture taken at Mason's Temple [sic. Mason Temple, Memphis, Tennessee] a couple of weeks before Dr. King was assassinated. And this Reverend Jim Lawson [James Lawson] who invited him to come to Memphis, and this was a bishop in the Church of God in Christ, Bishop McEwen [A.B. McEwen, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of Medgar Evers' wife, Myrlie [HistoryMaker Myrlie Evers-Williams], along with their son [Darrell Kenyatta Evers], at the funeral in Jackson, Mississippi of Medgar Evers. It was the week's best photo in Jet magazine. It was called 'A Time for Tears' [ph.]. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-three [1963], right? Speaker 1: Right, and this is a picture I shot of President Jimmy Carter. He came to Memphis. This was taken over in one of the FedEx hangers...