 Story_ID: 98110 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My full name is Daryl L. Shular, D-A-R-Y-L, L-A-D-A-L-L-E, S-H-U-L-A-R. Speaker 1: Okay, and now is there a story behind the name Shular, you don't hear that a lot in the black communities. Speaker 2: Right, right, I don't know, I don't know the history behind that. Speaker 1: Okay I just wondered. Is there a story about the rest of your name, Ladalle is an interesting name too. Speaker 2: I guess that what my mother came up with, you know. Don't really know the history behind that as well but I guess it works well for me because a lot of times you know when they see Shular, they think it is something totally different from what they're going to see. So I guess it works out for me, it gets me in the door. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay I learned that there are a lot of black Studymeyers. There are some in my hometown and other places too. That's a name you associate with Germany and when you think about Shular--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Exactly, I think it has some type--Shular is some type of German tie, you know I don't really know. Speaker 2: Okay do you have any nicknames? Speaker 1: No nicknames, no nicknames just Daryl. Speaker 2: What is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: September 10, 1973 in Winter Haven, Florida. Speaker 2: Winter Haven that's one of the towns I think the [Cincinnati] Reds used to have a facility--spring training--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Right a lot of the pro baseball teams have their spring training down in Central Florida. Speaker 2: Okay and what is your occupation? Speaker 1: I am a senior culinary arts instructor at the Art Institute of Atlanta. Speaker 2: Okay and what's today's date? Speaker 1: Today's date is October 9, 2006. Speaker 2: Okay and where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We are at my residence at 2935 Hemingway Lane here in Roswell, Georgia. Story_ID: 98111 Speaker 1: Okay now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight favorite questions we always ask, we ask everybody. They only require a short answer. First one is this is appropriate for you, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: What is it, seafood, seafood is my favorite. Speaker 1: You know the joke about seafood, right? Speaker 2: No what's the joke? Speaker 1: Seafood is whatever you see. Speaker 2: Oh you see food; yeah I guess that's what it is. See food, whatever I see, that's what I want. Yeah but I actually like seafood, I like it all. Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red Speaker 1: Alright. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Out of the country. Speaker 1: Anywhere? Speaker 2: Anywhere out of the country. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Stay focused, stay focused, push. That's what I say to myself a lot, stay focused and push hard. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98112 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. And I'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Nevada Robinson like the state of Nevada, N-E-V-A-D-A, her last name is Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N and her maiden name is Tunstall, T-U-N-S-T-A-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay that's an interesting name too, you don't hear a lot. Is there a story behind Nevada? Speaker 2: No story behind it, she was just one of fourteen children. They grew up in Alabama and just a huge family. So there is no history behind the name Nevada there. Speaker 1: Okay can you give us her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Place of birth I believe in Troy, Alabama and her birthday is August 23, 1942. Speaker 1: Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? Were there any stories that take you back to the 19th century or Civil War or beyond? OR any--how far back can you go? Speaker 2: As far as what I know of my mother's ancestors they would come from slaves. They grew up in Alabama. Some of the stories I remember her telling us was how they used to get up as kids very early in the morning and having to pick cotton and having to shuck potatoes out of the ground and pull sweet potatoes out of the ground all day long and during the middle of the day, they'd have a piece of bread that they would have in their pockets to eat but they'd have to work from sun up to sun down during that time and it was such a huge family the oldest one would have to take care of the younger kids but once you got to a certain age, you know, they went out there and worked. My grandfather was, you know, a white man and was very, very, according to her, very strict, very firm and he was just one of those people who just drove their students, I mean, their kids to really work hard and my grandmother was the same way. She was the homemaker, she took care of all the kids but they had to make do with what they had. You know, they didn't have much and they grew up in a very, very small house maybe one or two bedrooms. Stories of rain coming through the roof. Stories of you know just being in pitch black darkness but that's how she was brought up back in the day. Speaker 1: Now you say your grandfather was white? Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: Is there a story about how that works, in those --we're talking about in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: Right Speaker 1: Segregation was at its height so how did he manage--was he-I mean, well how did it work? Speaker 2: Well I think he was white or mixed and I think what happened was he was just one of those men that was very bright skin, I guess you know, and I guess that probably got him by. Probably didn't get too much harassment as far as being a Caucasian with a black family and so forth. But you know, a very, very strong man. Very little is heard about him, I guess he passed away when a lot of the children were very young. The only information I know of my grandfather was just from what I heard from my uncle, what I heard from my mother and very, very strong disciplinary guy you know, with the kids back in the day, really drove them really hard. He was a craftsman, was in to building things, was in to plowing the fields, he had lots of land. So he was a very well off person. Speaker 1: Was he--was his last name Tunstall? Speaker 2: Tunstall, yes. Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about growing up and going to school and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: My mother spoke about how back in the day you know they didn't have much. She used to tell you stories that they would take a nickel and buy a whole big sack of candy and all this stuff when they were on their way to school and how a nickel could go so far back in the day. Just hearing the stories of how they used to walk miles and miles just to go to school. Not having you know the best of clothes or the best of shoes but just worked with what they had being very, very driven to be responsible as far as their education. But at the same time, work was their main focus then, not really so much as education in the long run. I think their mentality back in the day was what can we do now and so she only went to school till I believe in her tenth grade. After that, I guess that's how life is sometimes. You know you have to make a different direction so she couldn't complete school. She ended up being a mother very early and that's the jump start of her life there. Speaker 1: Okay she came from a large family? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 98113 Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name is Thomas Lee Shular, T-H-O-M-A-S, L-E-E, S-H-U-L-A-R. Speaker 1: Okay what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't remember his place of birth; his birthday is February 16, 1951. Speaker 1: Do you know where he grew up? Speaker 2: I believe my father was adopted, don't really know where he was brought up. I remember as a young kid traveling with him to a funeral up in Tallahassee so I'm assuming that's, you know, the area where he was brought up. Speaker 1: So he's probably from Florida around Tallahassee. So I take it you don't know much about his ancestors I would guess. Speaker 2: Not much at all and that's due because of the relationship that we have with one another. My father--all of us grew up in Central Florida and my father lived probably a few miles from me. I only saw him maybe once or twice a year and so really didn't have a really good connection with him, didn't really have any type of relationship. So knowing anything about his past or where he's from and stuff, not much to contribute there. Speaker 1: Is he still alive? Speaker 2: He's still alive. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98114 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Thomas Shuler and Nevada Robinson] met? Speaker 2: I believe back in the day they met up and my mother said that that was the one gentleman that she was really in love with. She was planning on marrying him. I believe this would be her second marriage but at some point, I think the relationship probably just broke off. Didn't turn out like it was planned to be, they did not get married, of course and she stayed single from that point on raising three kids and he eventually got married and started a family of his own. Speaker 1: Okay so what can you tell us about their personalities and who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I take mainly after my mother. She's a very hard working person. Growing up in Florida, she was in--the citrus industry is very huge in Florida, of course and she worked seasonally and so from fall through, you know, late winter, early spring she would work six days a week at a sectionizing plant where they would sectionize grapefruit, oranges and canned them for distribution in grocery stores and so forth. And you know, her pay depended on how many jars she can fill and some of the stories I used to hear of her and how she used to work, literally push herself really hard to get as much done. I think that stems all the way back from how she was brought up having that work ethic as a child and now as an adult, she's driving herself really hard to really produce as much as she can at the sectionizing plant. So as a mother she put that into us, me and my brother, you know. My mother would say clean the house, she didn't really go into any detail about what she wanted cleaned. We had to really look at the big picture and say hey this needs to be cleaned, that needs to be cleaned. Take the initiative and clean it and she was the type that would come in and if it wasn't how she wanted it, you know, she would really get on to us. So I kind of picked that up from her and now as a chef that's kind of how I am. I work really hard and I push myself really hard to be the best. I'm not a big fan of coming in second place. I've always tried to push people around me to be better than what they can be and if there is someone better than me, they won't be better than me for long. You know, I try my best to catch up with them and really work real hard to be competitive. So I can say that my personality is mainly a hundred percent after my mother. Speaker 1: Okay alright, now do you have--so your mother did seasonal work. What did your father do? Speaker 2: My father worked at the boxing company that produces boxes for different companies. You know, if it was Wal-Mart and they had a particular box that needed to be packaged for paper towels or whatever, they would manufacture the boxes and do the printing for it to be shipped out for packaging. So what I remember, he kept that job for many years. Story_ID: 98115 Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Plenty of those-(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Do you remember the very first one? Speaker 2: The very first one, I can remember my first day in kindergarten and I remember my mother [Nevada Robinson] taking me to kindergarten and I had cousins that lived next door and I remember my cousin coming into the classroom just screaming, didn't really want to be there. And I remember the first task that they gave us in elementary school was to find your name on the board and you had the name on a piece of paper already, you just had to match it up. My name was one of the last two on there and I'm still puzzled like where is my name and so it was kind of funny that I was the last one. You know and that was one of my earliest memories of my childhood back in elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98116 Speaker 1: What were some of the--tell us a little about where you grew up and what the neighborhood was like and what were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Growing up in central Florida is a little urban country. All the kids in the neighborhood grew up together, all the parents in the neighborhood helped to raise all the children in the neighborhood. If one kid was bad and Ms. Jenkins down the street saw you doing something bad, you best to believe she was going to tell your mother when she got home and that type of environment. All the kids in the neighborhood, we really would be very innovative as far as like what we would play. We would play a particular game called 'Hot Peas and Cornbread' and one of the games was if you--we use to have a strap--a belt or a stick or anything and you go hide it and the person that gets close to it they would say you're getting hot and they would say hot peas and cornbread, come and get your supper. So whoever could find that stick, gets to hit everybody until they go back to the base and that was kind of one of the games we played. It was innocent, it was fun and it was a you know, little dangerous at times but that's how we were brought up. Some of the smells that I remember growing up were just on Saturdays and weekends after my mother [Nevada Robinson] worked all week and she got her weekly pay. She would always try her best to cook a nice meal and I think that's where I got my culinary influence from. It was just watching her just take a piece of chicken and just do something great with it. Back in the day I remember just having just the backs of chickens or the necks not really breasts or thighs; the parts that didn't really have the meat, that's what she used to cook because of course, the budget didn't allow her to have the more exotic pieces of meat. But those are the things I remember, her making pastries, making little donuts for all the kids in the neighborhood and just making cakes and things that we could package up and take to church with us on Sunday. I grew up in a very, very religious household. My mother was very, very into the Word, into reading the Bible and into her children knowing God in that area and so we always read the Bible, we always went to bible study whether it was next door at the neighbor's house or a hundred miles away at my uncle's church in Sarasota, Florida that's what we did. Speaker 1: So what was the name of your family church? Speaker 2: Mount Mariah Christian Church in Sarasota, Florida which is about ninety two miles away from Auburndale, Florida. That was the only church that I remember growing up in, the only church that we ever went to and it took us about an hour and a half to get there every Sunday. But we would always be the first ones there and we would never miss a Sunday. My mother was very, very dedicated to church and her ministry. Speaker 1: Okay your uncle was there--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: The pastor. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Wesley Tunstall. Story_ID: 98117 Speaker 1: When you were growing up was television, radio a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: TV back then was one of the things that we had, we were big--my mother [Nevada Robinson] was big on the news. Every day when she would come home, we really couldn't watch TV until we had all of our homework done. We had food cooked for her, we washed her clothes, we did everything that we could before we had a chance to even turn on the TV. So it was always the news and then it would always be whatever program we were allowed to watch. Back then you could only get maybe two or three stations and back in the day, we'd have these huge antennas on the side of the building that you had to go and twist to get the right reception. So Central Florida is lightening capital of the world so whenever it's raining, you know, you have to go out there and turn it or run in the house really quick. So we didn't really get a chance to watch a variety of TV. One of the one shows that we always watched was wrestling on the weekends. Saturday evening wrestling we'd watch that religiously and that's was fun because we would watch wrestling and then once wrestling was off we would go have our little Bible study to get ready for Sunday school the next morning. Speaker 1: That was the days of Hulk Hogan and all that. Speaker 2: Hulk Hogan and all that yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98118 Speaker 1: How would you describe your personality? What were you like? Speaker 2: My personality, I was a little hard headed. You know, I was determined to do my own thing. I think that as a child that may be a little bit bad. I think as an adult it can be a good thing. If my mother [Nevada Robinson] told me not to do something, best (unclear) I was going to do it anyway. So she was always on me, she was always making sure I stayed in my place. I was always a hard worker, I also was the type of guy that wanted to get my way out of trouble, if I got myself in trouble, I would try my best to try to get out of it. It didn't always work in my benefit but I was always a fun person, always got along with the kids. Have fun with everybody, never was the type that really caused trouble but at the same time, I had my little share of fights growing up. But it was all in fun growing up as kids. Just how I am, just like people and never had any problems with people period. You know and just always looked to help people; that's how I was. Story_ID: 98119 Speaker 1: All right, now what school did you start going to first? Speaker 2: My first school was Central Elementary School. That was from kindergarten through fifth grade. From there I went to Stambough Middle School there in Aurburndale [Florida]. I only went there for two years. Speaker 1: Is that Stambough? Speaker 2: Stambough Middle School, S-T-A-M-B-O-U-G-H Middle School from sixth grade to eighth grade and from ninth through twelfth I went to Aurburndale Senior High School. Speaker 1: Aurburndale that's A-R--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: A-U-R--Auburndale Speaker 1: Now did you like school when you were coming along? Speaker 2: I liked school especially courses I was really interested in. I was a big science person, I liked science. I was into history, English I liked, wasn't really fond of math. Of course I liked all the extracurricular things like basketball and all the sports and I was big in band. I was really, really into music so one of my first achievements in band was that I won the top percussionist of the year award in my seventh grade year and my first year of being in the band. That was really exciting for me because it showed that practicing and dedication paid off. I used to practice every day on snare drum and just practiced, practiced and it's paid off. Story_ID: 98120 Speaker 1: Now that's something, so was there a particular kind of music that you liked better than other kinds or--in those days? Speaker 2: Back in the day I liked gospel because that's what we always played. My mother never really allowed us to play anything outside of gospel in the house. Gospel kind of became one of my favorites but of course the R&B and Hip Hop was slowly coming in at that particular time--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Just starting up? I think when-- Speaker 2: Just starting out in about the '80s [1980s]. I think about the break dancing era then it slowly filtered over to the hard core--not really hard core but that New York style rap was just slowly coming out then. It really wasn't big--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: The Sugar Hill Gang and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 2: Exactly, I was a Michael Jackson fan. I liked all his music, you know, the disco era. My sister growing up, I used to listen to her play all of her disco music and so that was kind of something I grew up with as well. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's the age, I think, when the music videos started to come in. Speaker 2: Right MTV had just come out but it was really playing videos all day long. So that was the time--Prince. Speaker 1: What's interesting though you become actually a musician playing a real drum set. It seems like in those days are when they started fading out music in the public schools and a lot of young people didn't get a chance to play a real instrument. So where you went to school, did they provide you with an instrument? Speaker 2: They didn't provide you with an instrument of course; you had to purchase your instrument yourself. Luckily I was able to start off really small with just a simple snare drum. Of course, you know playing a huge trap set or a tri quad or multiple position base drums and stuff, the school supplied that once you got into the marching band level. The intermediate part you had to purchase your own equipment and then once my uncle realized that I was capable of playing the drums, he went and purchased a drum set and I ended up becoming the drummer for the church. Speaker 1: Oh, so that's-- So it was an opportunity to kind of upgrade from a one drum to--I have six pieces to work off of. Speaker 2: That should have been exciting to do that. Speaker 1: Yeah it was. Speaker 2: You know. Story_ID: 98121 Speaker 1: Did, did you have a favorite teacher in school? Any favorite teachers or mentors when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I had a lot of different teachers. All of them played their role but it was one teacher that really--that I remember the most today was when I was in high school and I've always been fascinated with cooking. I was fascinated watching my mom cook, I was fascinated a few times I was able to go and visit my father watching my stepbrother cook and I wanted to get into this restaurant class that we had in high school. It was kind of a step up from a typical Home Ec [Economics] class and I went to the instructor--the teacher Ms. Hinegarner [ph.] and asked her if I can be in her class. She looked at me and she probably didn't think I was serious but I was like really can I be in your class. And she was like you better work hard and I said I will. So she let me in and from that point on it just took off. My passion grew from that moment on and I remember developing the menu for--we had a restaurant that we used to serve food to the teachers and I remember my week came up where I had to prepare the meal and it was such a nice meal that she voted my meal the best the whole entire year. And that was one of my most inspiring moments with her and she always encouraged me that I really need to push hard and really, really the work. So I must say she was the one teacher that really stuck out the most for me. Story_ID: 98122 Speaker 1: You were a multi faceted in high school. Now I didn't know you played the drums--so you're playing the drums, taking cooking class, you're excelling there, you were also an athlete, too. Speaker 2: I was an athlete. Speaker 1: You were about 6'4 or something? Speaker 2: 6'4. I was 6'4 or I would say 6'3/6'3-1/2 probably when I was in seventh grade. So I had like a huge growth spurt in one year. So I was way over everybody else. I started playing basketball in seventh/eighth grade. Organized, I've always played on the courts. What we used to have was city courts for all the guys in the neighborhood every day we would just go play basketball and one of the greats that you would probably know, Trace McGrady--we grew up in the same neighborhood down in Central Florida. And it all started right there at the city courts. We used to play ball--I mean competitive ball, big guys, little guys, old, young. If you stepped on the court, you have to really come with it. So that filtered over into the organized ball once I started playing for the school. In the seventh grade I remember just being so excited that my mom let me go play basketball and I was really nervous about making the team. When I made the team, you know it just--that was the first year that middle school actually had a winning team. We made it all the way to the county finals and we just happened to lose by two points and from that point on basketball became a love for me. From there I went on to play in junior high school ball. I remember being the first junior high school player to ever dunk in the basketball game. I was averaging about twenty some points a game then I went to high school, I was doing well there. I was an all state player, all county player, I won the dunk contest; basketball was a love for me. It was one of the things that I thought would be the link towards my future was basketball but as time went on it just was not the avenue for me. Speaker 1: What happened? I mean, somebody in high--I mean 6'4 dunking now that's quite a--that's nothing to take lightly. Those of us who have never been to the rim (laugh) understand that. Speaker 2: I remember one year I was like man I want to dunk and I was always getting close to the rim but really wasn't able to get the ball in. So everyday I'm going to just work on my calf muscles and every morning I would just spend like ten/twenty minutes just working on my calf muscles and squats. Then one year we had the trials for the team and I don't know, it was like I had on springs in my shoes and I would just jump and out of the gym and I was always known for the one guy who could really, really jump really high. I was the one who always jump ball the beginning of the games. I was the one they would always try to hype up to go dunk in the game because that's the most exciting time in the game. I was always put on the big guy from the opposite team. I was pretty physical; I wasn't really a fearful person so playing the sport was good. I had a good knowledge of the game but it had to stop at some point. It was only going to go but so far. Story_ID: 95955 Speaker 1: We were talking about basketball. And so you played through high school, right? Did you have any scholarship offers for playing ball? Speaker 2: I had a few scholarship offers from small universities, small colleges. At one point I was very close to signing a letter of intent to play basketball up in Michigan. This was a crucial time for me because I was about to leave home for the first time and I was just going to venture out and go test the waters playing basketball. I remember having a conversation with my sister on the phone and she was like--persuaded me not to go that route. Speaker 1: What college was trying to get you at Michigan? Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of the college. It wasn't a major university, it was a small college maybe like a AA school. And I remember I was on my way, they were recruiting me pretty good. They were sending me letters, they sent me a letter of intent to go there and I was really, really contemplating on going there. But I knew it was something about it just hearing stories about athletes that have graduated and went on. I remember one of the star guys in our neighborhood, he went off to go play at the University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida] for the Florida Gators and he played four years and came back; he was back home again. To me that really wasn't what was inspiring me. Speaker 1: Did he graduate? Speaker 2: He did graduate, he did graduate and as a matter of fact, he was like an all American of football and basketball. He was a two sport All American and he played maybe like two years at the University of Florida but he played all four years of football. I remember him struggling to get on a protein and it really didn't work out well for him and all the mishaps he went through just trying to get into a very competitive level, playing professionally. Seeing that, it kind of discouraged me to a point. Speaker 1: Who was it, what was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Terrence Barber. Terrence Barber. He played at the University of Florida, I believe from '88 [1988] to '92 [1992] and he was a starter for, I believe three out of the four years and he was pretty well known in the state of Florida. Just watching him go there and do his thing and then come back that wasn't really for me because my ultimate goal even growing up, I wanted to get very, very far away from that Central Florida lifestyle as possible. Not that it was a bad thing but I knew there was more out there than just what we had and I knew basketball really wasn't going to take me there. So after having a conversation with my sister on the phone, she was like why don't you come to Atlanta [Georgia] and check out Atlanta a little while. So I thought about it and I said hey why don't I just go Atlanta, let me stay there for six months and I had enough time where if I still wanted to go back, I can always go. Story_ID: 95956 Speaker 1: And so I came here [Atlanta, Georgia] and I found me a job and three months of living here I was watching TV and I remember watching and I believe the Braves were finally making it from the Cinderella team to the post season for the very first time. And I remember just watching TV and a commercial came on for the Art Institute of Atlanta and I remember seeing this chef come out of the dining room and he had a plate in his hand and everybody was just clapping for him on this commercial and that was the one commercial that changed my life because there was something about that commercial where I said that's what I want to do there. And the next day I call The Art Institute; they brought me out, gave me a tour of the facility and became a student. Speaker 2: Okay now just go back for a minute. So what year did you graduate from Auburndale [High School]? Speaker 1: I graduated back in '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: Okay so you came to Atlanta that same year? Speaker 1: Right I came--I was in Atlanta in September, I graduated in June, I was in Atlanta in September of '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: So The Art Institute of Atlanta that's the--is that the one in Dunwoodie? Speaker 1: It was the same school, it was originally in Buckhead and after a few years then it moved to the Dunwoodie campus. Speaker 2: Okay was it what it thought it would be? When you got there did you pretty much like it? Speaker 1: I was so fascinated by--so thrilled to be doing something I was passionate about, I didn't care that we only had two classrooms, two kitchens in the place. I didn't really care that I was one of the third graduating class that was really coming through the school. I was just so thrilled to be doing something that I was loved. It was a passion from the moment that I stepped into the school and didn't really have any money. I signed up for school with no money at all and I don't know how in the world I made it through it but I really made it through school with practically no money. I got a couple of scholarships for having good academics, good performances in class and got a couple of student/parent loans that eventually paid off and made my way through the school. But the school, it was just a joy. I just loved going there. Every day was like a new adventure for me and it was something that I really, really put my heart--a lot of time into because I really knew that if I focused, I could do something great in this field. Speaker 2: What is culinary school like; I mean most of us have never been to culinary school. I can't remember home economics but what is a typical day in culinary school? Speaker 1: When you think of culinary arts--culinary arts is the art of culinary. Culinary is always the indication of being a chef and a lot of people get that terminology mixed up. A lot of people want to just go to school to learn how to cook but unfortunately you have to get all the principles of becoming a chef as well. So what they teach you in school is all the basic fundamentals of cooking. Everything that you thought you knew about cooking, you really didn't know until you got in culinary school. They taught you all the principles of cooking, they taught you all the sanitation practices necessary to have a very safe environment in your restaurant or establishment when you graduate. They teach you all the professionalism that goes along with being a chef. They teach you all the career paths that you can take with the field. You learn everything from basic cooking to baking and pastry or from seafood to poultry, from fabricate to cold food displays. Ice carvings, cake decorating, (unclear) decorating, bread making. There are just so many things that are associated with culinary arts. That's what culinary art school is all about. Because it is an associated degree, you have to learn the English, the math and all the other things you have to take along with all the general education pieces. But it takes you from American regional cuisine to international cuisine and that's what culinary arts is all about. Story_ID: 95957 Speaker 1: Okay now oftentimes I know because of economic circumstances, I know even in my own life I didn't see a pizza until I was eleven where I grew up, it was exotic to me. We had never had Chinese food or anything like that. Were you exposed to different kinds of foods in Central Florida when you were growing up or did you--when did you first encounter like you know, say, Thai food or different kinds of foods? Speaker 2: It's funny because I remember growing up; we were just used to whatever mom cooked for us. I think the most exotic thing for us was having Red Lob- not Red Lobster, Long John Silver was on Friday night. That was a like a specialty dinner for us having some fried food--fried fish. I remember for my prom we went to Red Lobster and I thought I was at The Four Seasons Hotel, you know. It wasn't until I got to culinary school that I realized how far away from the world that I was from, I was really, really green about food. I remember one day just sitting in a lecture class and hearing all the students participate in the lecture and they were talking about filet mignon, they were talking about lobster tails and they were talking about tenderloins and all those--to me it was like new terminology, new language but to them it was just what they were used to. So everybody brought their background into the labs and into the kitchens. Some people ate out all the time so they knew that. Me, I knew that I didn't know much so what I should do is anytime I hear something new, I'll write it down and I'd go home and study those words or those languages that they were speaking. So what happened was when I'd come back the next time, I could participate in the lectures. So school is where I really got my broad knowledge of different cuisines because outside of that it was just chicken and whatever else we could have growing up. Speaker 1: Okay what kinds of food did you really enjoy preparing the most in culinary school or what kind of activity did you enjoy? Speaker 2: Coming up through culinary school I just enjoyed food period. It really wasn't just one particular cuisine that really stuck out the most. I thought Asian cuisine was one of the cuisines I was really fascinated with because I was so iffy about Asian cuisine. You think about raw food, wow you never heard of raw food before. Whenever we had steaks growing up, it was well done, it was dry. I had my first medium rare steak in culinary school and I enjoyed it, it was the best thing ever. From that point on I eat medium rare medium steaks all the time. But I thought Asian cuisine was one of the cuisines that was very fascinating to me. I was always a fan of the Italian food, Latin American; South American food was one of those things that was kind of new to me as well. But towards the end of my culinary schooling, I really became a lover of French cuisine--European cuisine. Story_ID: 95958 Speaker 1: That's because all of our books are based from a famous chef called [August] Escoffier and he's what we call the father of gastronomic cuisine and he wrote a lot of books that a lot of chefs in this world period, use as the foundation of cooking and I became a big fan of that. Speaker 2: Okay how far back does his work go? How far back does this Escoffier go? Speaker 1: Escoffier goes all the way back to the 17th century back with--before him [Marie-Antoine] Careme. You think about the chefs that were during the French Revolutionary War from the Romans all the way up until now, Escoffier took all that information; years of just cookbooks and way of cooking in kitchens. Back in the day before him this used to be called the grand cuisine and it was very, very chaotic. You have twenty people doing the same task. You'll be roasting off a bird, this person will be roasting off a bird and it was just a very, very chaotic atmosphere and what Escoffier did was allow us to have a little bit more of a systematic flow in the kitchen. He took all of those tasks and broke it down to a broiler station, a fish station, a vegetable station, a garde manger station, a pastry station and so now that gives us the structure of the kitchen now. You have an executive chef; you have an executive Sous chef and you have your department chefs and that's what Escoffier contributed to the industry was taking all of that rough very chaotic way of doing things and made it into a formula that really works well. And then he took all the techniques of Italian and old French cuisine and made it a universal standard of cooking that we use a lot especially in teaching students how to cook. Speaker 2: Okay so he basically set the standard? Speaker 1: Exactly. Story_ID: 95959 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now is there--here we have courses taught at the Art Institute of Atlanta, it implies that there's more to this than just fixing something tasty, it's an art form. Can you kind of give us a sense of why it is considered an art form? Speaker 2: When you think of food there are so many senses going off. If I was to say we're going to have a butter poached lobster tail just hearing that automatically stimulates in your mind a creative thought, wow lobster tail and butter and then just saying automatically stimulates your tastes. You can taste the butter; you can taste what lobster taste like. So what we try to do is teach students how to bring all of those senses to the table as far as how you prepare your food. Teaching them the basic fundamentals so that when they prepare food when your guest is looking at that dish. They're enticed by just the visual presence of that plate in front of them. It's sort of like a picture and it should stimulate your palate. You want to look at that plate and say wow that's beautiful, I want to eat that. If you look at a plate and you're like hmm, I don't know it looks like a circus plate here, that's kind of like what we're trying to keep people away from. All this is ultimately benefiting the public because we're putting the chefs out there so that people can understand it and appreciate food. And then we teach students how to take food and bring the natural flavor out of something. With that same lobster, can we bring just a little extra herb or just a little extra garlic just to bring that lobster up or are we going to kill the flavor of the lobster by cayenne and paprika and all these weird things. So what we try to do is try to give them a culinary common sense about cooking and teach them how to look at a product, make the right determination about what ingredients go with this product, how to prepare that product, how long to prepare it and use their taste as their ultimate recipe guide because eventually the taste and how you taste the food should be how the final product should be presented. So there are so many areas, so many ways that we look at food is what we teach our students. Speaker 1: Okay now when you were coming along--well were you surprised that food presentation at The Art Institute of Atlanta versus what you're used to seeing at home or somebody else's house or something? Speaker 2: Exactly you know I think it doesn't really matter where you come from--your upbringing as far as presentation. Everybody's--you know its like are you artful or not, either you have some natural artistic abilities or you have to learn how to become artistic. So when you look at food--everybody is going to look at food and say wow that's look good and I never really--a pot of greens on the stove looks good to me. So I think presentation is in the eye of the beholder but what we try to do as far as presentation is really to teach people how to bring it life, to bring something new--we're bringing a trend. Like I said I wasn't really exposed to much--what I knew was the best but once I got exposed to it, I realized that wow that's a lot to learn here and being at the Art Institute [of Atlanta] it was some things right there that was a little old school--a little rough, outdated and that's based upon whoever was teaching that class and there was some stuff that was pretty trendy. You may have a chef that was fresh from the industry, someone who was pretty much more active than other chefs that bring something new to the table. So you got a wide range of everything. I got some old school presentations, you've got some new school presentations, you've got some new school presentations but all eventually to me was just the best. It opened up a brand new package of cards that just smelled good, looked good. Story_ID: 95960 Speaker 1: Okay so when you were at the Art Institute of Atlanta, you were in the groove. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You were really, really, okay. Who were some of your teachers that stand out? Speaker 2: Some of the teachers that stood out to me back then are my colleagues now. I remember one of the chefs that were there and were teaching all ala carte classes. She's now my boss, she's the department chair and she was a lady that was very strong--who had a very strong presence in the kitchen, had no nonsense type of personality, very straightforward you know, I really liked that. There was another chef that I had personally that was a competitor that had the same presence as well. A very tall guy who whenever he walked in automatically he just demanded respect. Those individuals really stood out with me a lot and those are the type of people that really gets my attention is those few people who had that type of presence. Another chef who now is my colleague, he was the director back then and now I'm training him in competition procedures now twelve years later. And those are the people that really stand out the most in culinary school. A few of the chefs had a lot of selfish personalities and they didn't really do well with me. I have very vague memories of them. Speaker 1: There is, I guess, kind of an image we get from movies and television of a diva chef. That kind of person that's got a curly mustache, giving orders and a bit too proud--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah people look at me and when I say I'm a chef they don't really get the word chef they think you are a cook and I try to educate people. There's a difference between just being a cook and a chef because anybody can work on their cooking craft but a chef is all about your presence, it's all about how you inspire people to do better. Are you an innovative thinker, you run into some problems in the kitchen are you able to work through those problems efficiently without having to--losing your head or anything like that. A chef is all of that. He's a business person, he is a motivator, he's a teacher. So whenever anyone asks me are you a chef or a cook, I make sure I let them know I'm a chef. But then they look at you like you say and they think you're supposed to be this big, greasy guy. Sloppy hat off to the side, curly mustache and just talking with this weird accent and that's so far from the truth, it's totally off in the left field. Story_ID: 95961 Speaker 1: So a chef what you were saying earlier about being a chef, you had to learn like health practices and so forth. So health standard for whatever region you're in comply with that. You've got to be responsible for that for the whole kitchen. Speaker 2: For the whole kitchen exactly. That's the reason why a lot of chefs in a lot of industries and institutions around try to get students who've been to culinary school because they have the principles under their belt. They're going to perform the basic sanitation practices that people are comfortable with going into your establishment. Anything can happen, we just had an outbreak of spinach, shut the whole country down with spinach, we can't even purchase it. Anything can happen like that. If you left some chicken out all day long and you under cooked it and you let it set out even more and you served it to the guests and have a ecoli reaction or whatever then that can really damage your reputation, you could lose your business over that. So following basic sanitation practices and basic safety procedures is so very, very important. It's very crucial to any restaurant establishment anywhere. Speaker 1: And you all-chefs and cooks do to use very sharp instruments sometimes, chopping things and so forth. Is there--I guess you learn the proper way to do that. Have you ever seen a bad accident in the kitchen? Speaker 2: Tons, tons I think there is not a chef around who hasn't cut a finger, chipped a nail, or injured themselves like that. Most people try their best to--first you've got to have control of the knife; you can't let the knife control you. So you've always got to have that in place and that will eliminate half of the battle there, any other injuries is just going to be accidents but there are some mental dumb mistakes that a lot of students do. Like opening up a steamer too fast without letting the steam bleed out and you've got that hot temperature hitting you in the face and it can take the skin off your face like that. I saw that happen, I saw students actually the tips of their fingers off just by not having a sharp knife. A dull knife can cut you faster than a sharp knife. I saw students just lackadaisically walking around in the kitchen with a knife in their hands and scrape the leg of a person that's not paying attention or dropping a knife and trying to get it before they hit the ground and cutting their fingers. All those are things are just mental. Learning how to like step away from a hazard before it happens to you. It's all about control; I think if you master your craft and you constantly work on your craft, you can avoid injuries. I haven't cut my hands in years but I've had my share of cuts and burns. Speaker 1: Okay all right so you would think it's not just the person at home that does that, people actually--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Exactly and in the industry as well. You think about the pressure and the stress and the time and all that going on, you're working real hard and anything can happen. And it's those careless mistakes that cost you the most. Story_ID: 95962 Speaker 1: Okay so when you were, you were at the Art Institute [of Atlanta] for how many years? Speaker 2: In school? Speaker 1: Yes Speaker 2: For two years Speaker 1: Two years okay so when you were getting ready to graduate what were your prospects, what did you see yourself doing immediately after graduation? Speaker 2: Well prior to graduating, I've already had about a year of cooking experience under my belt. I had my first job at The Tavern at Phipps. I was already working at a major hotel; I think I was working at the Marriott here in town. Speaker 1: And so before you even graduated--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: I had a job. Speaker 1: This is a field where people are really in demand, I take it. Speaker 2: Exactly Speaker 1: And if you know anything--if you have a year of experience and still in school, people want you or will hire you. Speaker 2: Exactly and it's so sad--the field is saturated with a lot of people who don't have the education and that's what we're dying for is having the educated, well trained person in the kitchen. So if someone is looking for a job, this is a great field to get into. There are so many avenues to go down and food is one of those things that's not going to go away. If food goes away, we're next, you know. So there's always a job out there for you but there's a few out there that's doing it right and that's where the education and the personality comes in. Can this person take the education and really push themselves to do it on a high level and that's very few, a very few out there that's doing that. Speaker 1: So you already had a--cooking at a hotel. Were you a chef at that place where you--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: No I was just a cook at that time. I was a cook at that time and being a chef you don't automatically become a chef once you graduate. Its years of knowledge, training, education, certifications that makes you a chef in the industry's eyes. Speaker 1: I see, so - Speaker 2: Anybody can just say I'm a chef and they can believe it but in the industry perspective, you're not a chef until you've passed certain credentials and you have X amount of years of experience and you have a deep knowledge of cooking and you have a title in the establishment before you're able to call yourself a true chef. Speaker 1: Okay so you have to build a reputation, the respect. Story_ID: 95963 Speaker 1: You know, okay, so you start as a sub chef at a station or something like that, a pastry station or another station? Speaker 2: Right, typically what happens is that whenever you go to a job and you don't have a lot of experience, they always start you off in a pantry. The pantry is where they make all the salads and sandwiches and deli stuff, all the cold stuff. Basic things that someone coming in and you're trying to introduce them to cooking, is a good starter and from there they'll move you to what they call the fry station. You'll probably fry basic things. If it's chips, they'll fry, if it's fish, you will fry, shrimp whatever, you will fry all of that. Then eventually you'll move your way down to the more skilled stations which is the broiler, the grill and the saute station. Those stations are mainly for those skilled cooks who've been in the industry four or five years who is able to handle the more valuable product. You think about the fry, the cost of frying tilapia is not as much as you burning a piece of fillet mignon or you frying some shrimp doesn't cost you as much as you over cooking a piece of sea bass. So the skilled person needs to be down there handling the money product and you just work your way up and then from there you become lead line chef and then you become the Sous chef and then from the Sous chef depending on the size of the establishment there is the Sous chef, there is executive Sous chef and then eventually there is a chef or executive chef. Speaker 1: Okay so did you start like in the pantry section? Speaker 2: I started off not really in the pantry station, I've always started off in the fry station because I'm a quick learner, and I got that from my mother. I wasn't a big fan of being in the bottom of the barrel. I've always been the type that going back to what I said was hard headed. I don't like people telling me what to do too much. So if that's the case, I've got to be the one who is driving the ship. So I have to have all the experience in place so I can drive the ship. So what I did was I wanted to start my first year on the job knowing my station the first day and by the end of the week, I tried my best to know the whole entire station by the end of the week. So within a month's time or two month's time, I became more efficient than everybody else on my shift that whenever a promotion came around, I was getting promotions quickly and when I graduated from culinary school, I was working two jobs at a time. I wanted to speed up the process by working at two different places getting education on both jobs. So that was my way of thinking. I was very, very aggressive, I would soak up any knowledge that I could see or take on to and I pushed myself really hard to be the one who stood out. And I became a Sous chef very quickly. I had my first executive chef job when I was twenty one. Speaker 1: Where were you executive chef? Speaker 2: I was executive chef at the Doubletree Hotel. Speaker 1: Okay I think I was reading that in the newspaper. That's really sounds like a big deal. The executive chef at the Doubletree at age twenty one--were you one of the younger executive chefs. Speaker 2: Yeah I was. I've always been the one who was in charge and a lot younger than the people that were working for me and that was always one of my challenges. So that was one of the traits that I had to pick up was having really good people skills. It's one thing to come in cocky, young and trying to tell someone a little bit older who has a little bit more experience than you what to do and it becomes a bad relationship or you can have some maturity and come in and have everybody's inspired to do new things and you can grow as a chef as well. So staring off I was a little to gung ho. I wanted to take on the world so--I was working real hard, I was dedicating my time, I was putting in the hours necessary and there was nothing that I really couldn't do and if it was something I couldn't do, I could do it the next day when I came back in because I made sure that I prepared myself for it. So I was good in that area but I think my people skills at that time was a little rough. Story_ID: 95964 Speaker 1: Twenty one years old, you're in charge of a kitchen at the Doubletree, executive chef. Where did you go from there? Speaker 2: You know it's so many other options out there. For me, I think, just the adrenaline of seeing the seed grow and grow from where I was first day of culinary school to that point and each step for me was a testament that hard work and perseverance do pay off. So that was kind of the high that I was riding on and also one of my--one of the fuels that I used to was that I knew my father [Thomas Shuler] didn't play so much of a valued role in my life. I want to be one of those people that say hey I did without that type of help. I did it despite of; I'm a better man because of it. So that's a little bit of my fuel that drives me into doing things better than the next person and I always remember what my mother [Nevada Robinson] said before I was born she saw me in a vision, she's a spiritual lady and she said I saw you son before you were born being this great man or whatever. So I can do two things, I can brush it off and say ah she's just a crazy old lady or I can take it in and say hey you know what, if she saw it then I can live it and try to believe it. So that's always been my motivation. Behind everything that I do, I always want to do it not in a mediocre state, I want to go a little bit further and push myself a little bit further so that I can do something that gets people's attention, you know, do something great. Story_ID: 95965 Speaker 1: Okay. Now how did you polish your people's skills? You said you were a little rough on that when you started out--a little gung ho. How did you end up polishing your people skills? Did somebody advise you or did you observe someone else? Speaker 2: Mainly observing, certain people attract my attention and those people I try to mimic their traits. Certain people that have good business savvy or some people just have a great presence and I watch and say what's make this person so savvy or have that great presence. I'll see what they do and I'll try to take on some of those traits myself and I'll try to apply that to my everyday life. Over time it just became who I am and it pays off. I try to be careful; I've always been the type who has always been careful about what I say to people. How it came across may be hard or whatever but I've always had control over my words. But I think sometimes the unspoken word that makes the most--gets the most attention. So I want make sure that if I walk into a kitchen, I want my presence to get the attention of everybody around me. So I make sure that my jacket was always clean, always pressed, make sure my shoes are always polished, make sure I was well shaved and just have that presence and have that look that I'm in control like a sergeant, like a military person. You know you see military sergeants, just their look is enough that there's no playing going on here and that's what I wanted. Then that kind of helped my people's skills out and I think what also in this industry what helps your people's skills out is that it's not so much what you say but what you do and I've always wanted to let my actions back up my words. So I started competing and started doing all these things on the side so that when I tell somebody to work hard, I'm doing it myself. It's just not me just talking in the wind; I'm actually living out what I'm teaching to people, what I'm going trying to get across to people. Story_ID: 95966 Speaker 1: Okay why don't you tell me like where did you go next after Doubletree and then, you know, just kind of walk us through the stages of your career then I want to ask you some specific questions about cooking for people and being a chef and what it all--(simultaneous)(unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. From there I worked at the Doubletree for about three years and from there I got burnt out. I was working seven days a week, fourteen/fifteen hours a day and it was a very tough time for me. I was really, really pushing myself really hard but I knew that I was pushing myself too far in that direction, I didn't have that balance. Speaker 1: This is something, it's interesting that you bring this up because I've--in a few conversations that I've had with chefs in hotels they do push themselves almost like doctor interns, medical interns or something, they work almost twenty four hours a day some of them. Why is that--is the culinary field that intense? Speaker 2: Because it's part of the training. When you're trained as a chef and as an apprentice they tell you that you have to put in a lot of hours, you have to work and you have to work and work. I think that's a old mentality that we're just trying to keep alive because that doesn't really work when you're in an establishment and you're working sun up to sun down, seven days a week. There's only so far your body and your mind is going to take you without you having that balance and if you're living your life in a restaurant, in a hotel, how's your family life? How's your spiritual life and if that's not in place, it never really works and I learned that earlier in my career as well. Just giving myself, just driving hard, working, working, working. Because you're looking for that recognition, you want your food to be good, you want your operation to run smooth so you're there all the time and it's like what's required of you. But at the same time if you don't have that balance, your family's leaving you, you're having problems at home, you're physically not eating well, you have health issues. A lot of chefs have health issues, their divorce is high, there are a lot of things that goes wrong because of that mentality, we have to work all the time. I think in this new day and age that old way of thinking is slowly fading away and I think balance is what's coming in now and I think efficiency is coming in and I think working smart is definitely what's in now. You will see a lot of cooks coming out and they're having a life, they're able to work the eight hours a day, six days a week but at the same time they have time for their family. They have time for their personal life. It's for the longevity not so much trying to get that recognition. You bring yourself far but there is only so much you can do. Speaker 1: Now were you married when you were a chef at the Doubletree? Speaker 2: I was married--my first wife--I was married at twenty one/twenty two and that's kind of like where I wasn't ready for that even though I was married young, I thought that I had everything necessary to have a successful marriage but her goals in life were this way and my goals was this way and at that age how you think at twenty one to how you think at twenty five. So it didn't work out, we did have a child in that relationship and she's eight now but to me I thought that was the best reward was just having the child out of the whole entire marriage. But one of the problems was that I was just constantly working and I had very little time for them both and it just didn't work out. Story_ID: 95967 Speaker 1: Okay so you left the Doubletree [Hotel]--when did you leave? Speaker 2: I left the Doubletree I believe back in '98 [1998]/'99 [1999]. I went on to--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: And you were there for how long? Speaker 2: It was about three years. I went on to work at several different restaurants, Spice Restaurant downtown Atlanta [Georgia] opened that also opened up different restaurants like the Villa Christina, opened up another version of the Villa Christina in New Jersey. Speaker 1: Now when you say opened it up, you established a style of cuisine or something or a style of--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: A lot of times whenever you're working for a restaurant or a major chain, they open up versions of that restaurant or that concept and depending on certain people in that establishment if you're skilled or you're knowledgeable enough and you're one of the head people in there, they will ask you for yours services to go and help start another one. You're not the owner of it but you're able to go and help do the recruitment, do the menu implementation, do all the things necessary to get the restaurant going and then you'll come back to your main job. Speaker 1: Okay often someone starts a restaurant is a business man and not a chef, right? Speaker 2: Right, exactly Speaker 1: They have to hire a good chef. Speaker 2: Right see you always have to have that experience around you so that happens a lot is they ask you to go and have you implement--because you're running one restaurant and it's running well and it's successful. Why go hire somebody new, they hire you to go get it opened then you do the hiring. You bring in someone that you train for sixty days or so and then you leave him to them and they run the restaurant, you come back to your major job. Speaker 1: So you were at the Spice Restaurant and what were the others? Speaker 2: The Spice of Villa Christina and prior to that way before I even started at the Doubletree, I worked at the Bucket Club, like I said I worked at the Marriott Marquis, a restaurant called Anthony's. Story_ID: 95968 Speaker 1: Now you don't --do you currently work for a restaurant? Speaker 2: Not now I don't, my service is mainly in the form of consulting. I'm on the board of directors of two different restaurants. One restaurant in town called The Pecan, I'm on the board of directors there and I'm also on the board of directors of a restaurant called Onyx. Directors or advisors we advise the management and owners on their every day procedures as far as the restaurant. Whether looking at their numbers, whether they are looking at revising their menu, helping them with their marketing strategies, helping them in the process of eventually opening up a second concept, that's what we're there for and on that board there's a team of experts. I'm always the chef or the foodie person--culinary person and I typically look at what the executive chef is doing and look at how the executive chef can be a little more efficient in his food cost, his labor cost and look at his food and see how he can save his numbers by maybe purchasing something from here than over there or let's run something that is a little bit more in season or the price of tomatoes went from $14.00 a case and not it's $40.00 a case maybe we need to look at having an alternative solution to that. And that's what I do, I go in and I give my expertise in that area because of all the other extra things I do on the side, with the teaching and with the travel of the United States Culinary Olympic team, I don't have the luxury of, you know, working in a restaurant full time. Story_ID: 95969 Speaker 1: Now what is a--are we ready to talk about the--? Speaker 2: The competitions, yeah. Throughout the whole entire period there I've always competed. Competitions where I can take cooking and sports, put them together and I have heaven and its fun. It's an opportunity--you've probably seen 'Iron Chef' on TV, something very popular. We love to see the shows, going in and just cooking things on the spot. It's kind of how a lot of our competitions are. There is an organization that regulates a lot of the competitions for the chefs; it's called The American Culinary Federation. It's the largest chefs' organization in the world and we represent the United States in the world culinary association. And so what they do in these local chapters say for instance in the state of Georgia they may have seven chapters. We may have a chapter here in Atlanta [Georgia], we may have a chapter in Columbus [Georgia], we may have a chapter in Macon [Georgia]. So I was always a part of the greater Atlanta chapter and they would hold cooking competitions maybe once or twice a year. My very first cooking competition straight out of culinary school, I placed third. I took a bronze medal there and from that point on it just became what I do. It became a passion for me. It's like playing ball, once you start playing, you want to do it forever and so that every year whenever a competition would come around, I would get into it. Competitions and what we teach students and what was taught to me that competition was a way to excel your career. It gives you an opportunity to walk into somewhere and to a kitchen that you've never seen before, get product handed to you that you don't know what it is and you're forced to develop something in an hour for some master chefs to critique and you put your skills on the line. They're critiquing from how you work in the kitchen to how your food looks, how it tastes the whole nine. And then all the knowledge that you get from those expert chefs, you can take it back to your establishment or where you work and apply it to your everyday working skills and become a better chef at it. And so over the years, I competed, competed and competed. Some of my accomplishments, I was three time state champion here. I was the regional champion in 2004. I competed in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina at the National Restaurant Association Show and I beat out 75 chefs. I was the regional champion there in 2004. Also I won several gold medals. I was national champion for the American Culinary Federation Nutritional Challenge in Orlando, Florida in 2004, I was national champion. I was on the Art Institute's--the Art Institute system has about forty different schools all over the country and it took twelve of the top chefs in the system. We put together a national culinary team and we went to Asia to compete. We competed in Hong Kong, we competed in Guangzhou, China and we competed in Tokyo and we took gold medals over there. Story_ID: 95970 Speaker 1: And then last year I spent the whole year training for the United States Culinary Olympic Team which we represent the United States international competitions. There are only fourteen chefs on this team in the whole entire nation and I just made the United States Culinary Olympic Team. So now we're training every other week. All the team members from around the country will go to one location and we'll practice for a full day practice session and right now we're getting ready to head to Luxemburg to go compete at the world culinary challenge in Luxemburg November 14th through the 25th. Speaker 2: Okay now this is something that's funded. You don't have to pay for this yourself. Speaker 1: This is something that we have sponsors--major sponsors that really sponsor the American Culinary Federation and the ACF culinary team. It's a very, very highly selective team. Anybody just can't say I want to be on the team, you have to have years of experience, you have to have years of competing--competing on a high level, your skill level has to be very, very high. The process is every four years we have the culinary Olympics just like the summer Olympics for sports; we have a culinary Olympics in Erfurt Germany. The last one was in 2004. This team that we're on now is preparing for 2008 and what we do is after the culinary Olympics, we will have another selection process and all the chefs in the country will put in their applications and they'll take maybe seventy chefs out of the country and invite to these different locations to try for the team. If you make it, if you score high enough in the preliminary try-outs, you're invited to the finals and in the finals there are only twelve chefs. Those twelve chefs they pick ten to participate with the other four that's already on the team. From there we just go around and we compete internationally against other countries. The United States team is ranked currently third in the world Speaker 2: Who is first? Speaker 1: Sweden and Scotland and the United States Speaker 2: Sweden and Scotland and the United States. Speaker 1: Right Speaker 2: That's interesting. Speaker 1: Canada is ranked fourth. Speaker 2: Okay you would think that France would be one or something or Italy, Spain maybe but not so huh? Speaker 1: Everybody thinks the best chefs in the world are from France or the best chefs in the world are from Italy but its so much tradition there, yes to some point but that's not always the case. The United States has a very strong culinary presence in the international community Story_ID: 95971 Speaker 1: So they give you like a product and the competition is about how you can do something with a product you may or may not have ever seen before, right? Speaker 2: Right as far as individual competition that's what they do. They will give you something that you probably haven't even touched before but that's a measurement of your knowledge in cooking, that's a measurement of your experience and if you're not good at it you're not going to do well. But if you are then you had better take that product, you're going to be able to indentify it, you're going to be able to identify the appropriate cooking technique that goes along with that product and then you're able to take it and execute and deliver a quality product in a short amount of time. That's what you do on the individual level but on a team perspective for the international competition we have what is called a cold food program and then we have the hot food program. In the cold food program we showcase craftsmanship, we showcase food that you just look at it they don't even taste it. It's all patterns, it's all cold food displays. Very intricate garnishes, food has nice inlays, you have to look at it in order to understand what I'm saying. It's very, very skilled, just to put out one platter takes you about three days of work to do it and then you go into the hot food kitchen and what you do is you have five hours to prepare 110 plates and you have to do appetizer, entree and dessert. The judges will select any five plates that they want out of that 110 plates and they judge you on the highest level possible on the international level. They say that being two years on the culinary team is equivalent to ten years industry experience from all the practicing and all the educational knowledge that you gain from it. Speaker 1: Okay so you've made another big leap now. Speaker 2: Right Speaker 1: Wow that's something. Have there ever been any other African Americans on the team? Speaker 2: I'm the first African American to make the team in sixteen years. The only other chef that has ever made it was my mentor back when I graduated school back in '92 [1992] named Daryl Evans. He's from Atlanta [Georgia] and his name is Daryl Evans and he made the '92 [1992] culinary team. He was the only other chef that has made it to the regional team that I'm on. My goal is to be the first chef to make the national team. Story_ID: 95972 Speaker 1: Also my goal is to be the first African American to be a certified master chef. There's only 72 certified master chefs that have ever passed the master chef exam and there are no African Americans or no minority master chefs in the system and my goal is in 2009 to take the master chef exam--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Who administers that? Speaker 1: The American Culinary Federation administers that and it is held at the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, New York. It is a--originally it was a ten day practice or ten day try-out--ten 14 hour days. Now they have modified it down to eight 14 hour days and the success rate is one in maybe ten will pass the exam and it's only offered once a year, it's a $2,000 entry fee in order to get into it and you have to have two letters of approval from other master chefs before you can go and actually take the exam. They test you from everything from international cooking to classical cooking to baking and pastries to charcuterie to Asian cuisine. Any type of food as a master chef you're considered the expert in food across the board and to me that's the ultimate goal for me is to become a master chef. Speaker 2: Okay you think your chances are pretty good to be selected for that? Speaker 1: I feel confident about it but at the same time I think that's where we have to have a little sense of reality at the same time to be honest. Am I ready, do I want to go and take the test too soon and be one of those statistics that don't make it or do I want to make sure I have all the tools under my belt? So when I walk in, I'm a master chef even before I even take the exam. Being on the culinary Olympic team is a platform that I'm preparing myself for the master chef exam. Most chefs who have passed the certified master chef exam have spent at least one or two times on the United States Culinary Olympic Team. That was my goal that was my career path to get on the culinary team, get the knowledge, get the experience, get the training then go take the master chef exam and have more success. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I do feel confident about it. Story_ID: 95973 Speaker 1: Okay. Now when did you start teaching full time at the Art Institute of Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: I started in spring of 2001. Originally I started off as an adjunct professor. I was teaching the garde manger class which is what is known as the chef who teaches ice sculpting, who teaches pate making, (unclear) making, salads and all of the cold food. I taught that class for the first six months and then from there I got promoted up to the senior lead instructor position of the final class of the program which is the ala carte class or the restaurant class. That's a class where after two years of culinary school you go to my class to get evaluated before you are able to go graduate and my job is to look at these students, give an assessment of their skills, evaluate what they need to work on and improve on, try to make those adjustments and at the end of the quarter, test them and if they pass and they have an acceptable skill level they would graduate, if not they would have to repeat the class over again and that's my job as the exiting chef of the program. Speaker 1: Okay that seems like the most--one of the most important jobs there, I guess to certify--(simultaneous)(unclear). Speaker 2: Right a lot of pressure is on me because I'm the check and balance of the program. My job is to make sure there is nothing filtering through the system that really is not representing the philosophy of the school. We open to the public, it's a restaurant. People can come in and order off of my menu just like they would any restaurant. So we don't have the luxury of having mistakes, keeping it behind classroom doors and just talking about it. Our product has to be presented nightly at a high level, consistently because the reputation of me, the school and the students is on the line. So it's a lot of pressure on me, there is a lot of pressure on the students as well. But at the end of the day, you know the program is continually--constantly growing because of that reputation. Story_ID: 95974 Speaker 1: Okay did you ever have a nightmare in the restaurant or somebody just couldn't stand the food or got upset--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: We've had our share incidents. We've had shares where someone who was allergic to pine nuts had a run in with pine nuts and that was scary. The lady couldn't breathe, her face turned red, we had to rush her to the hospital. We had someone who had hair in their food and that happens a lot. We've had people who had shell fish allergies because one of the students using the spoon from a seafood dish used the same spoon in the chicken dish. So just that little cross contamination affected this lady. Other than that, as far as anyone just absolutely hating the food or not having a problem, that's where I'm the last line of defense. And I'm not a big fan of having any type of negative complaints. I can deal with someone saying this is too salty but they're just one out of forty people, I can deal with that. But just having people just not happy or pleased with the product, that's something that as a chef and my reputation, my job is to make sure that people don't have those comments. I need to make sure that people walk away saying wow that is consistently great product from that chef and your name is what they remember so not too many bad cases of poor product going out into the dining room. Speaker 1: Okay but now days, I guess with the increase in scientific knowledge about food allergies and so forth like maybe fifteen years ago they weren't talking--there was no discussion about peanut allergies but now it is. Some people have actually just dropped dead if you feed them peanuts. So that's the kind of thing you have to be aware of. Speaker 2: I find students that have had flour allergies couldn't be around flour. I've had students that couldn't be around basil or shellfish or allergic to so many things. They are in the hospitality industry and they're trying to cook. Why only they would know but all of those things where the management part, the oversight from the chef is important. Making sure that you have the right people around you who have the ethical knowledge to not try to hurt someone because how it easy is it for someone to put a pinch of flour in a dish to someone who is allergic to gluten, it can really hurt someone. So it's important that the people around you have the same mentality, have the same focus that you do as a chef and it's a tough job to do. Everybody's not always honest, everybody doesn't really have that work ethic and sometimes they gamble and you hit or miss. But the main thing is that you constantly have a standard that people must live up to especially your kitchen as a chef. Speaker 1: Do customer who have these allergies warn you when they come in the restaurant and they say well I can't eat this or I'm allergic to that. Speaker 2: Right most people who eat out a lot know the routine, they always warn the waiter or the maitre d prior to ordering. But a lot of people just assume that we as cooks got a crystal ball in the back and we can just say hey this lady is allergic to something, we don't know. So what happens is the food goes out and then they want to know if there is garlic in it or most times if you've got a chef cooking, there is going to be some type of garlic in it unless it's a dessert. So most people yes will communicate that with you up front, some people maybe they're trying to get a lawsuit, maybe they're trying to get some type of compensation so you've always got to be careful. Story_ID: 95975 Speaker 1: Okay now is it--I guess part of the job of being a chef or preparing food for the public is the ability to generalize what people like. I know everybody is not exactly alike but there is enough general--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: That's where you know good skills come into play and as a chef; a chef has to think outside of the box a little bit. You can't--that's the reason why when someone ask you what is your specialty, a chef should not have a specialty, one thing that you are just good at because then everybody is not--everybody may not like asparagus. If that's all you cook is asparagus, that's what you're good at. A chef needs to be good at everything so that you can cater to the masses. This is a very, very diverse country. There are so many ethnics and people that have different tastes and different desires you have to be ready for that if you want to maintain an ability to have a job. If you're just limited on Cajun Creole and there is no Cajun Creole restaurants in the city of Atlanta, you're out of a job, you can't fall into a Mediterranean restaurant or fall into that Indian restaurant or that Moroccan restaurant because you don't know the cuisine. So chef really need to broaden their horizon, they need to travel, they have to read, they have to really get around people who are able to educate him on different cultures and different cuisines. Story_ID: 98123 Speaker 1: As I was saying before, it's hard, I guess it's one of the toughest things may be to generalize what people want. Have people--I know you're still young but have people's taste changed over the years in terms of what kinds of flavoring they like and how much salt they want in things, peppers and so forth? Speaker 2: Right I think the basic taste and the basic desire is still there. Some people like their food a little bit more salted than others. Some people always like to have it with extra spice but I think people are becoming more knowledgeable to food and want to try new things because of television, because of all the marketing things out there for the food network and all the things you see. So you really as a chef you have to come up with variety on your menus. You have to have maybe a little Asian or little something that resembles the region that you're from or something that has a little of the specific rim tied into your menu. But at the same time there is a fine line between having variety and having confusion. Each dish must have a set theme. If you have a dish that has a Cajun--you know rubbed lobster tail then all the food and flavors of that dish needs to have that theme kicking in. You don't want to have a little soy sauce in there because it just throws off the balance. So those are the things that you should know as a chef is how to have variety without having food that's confusing. We don't want to experiment on your guests that's the reason why you test out your product on your own time and you research--you do studies. But you want to put out a product that typically most people would enjoy. No matter how good the product is, someone is not going to enjoy it and that's what we deal with everyday. But if you get ninety percent or eighty percent of the people out there to enjoy your food, then you are a successful chef and I think that's what it's all about. Story_ID: 98124 Speaker 1: I've heard stories, now this is just hearsay, I've never seen it happen but I know there's a friend of mine has a friend who has a restaurant in Detroit that because someone didn't like what he's serving, blew up and told him he'd never come back (laugh), this is a black man. But have you ever had a time when your feelings were so hurt by criticism--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: You know what, it's tough and I can understand his gripe about that is that you put so much time and effort into something and if someone just says that it's a little over cooked, you can deal with that. If someone says it's a little too salty, you can deal with that. But to have someone say I just don't like it because why, I just don't like it then I could understand how you get a little heated because he's not giving any constructive criticism, you're just giving your opinion. You probably don't eat artichokes don't mean the dish is bad; just say you don't like artichokes. So, I can understand that but at the same time what I do in competitions, you have to have a very thick hide because you put days and weeks and months worth of work into one event just to have two gray head old guys who have forty years of experience each come in and say this is wrong, that's wrong and then walk away. And if you can deal with that and learn from it and move on and grow from it, you can become better because it's not really now, it's later on down the road. So we can deal with the flaws now as long as you're on that trail. You know that this is not where you're going to be, this is just the process. So if something is wrong, I can deal with it as long as it's tomorrow, I'm better for it and criticism, I have no problem with criticism as long as it's constructive criticism and not just I don't like anything. Story_ID: 98125 Speaker 1: I know we have a larger middle class in the black community now than we've ever had before; we still have the poorest people in the United States. There seems to be--I know at the school where I'm at right now Wright State, one of the biggest things we do every year is have a sit down dinner with the students and it comes out of the budget to pay for it. A lot of them never had a sit down banquet type dinner--courses before and they've never done it. Do you try to take in account--a criticism might be ooh this is nasty, something like that from somebody who have never sat down at a--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Well you've always got to take the source. Someone who we are trying to educate them and try to broaden their horizons and we have a lot of students from high schools that may come up to the school and they just want to get a feel for what culinary life is all about and what the field can bring to you and we may put out a dish that may be Cornish hens and just the thought of Cornish hens and they ooh, I don't want that, can I have a hamburger. They want something that's comfortable and so you've got to take it for what it is, they don't know. But they don't realize that the Cornish hen tastes just as good as or better than a piece of chicken. That's where you have to always make it where it is educational and educate them into it and take them baby steps. I think if I was to go take them from a piece of chicken to a piece of buffalo then I'm stretching it and I'm expecting them to say ah I don't like that, ooh I don't want it medium rare. But I think if you educate people on a gradual basis and you're constantly teaching them how to taste food and looking at food for the science of it and not so much just being afraid because it's something new and people love education, people love when they are able to learn and know new things. I don't know who frowns against education especially with food. Everybody loves food but if you can teach them in a way that they can understand it and something that is on their level and don't shove it in their throat because I eat this and you don't, taste it anyway. I think if you take them through that process, you can get anybody to have a sophisticated palate over time. Story_ID: 98126 Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a personal--asked you if you had a favorite food, I think. I know you're a chef but a--and you know how to fix a variety of things but do you have a certain range of food because you know so much about food that you would rather eat than not? Speaker 2: Like eating food or--I don't understand? Speaker 1: No I'm just thinking you study food so much, is there a range of food or a kind of food or a style or preparation that you would rather than eat than something else? Not all food is healthy, I mean it's healthy in another style or preparation might--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Exactly if you think about European French cuisine, you think of creams, you think of butter, you think of wine, you think of starches and then you think of Asian cuisine you think of really light, spicy, fresh because they have cook everything right there on the spot because they don't have the refrigeration. So everything is more freshly prepared and then you think about Tex Mex or Mexican food. It's spicy a lot of oil, a lot of smoked items and corns and stuff. I think it's just based upon your preference at that particular time. Me, personally as a chef because I teach it all and I'm exposed to it all the time sometimes just having a simple hot wings is fine for me. But as far as--if I could pick one cuisine that I prefer the most it would definitely have to be classical French cuisine and probably second would have to be Asian because of the variety of seafood. I'm a big seafood fan; I love the exotic flavors and the exotic techniques of preparing the product in Asian cuisine. I've learned a lot when I took the tour over in Asia. I became a huge fan of Asian cuisine. So I would have to pick those two cuisines as my favorite. The one that I would stay away from the most would probably be Latin cuisine. I'm not a big fan of spice and smoke and those things tied in. I enjoy it but not on a basis like the other two cuisines. Story_ID: 98127 Speaker 1: Okay now I think I was reading in the material that I had about you that you--when people hear that you're a chef they think you must be a soul food chef because you're African American and you must be a soul food specialist. Are there any aspects of soul food actually served in--is that something that people are looking for when they come in a restaurant? Speaker 2: Well you think about here in the south, soul food and southern food is the same thing but it's just done different ways. One may be a little more exotic than the other but it's what we're used to here in the south and as far as the comment about they look at me as a soul food chef, they're just stereotyping. They think that I'm just going to cook my cuisine. Well of course that's understandable because if I see a Latin guy, I'm going think he's going to cook Latin cuisine, if I see an Asian guy, he's going to do something Vietnamese or Asian and vice versa, somebody from France, I'm expecting them to do that. So with African Americans they think that it's going to be soul food because I guess that's our cuisine. But I try to break that mold whenever I go out in the public and compete. I can say people look at me and they think I'm going to do something very, very simplistic but I still take that simplistic item, the simple greens or the simple chicken and do something on a highest level possible that make people rethink soul food. And that's my goal one day is to really spread that around the African American community and show that yeah we have a cuisine but it don't have to be looked upon as a simple cuisine. It can be presented as something very elegantly--something on a very high level that even though we compare and keep the tradition going but it can viewed as a reputable cuisine. It don't have to be an under the table behind the back door cuisine. We can enjoy it, it's going to be great, it will be healthy at the same time it can have that sophistication. You can serve a nice influence regional southern influence menu in a fine dining establishment and do just as well as something that's coming from Midwest Chicago [Illinois] or something way out west from Seattle [Washington] somewhere. And that's my goal is to really bring that flare, bring that to life. Speaker 1: What would be a regional dinner say for Atlanta [Georgia]? What would represent Atlanta as a regional dinner? Speaker 2: You think of trout because we have the Chattahoochee River and trout is in our streams here. You think about we're on the coast so you think a lot of seafood is in our cuisine. You think of quail as one of the things, chicken of course, pork. Definitely high on the peaches, nuts, you think about grits are in here in the south still, you think about having pecans, walnuts things of that nature. They are very fall--autumn type feel because it's southern. It's a little bit heavier but at the same time it can be light. You think of a little barbecue. But that's just in the south but Atlanta is a melting pot. You can't really say Atlanta is that, we have so many people from up north, all over the place so Atlanta itself, you have to have that flexibility to really cater to the people of Atlanta. Story_ID: 98128 Speaker 1: Now what advice would you give somebody younger than yourself? There are some people your age that are trying to get in to this right now. You're so far along, what advice would you give somebody trying to get into the culinary field? Speaker 2: I think what they should do is honestly really research the avenue that they want to take. You can go to culinary school, get the training that you need and take it in any direction that you want to go. But I think you need to do the research and really know the steps that you need to take to reach the plateau that you're shooting for. If I want to be a doctor, I know that X amount of years of schooling I have to take. I can't go two years of school and expect to go operate on someone. Same with the chef, it takes years of experience to get to that level where people will respect what you do. You can't look at the end result and not take into consideration the process that gets you there. Don't get too caught up on what you see on TV because once again that's just the end result. There's a lot of studying, there's a lot of advising that you have to get from other people and you really have to do your research. You really have to--it's the hospitality industry and you have to have that passion for people, you have to have that passion to try to please people and whether you're waiting tables or you're cooking, the reward or the ultimate goal is to please that person you're serving. Now I think if you don't have that hospitality field in you then this industry may not be the industry for you. Story_ID: 98129 Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite chef of those television chefs? Speaker 2: It's a few of them out there. I like Emeril [Lagasse]; I think Emeril's pretty good. I think they make them a little flashy for TV with the bam and all that stuff, it's for TV ratings. But I think reading his background and knowing where he's from that he's a very talented chef. I like Wolfgang Puck being an Austrian chef, I think he's excellent. I like some of the chefs on the Iron Chef like [Masaharu] Morimoto he is a very excellent Japanese chef there. The rest of them, they're good at what they do. I do watch-what's the other guy from out west on TV1-ah man I can't remember his name. The African American guy that's on TV anyway he's pretty good, I like him. I like his style and I like how he--his program is catering to the average guy who wants to know how to cook. Who can relate to him and wants to just take something and just cook something with. And a lot of times personalities don't really match up with who they really are. I like to read about them and read where they came from and read about their history and I'm intrigued by a lot of people but I really like those few of the chefs. Story_ID: 98130 Speaker 1: Okay now we always ask people what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think just getting stuck in a rut. I think so many times we have a blame or an excuse for a lot of things and especially our young generation, especially with single mothers being so high and fathers not being there that we just accept it for what it is and just let the kids grow up on their own. And you let the TV raise them, we let the video games become their mentor and then when they get to a certain point, they don't have the standard to be a husband one day or the standard to be a good father one day. And I think we can't let the situation dictate the end result. I think we need to go back to what we were brought up on is a little discipline to challenge our students, monitoring our students-our children and really pushing them for the future. We can't always give them world. I think one of the problems I see is that we want to give them everything under the sun. Sometimes it's nothing wrong with teaching them how to work because we're always going to have to work and not blaming people, at some point we have to stop that. I think we have to take a look at more responsibility, take control, educate ourselves, huge very, very important and go back to concentrating on family. Family is so important, I think growing up and not having my father [Thomas Shular] around and I have kids of my own, I don't see how anyone cannot have love for their kids and not want to do for that kid and make time for them and I think that's where we need to get back to, just the basics all over again. Just family, discipline, drive, education and stop blaming. Story_ID: 98131 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back on everything you've done at this point, is there any major thing you would do differently if you had to do it again? Speaker 2: Yes and No. Yes I think I would have been a little more focused in school coming up during elementary and middle school and high school, of course. It wasn't until I became an adult that I realized how important education is. Then I became really serious and I was a very, very good student at that point. I think if I would have had that earlier, I think I would probably be even further than where I am at now. I think if I would have done more research earlier on, I think could be even further that where I'm at now. But I'm happy how it turned out so far. I think this is just the beginning for me. I've done a lot in comparison to a lot of other people that's out there, I know I've done a lot of things and what I know now is that education; you've got to educate yourself, you've got to do the research and I think if I would have known that starting out, who knows what we'd be talking about now, you know. Story_ID: 98132 Speaker 1: Okay. Likewise, if you look at everything you've done up to this point, I mean I know you're still really young, what would you consider today to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy is the amount of people I've influenced. I think that's me over all the medals and all the magazines and stuff, I think influenced so many people from me--just Daryl from Central Florida, you know, from a single mom; I think that's my legacy because I have just and what I'm able to give back to people and I'm a big fan and big believer of giving back. I've seen people just take what I've given them and grow and do great things now. I've help people go out and they open up restaurants. I took a high school student that never cooked before and trained her for three weeks and she won the Best Teen Chef in America Award and got a full scholarship to go to school, paid and now she's a sous chef at a big major hotel and doing very well for herself. I've coached students and I've been a coach of the culinary team for students, they were state champs for three years in a row and I watched all of those students go from just not having any experience to being head of their departments at their establishments two or three years ahead of anyone else. Having people from across the country read an article about me and call me up and want to talk on the phone for an hour. Those are the things I think is to me my biggest legacy at this point and being a good example and a good father to my children. Story_ID: 98133 Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us a little bit about your family. Now you're remarried, right? Speaker 2: I'm remarried now; we've been married for about two years now, been seeing each other for about five. She is absolutely the best; I wouldn't trade her for the world. Then she has a daughter from a previous relationship and her father wasn't around and so now I'm the father and I love her just like one of my own and then I have my oldest daughter from my previous marriage. She's eight now and we now have a seventeen month old, a little girl who has my personality, who is the ring leader who I see great things out of her. So we've got to control a little bit, other than that I have a great family, great support system. I don't think I'll be able to do the things that I'm able to do and be able to concentrate on the future without that support. Speaker 1: Okay now is there anything I haven't asked you that you think I should ask or you should address before we ask our last question? Speaker 2: I think you asked plenty of questions (laugh). I could talk a full four more hours more, I don't want to take up too much time. I think we've done a pretty job today. Story_ID: 98134 Speaker 1: Okay well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as the guy chef man who made a difference in people's lives. I would like to have people say you know what that Chef Shular or that Daryl however they want to call me, that guy made me change directions for the better. If I can have people say that about me and my kids can grow up and say my dad made me go in the right direction then I can say job well done. Speaker 1: Okay thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. I appreciate it, man. Thank you. Story_ID: 98135 Speaker 1: This photo here was taken back in May 14, 1992. This was in high school my senior year. We were having a birthday party for one of the students in the restaurant class on the last day of class. This class caters to all the faculty members at the Auburndale High School. Speaker 2: This next photo here was about a year later in 1993 probably summer of '93 [1993] in my international class with Chef Keller there. He was a young German chef there who was our instructor at that particular time. You can see me in the back of the photo there. We were having a last day celebration dinner for him. All the students pitched together and did a special meal for the chef there. Speaker 1: This photo here is a picture of me and colleague of mine in culinary school, Walter Echols (splg.). We were in baking and pastry which is the third quarter class. This is our first cake that we made. A carrot cake with all the little marzipan carrots figures on the cake and we thought that was the best cake we'd ever made in lives there. Speaker 2: This photo here is an action shot that was taken of me at the NRA Show in Chicago [Illinois] this past May. I was of twelve finalists for the United States Culinary Olympic Team which I eventually made the United States Culinary Olympic Team and I was in the middle of preparing a four course meal. Speaker 1: This next picture here is a picture of me a few moments after winning the national title at the 75th anniversary of the ACF National Convention in Orland, Florida. I was the 2004 national champion there for nutritional cooking. Speaker 2: This next picture here is a picture of me and my brother; my brother Steve Robinson who is four and a half years older than me. I believe he was about five then and I was just maybe three--maybe four month old there. Speaker 1: This is another photo of me same date different pose, there I am there. Speaker 2: This is my youngest daughter, Taylor Shular. She was about six/seven months old there. This is my youngest daughter there. Speaker 1: This next photo is a family portrait that we took on the summer of 2004 in St. Petersburg, Florida at a family reunion. To the left is my nephew, Lonnie Harding (splg.), in the back there is my brother Steve and his wife Vivian in front of him and their son Daryl. That's me in the back and mother is directly in front of me and my daughter, Jordan is in front of her. Next to my mother is my sister Beverly, she's the oldest, my nephew--my brother's son, Aaron and my sister's daughter and her youngest daughter, Lynell (splg.). That is my family. Speaker 2: This is a photo of me in 1992 my senior year in my basketball uniform playing for the Auburndale Bloodhounds, my number was number 22 there. Speaker 1: The Bloodhounds that's the first time I've heard that--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: The Bloodhounds, man, yeah. Speaker 1: This is my second year of playing little league football for the Colts little league program we had in Central Florida there. I believe this was back in 1985, I was playing for the Colts, I was a tight end. Speaker 2: This next photo is a photo of me in my first year of playing little league football, playing for the Colts. This is 1984; I was a tight end there as well. Speaker 1: This next photo is a photo of my first year of playing basketball in high school, ninth grade. I was a ninth grade freshman on the varsity team. Speaker 2: This next photo is another close up shot of the meal that we prepared in culinary school for our international class as an appreciation dinner for our instructor Chef Keller. Speaker 1: This next photo is an action shot of me in the final stages of plate up in a mystery basket full course meal at a local Cisco Steak competition which I won that year. That's my assistant across the table from me who was the best teen chef in America the year before. Speaker 2: This next photo here is a photo of me being a member of the Art Institute National Culinary Team. We traveled to Asia to Tokyo, Hong Kong and Quangzhou China and competed in the culinary competitions and we took gold medals there representing the United States. Speaker 1: This next photo is a photo of my oldest daughter, Tiara Shular (splg.), she's fourteen years old an excellent student doing very well. Speaker 2: This next photo is a photo of my middle child Jordan Shular, she's eight years old. Speaker 1: And this next photo is a photo of me and my lovely wife Michelle Shular who I've been with for five years now, I've been married close to two and that is one of my favorite pictures there...