 Story_ID: 315585 Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted with Vera Shorter [HistoryMaker Vera Thelma Shorter] at her home, 33 Cronig Avenue in the town of Tisbury on the island of Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts. The date is June 24th, 2005; the interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Madam HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me? Speaker 2: (Cough) Excuse me. My name is Vera Shorter, V-E-R-A, S-H-O-R-T-E-R, that's--well actually I left Thelma out because I have a middle name and it's Thelma and I'm not fond of it so I unconsciously left it out. Speaker 1: Fine, no problem. Your date of birth and where you were born. Speaker 2: I was born December 22nd, 1922 in Huntington, Long Island [New York]. We use to kid and say Lung Island but it's Long Island. Speaker 1: I know that you've been retired for a number of years here on Martha's Vineyard, but during your professional life, your working, life what were you, what was your occupation, how would you describe what you did primarily during your working years? Speaker 2: Well I had so many occupations, but I suppose that the primary would have been in accounting; taxes, bookkeeping and that field. But I wrote; I danced; I created shows, local shows, not on Broadway. So I had a lot of other different activities but basically where I made the bread and butter was in the field of finance I guess you would call it. It's not really finance; I think you would say accounting, okay. Speaker 1: And what was your major position for a long period of time, you worked--? Speaker 2: Well I was supervisor of tax auditors for the Manhattan District IRS [Internal Revenue Service], which had let's say three thousand employees at that time, and it was a great experience. Speaker 1: Good. Story_ID: 315586 Speaker 1: Before we go on to look at your family history and your early life, we have a few what we call warm up questions, People magazine type questions so that people who would look at your interview over the years, will have many different dimensions of your personality. So I want to ask you, Mrs. Shorter [HistoryMaker Vera Thelma Shorter], what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Well if I were to say chitlins what would you think? I like chitlins too, I do, but I don't really have a favorite food. I like almost all food; European, French, southern you name it. If it tastes good, it is good. So I can't give you really a favorite food. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes spring; I love spring, spring is beautiful, it's just wonderful; that's my favorite time. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, aqua, teal; the colors I have on--the color I have on here. Yes I like--and I have other colors too that I like, like earth colors, like this kind of red or rust, browns, yellows, but my favorite is really aqua. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: (Laughter} I live in one; Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. I used to like Sag Harbor [New York] a lot when we were younger but that's off. I've enjoyed Sarasota [Florida] but I like being right here on the Vineyard. I know I'm blinking my eyes and I'm going to stop. I'm not blinking (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you can't control it. Yeah. Speaker 2: 'Cause sometimes I'm a big blinker. Speaker 1: Oh, we all do that; yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Last warm up question. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you like to use from time to time; your philosophical thoughts that you share with others? Speaker 2: I probably do, but off hand I'm trying to think of one that's nice, and pithy. Probably I'd like to say, "Think--," you know one of the old Ben Franklin [Benjamin Franklin] types of statements, think before you leap. I'm a great believer that you don't solve a problem jumping into it; you've got to give yourself some time. So it's probably, give yourself some time. Speaker 1: Good, very good. Story_ID: 315587 Speaker 1: We're going to now look into your family history, family background, so that we have a context in which we will listen to and understand your growing up years and your young adult life and your career and all the things that you've done and how you've been influenced along the way. So we're going to start with your mother. Would you please give me your mother's name, where she was born, and approximately when she was born? Speaker 2: Well my mother--my mother's name was Susan, but we all--everybody calls her Sue, Sue Hendrickson [Susan Hendrickson Groves]. She was born I think--what did I think? I know it's in--gee, I can't remember the date, but it certainly was in the either early 1900s or the late 1800s. What else did you ask me? Speaker 1: Her place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh it's Huntington; Huntington, Long Island [New York]. Speaker 1: Huntington, Long Island, okay. Where did she grow up; she was born in Huntington but where did she actually grow up? Speaker 2: She grew up there. Speaker 1: In Huntington? Speaker 2: She was a--yeah a native-I see people up here in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] takes such pride in being born here, my mother took a great deal of pride in being born in Huntington, she really did. And she had a pretty nice childhood. I'd love to tell you a little story about her. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Oh. One--in grade school, she must have been about ten; they had assembly-and the kindergarten. In those days the kindergarten teacher always played the music. That was a prerequisite, you didn't teach kindergarten if you didn't know how to play a piano. And she was absent and so the principal said--and the whole assembly--Huntington at that time was not big, big. He said, "Well we can't sing today because we have no music." So my mother raised her hand and said, "But I can play." And he said, "Well come up and play." And she played all the songs. Now she had never studied music but somewhere in her head and hands it came through. And so from then on her parents [Minnie Allen Hendrickson and Benjamin Hendrickson] had her take music lessons and she did fine until she was about in the teens and she got into jazz, and she had a German music teacher who hated jazz and so--he or she--I'm not sure what gender--told my grand pop, and he said well he wasn't going to pay for music for her to learn jazz because he didn't think it was that great either. So--but from then on she started a little band, you, know, of young people at that point and later she had it all her life, Sue Groves and Her Boys [ph.] that's what she--'cause all of them were men. But I thought it was a charming story when she told us that. And I believe it because you could--you see that piano over there? Every house we ever lived in we had a piano and she played and if you heard a song and you sang it, she could play it. Oh she also read music 'cause she had studied it. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Growing up in Huntington how far out on Long Island from New York City [New York, New York] is Huntington? Speaker 2: About forty miles or so, forty-five. Speaker 1: And what side of Long Island is it on? Speaker 2: It's the Suffolk County [New York] side. What would you call that, east? Speaker 1: East side I think it is. Speaker 2: I'm not sure; see geography goes out the window with me (laughter). Speaker 1: Huntington was a small town at that point, right? Speaker 2: Much smaller--much smaller than it is now, but it had still had two sections. It had the station and the village part. But it was still bigger than Northport [New York] where I spent a lot of time growing up. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Any other stories that she told you about her growing up years in Huntington? Speaker 2: Well yes she told me about learning how to play tennis and how my grand pop worked for this well-to-do family and they had boys and the father had died. So he was kind of like--although he was a paid person he was like a surrogate father and so he took them hunting and all of that and then it was time to play tennis. My mother wanted to play and he thought well no he's working with boys and he doesn't need her. So anyhow she would sneak out with one of the boys and play when he was in route and finally she got very good and so he happened to come upon this and he was surprised to see how well she played. And he said, "I told you Sue you'd make a good tennis player," or something. He took credit for it, but that was typical of people (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Story_ID: 315588 Speaker 1: As you were growing up with your--you had a brother [Eugene Groves] and a sister [Marie Groves], we'll talk about them in a few minutes. But as you were a youngster and growing up, did you mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] have an occupation or work? Speaker 2: Yes, she would play music all of the time if she could, but then she had to make some money because she and my father [Claude Groves] were separated, and he did send money but it certainly wasn't sufficient. You know, we're talking about the '30s [1930s] and that's right after the Depression [Great Depression]. So she then became a nanny to a member of the Rockefeller family and then she later worked for the Rockefellers herself, and something with housekeeping. She was never--my mother never was a cleaning woman, never, but her hands were beautiful 'til the day she died. But she had a lot of pep and interests in things and knew music and all that stuff, so she could fit in pretty well. So she did that until, I guess she retired, because the children had grown up a bit so she wasn't nanny anymore. And she had periods of time where she did stop, come to think about it, 'cause she had a severe arthritic attack, and I think then she didn't work for the Rockefellers, she worked for another family in Huntington [New York] and then--as a cook. That was her--she wasn't the greatest cook, but she had the greatest personality. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Was the Rockefeller estate [Kykuit, Sleepy Hollow, New York] where, (unclear) where she worked with the family, was that on Long Island [New York]? Speaker 2: No, it was someplace upstate New York, I'm not sure. I never visited, so I don't know, but I know she talked about--and then they had somewhere some other place; they had a couple of places that we knew of. Speaker 1: So she travelled then back and forth between home to the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she travelled with them, yes. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. She was educated in Huntington, schools? Speaker 2: Oh yes she went to school. She graduated--they had a little high school, and she graduated from that high school. She didn't go on to any higher education. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 315589 Speaker 1: Would you give me your father's name and when he was born and where? Speaker 2: Well his name is Claude--was Claude Groves and he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Would you spell the last name for us? Speaker 2: G-R-O-V-E-S. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: And he was born in Brooklyn, New York. There's some argument about where he was born. He has two birth certificates. One says Ridgeville, Pennsylvania and the other one says Brooklyn, New York, so I'm not sure. If you all want to be accurate (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh that's all right. No, we can--. Speaker 2: But I usually say Brooklyn, New York. Speaker 1: All right, uh-huh. Speaker 2: What else did you ask me about him? Speaker 1: The year he was born? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989]. Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-nine [1889]. Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-nine [1889] (laughter); that would have been cute wouldn't it (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 315590 Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother's [Susan Hendrickson Groves] personality, what was she like as a person? How do you remember--? Speaker 2: Well anybody who plays a piano is a lot of fun to begin with because it is a joint thing, you start playing, and people start singing. So she was a lot of fun. She had--her one quirk was that she had to be available ahead of time, whatever it was. If it was a train to meet, you're there an hour ahead of time and she loved to drive so if you're going someplace we had to leave an extra hour so that was her real quirk and that used to annoy me as a young person. But in my old years I understand it a lot better than I did then. She was also fun, she was not a terrific disciplinarian, she was very earthy. She understood that young people go out and they might even have sex, she wasn't fuddy duddy, but my grandmother, her mother was the--Minnie [Minnie Allen Hendrickson], was the person who kept everybody straight on the narrow path. The church, the respect and that was very important in my family, manners. Everybody--you had to speak to people and you had to look at them you couldn't say, "Hello there" (looks away), you had to talk. But I guess the best thing to say about my mother is that she never told me anything that wasn't true. At the time I disputed her bitterly, but I know now she never told me anything. For my own life, for my children's [Lynn Shorter and Beth Shorter-Bagot], for my husband [Rufus Shorter], they were very friendly. My mother was also very sexy which of course I tried very hard not to be, that I didn't like about her but she couldn't help it. Story_ID: 315591 Speaker 1: All right let's get back to your father, Claude [Claude Groves]. What did he tell you about his growing up years? What stories did he share with you as a youngster? Speaker 2: Well he told me that he hardly remembered his father and that he knows that he was older than his brother Pump [William Groves]. We called him Pump, Uncle Pump; his name was William. And that his mother left his father when they were children and came to Brooklyn [New York] and that his father was a mean man, and he told me that part. And growing up in Brooklyn, he told me one story. I don't know if this is interesting or not but to me it was funny. It wasn't really funny 'cause it was a little sad but it also indicated a kind of determination that my father had. My father was a little guy, he must have been about 5'3" maybe 5'4" but he was a nice firm muscular guy and because he had this blond hair and blue eyes and he was supposed to be black, it was a source of discontent with one group or the other group. So one guy wanted to fight him all of the time; in those days they did fight--fist fight. So this guy would find him after school and fight--beat him up. But my father would go to look for him the next day. The guy thought that he had settled this problem but not my father. He said okay today again, until about the third time my father approached this young man, he started running; he thought my father was crazy. He didn't want to fight any more, but my father felt he had to prove something and it might have been because he was a small fellow. But whatever his reason, it did indicate a kind of determination that he had. That's one story he told us. He told us a lot of stories, he was a story teller; he really was, he was very good. When we would visit, before we went to sleep he told a story every night and I think that's why I became a story teller because--and I used to do that with my grandchild, Gabriel [Gabriel Bagot], because it's so much fun to make up the story and especially with children. If you make up the story about the child, they love it. Story_ID: 315592 Speaker 1: --Tell me about your father's [Claude Groves] occupations, what did he do? Speaker 2: Well (unclear) he had many. First of all he was a victim of the Depression [Great Depression] and he was also--he didn't want to pass. This is what is known in our parlance as passing for white. He didn't want to do that and so he'd always be writing down black which was kind of a strange thing. So he worked at many things. One I remember, he even had a vegetable cart that he pushed. He had job--all kinds of--he worked at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)], he did this, he did that. He had studied to be a mechanical engineer and he couldn't seem to find a job anywhere, but he did before he died. He must have been later in life but he became a foreman in a factory and he loved it. That was a high point of his life; but the other side of my father was that he was a philosopher, he was also a reader. He must have read every classic you could think of and I think that's exposed us to the Greeks, the Romans, Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], he could quote Shakespeare at length and he also was a tourist. He loved the City of New York [New York] and he would take all of us on trips to various places. But I don't think he ever--I'm sure he never made much money. And the little, few money--he would send us out in Huntington [New Yok] a dollar each, each child a dollar, that's three dollars, and he would send my mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] money but I don't think he ever made much money. But he was a happy person--he seemed to--at least to us. Speaker 1: You said that he would take us on trips, he liked to tour around the city and so on; and the us would be your siblings. Would you tell me about your siblings, their name, when they were born? Speaker 2: Okay, well I'm not sure about birth dates, but my oldest sibling was my brother Eugene Groves, G-R-O-V-E-S. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: The middle sibling was Marie, Marie Groves you don't need that spelling again now, do you? Speaker 1: No no. Speaker 2: Okay. I was the baby, the youngest. So he would take us on trips to The Cloisters [The Met Cloisters, New York, New York], to the botanical gardens. I can't even remember the names of these places, Coney Island [New York, New York] which he didn't like, but we liked, he didn't like it. Speaker 1: So he had an automobile he drove? Speaker 2: No we went on the subway. Speaker 1: The subway; uh-huh. Speaker 2: In fact we used to laugh and say if it's a nickel we can go, because daddy will take us. Because that's what--the subway was a nickel at that time. I think it was something like that. And we could always get those big franks that they had and put sauerkraut on it and sometimes believe it or not they had French fries on them or some kind of fry on it, some kind of potato, and we thought that was heaven, really heaven (laughter). The simple pleasures of life that children today probably don't even know. Story_ID: 315593 Speaker 1: We're going to talk about your career, but very briefly, what was the occupation/career of your brother Eugene [Eugene Groves] what did he do? Speaker 2: My brother was a musician and he later became a food administrator, basically. That's what he liked to be called. I would call him a chef and a cook and he would say no, he really--because his jobs were mainly--he worked up until he was--let's see he died--he must have been eighty, or yeah 'cause it was about four years--so it's about eighty. He worked until he was about eighty and at that time he had stopped working in Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] running the food department and he worked for a private place of handicapped kids. I think it was sponsored or organized by a Jewish group and they loved him. They gave him an apartment, he didn't need it, he had a home but they gave him an apartment because--I didn't tell you one thing about my brother. My brother was blind in one eye. And we thought when World War II [WWII] was on and that he went for, you know, the draft, that they wouldn't take him. But they took him. Once they found out that he could play music they just put him in the band. So he did have that eye thing, but--and he got that--I don't know if you want to hear this--stop me if I'm going on too long. Speaker 1: No, if you want to tell it--yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. He was blinded by the fact that he and some boys found explosives somewhere that had been--they were digging and they found it and there was a small factory that they burned material outside and they threw it in it. So he lost a thumb, he was blind in one eye, so you would think that the [U.S.] Army would not have taken that man. In fact, he didn't even--he rode there in his car because he thought they would send him back home so somebody had to get the car. Speaker 1: That's good, that's good; tell me about your sister Marie [Marie Groves]. What was her livelihood and career, what did she do? Speaker 2: Well first of all she was a mother of four kids and she did very well. She didn't have a great marriage. It seems that I'm the only one in the family that had a great marriage, really. She didn't; but she was almost what you called a single mother and she raised those kids and they're all successful. Her oldest--not her oldest, her next to the oldest is a doctor, they all did well. About her. She was a lovely person, a very bossy person when we were growing up, but then she got--found something--some kind of epiphany took place or something because she became very sweet and very loving. Let's see. She had to work, so she worked in--she took civil service tests, that was her method and she had a nice job with the state [New York]. I can't remember what she did, whether it was intake, interviewing or something and she was also a very good bridge player. Excuse me. She had that kind of mind, and so--. Story_ID: 315594 Speaker 1: What did you and your brother [Eugene Groves] and sister [Marie Groves] like to do together, the three of you? What kind of things kept you occupied in your younger years? Speaker 2: Well they liked to bother me it seemed. That seemed to be their habit when we were little. They seemed to make fun of me and I didn't know how to get back at them because they were so big. You know, six years old was big for a little person and so I finally--and they played sports and they wouldn't let me play. So we weren't doing anything together right then, but I decided that I was going to get good. And I would practice hitting balls and catching balls and you know, they would match up teams when you're kids you know, "I'll take you, take me or take John, take them." Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And nobody would ever take me. And so, finally somebody did and I--it was like a Mark Twain thing where the stumble bum is the hero or heroine. Well, I was hitting and catching and carrying on and I must have been only about seven at that time. And so now they had a different attitude, I had proven myself. Don't tell there is just natural love among children, I think it has to be developed. Because anyhow, then they became my best friends and my brother was really as I got to be a teenager, extremely protective. I mean he--he could drive, and so he would take me to the socials and so forth and she was too. They were both loving finally; they weren't so great little, when I was little. Story_ID: 315595 Speaker 1: What do you know about the--your grandparents on your mother's [Susan Hendrickson Groves] side, your maternal grandparents? Could you give me their name and what you know about them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Minnie--her maiden name was Allen [ph.], Minnie Allen [Minnie Allen Hendrickson]. And she came from a large family of rather enterprising--well they were southerners and I find southerners to be extremely--maybe I'm exaggerating, but much more family oriented and cohesive and looking out for one another than I found of some of the families that I grew up with. And I'm not--well, I won't go there. But anyhow, her sisters brought her up from Virginia to work. And her name was Minnie but she liked to be called Patty [ph.]. And she was a very pretty woman and you know, quite put together a person and a nice person, but she was very rigid about everything you could think of, even food, she was very rigid. But she was likeable and people in the community respected her. She got what you call real respect, and her sisters too, and they were all there, Aunt Lucy [ph.], Aunt Mae [ph.], you know all--we called them all--everybody was an aunt. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she live in Huntington [New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She did. Speaker 2: Well she had lived with my grand pop in Northport [New York] 'til he got crazy, fell in love (laughter) and left his wife but I'm not going to go into that story. Speaker 1: Okay and his name, your grandfather? Speaker 2: His name is Benjamin. Benjamin Hendrickson. Speaker 1: What was his occupation; what did he do? Speaker 2: Well he was basically a chauffeur for most of his life, but he could also cook because he had been in world--not world, the Spanish American War. And at that time anybody black who came into any war was pushed right in the kitchen. But my grand pop used to tell us stories and he said he loved it because everybody loved him because they could get the better food. The cook became the person you liked when you're out there on that water a long time so he said it was fine. But he was also a bit of a disciplinarian, he was a very up-together, you know, soldier type, martinet type. But he was--I was his pet so it's hard not to like him, right (laughter)? Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 315596 Speaker 1: Tell me more about your grandfather, Benjamin [Benjamin Hendrickson]; your mother's [Susan Hendrickson Groves] father. Speaker 2: Well I'll be happy to. The one thing that--the story that always sort of struck me a bit was that his mother was a full blooded Native American of Shinnecock tribe. And I really--you know, you hear these stories when you're growing up in a family and some of it is folklore, some of its truth and some of it is just fiction. But I found this one to be true because we later--and I have this article somewhere, don't ask me where, where somebody did save it, where the Brooklyn Eagle [Brooklyn Daily Eagle], which is no longer in existence now had an article on Native Americans on Long Island [New York] and they had this--named her Susan January [ph.] and blah blah blah; that she was a pure Native American. But it stopped there because she married a Portuguese person and my grand pop and his family which was about twelve of them, Hendricksons. There are Hendricksons still out in Huntington [New York] right now. In fact you can almost recognize them because most of them have either red hair, light hair or gray eyes. You can walk down the street and you see one and you say, "Are you a Hendrickson?" they'll say--because one cousin, grand pop's brother's son had a slew of children so they multiplied all over the place. I don't even know them. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's good. Going back to your mother's mother, your grandmother, Minnie [Minnie Allen Hendrickson] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Minnie. Speaker 1: She was from the South. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did she share with you any stories about her life and growing up in the South? Speaker 2: Yes, she said that the reason her sisters wanted her to come north is that she was very pretty and she was working in--for some, I guess reasonably well to do although you didn't have to be well to do to hire somebody in the South--somebody black. But she was working in this family and there was a young man that was constantly bothering her. The father of the man was bothering her, making advances, and she wrote her sister up here who was working here in Huntington. So they sent the money and brought her up because they didn't want raped or violated or whatever. Maybe it wouldn't have gotten to that but my grandmother really felt pretty threatened by the whole situation so that's one story she told me. But then she had, what was that place that's like Freezeville [ph.] I can't remember the name of the place but she said it was a really nice town and most people were very nice and in fact she was more critical of the people in Huntington than she was of the people in the South even though that other threat was very serious. But she--Farmville [Virginia], she was from Farmville, Virginia and she said she liked--liked a lot--liked the style there, okay. Story_ID: 315597 Speaker 1: Well let's move to your paternal grandparents; your father's [Claude Groves] parents. What was his mother's name? Speaker 2: Cora [Cora Groves (ph.)], her name was Cora and I don't know--oh yes I do--who was that surveyor that after world--after the the Civil War--oh I wish I could think of him; it's probably in my black history book over there. She had the same name and we often wondered if she was related to this famous African American. But you know, she died when I was thirteen and she was also very private. She was quite an elegant woman, she had been a ladies maid, she had been to France. Maybe that's where my daughter [Beth Shorter-Bagot] got it from between my father being in France with the war [World War I, WWI] and my grandmother having spent a time in France, there are all Francophiles. And--so she taught us ladylike behavior 'cause we were little hoodlums anyhow but out in the country running and rolling and fooling around. But she made sure that we knew manners, had to understand--and also she was what you called lace poor, they didn't have much money, but we always had the table cloth, we always had to set the table and all that. We weren't quite as lacy out in Huntington [New York] but we were lacy when we got to Brooklyn [New York]. Speaker 1: And she was born where? Speaker 2: I think she was born in Pennsylvania, I'm not sure. I think it's the same place where my father--that disagreement in the birth certificate, I think it's--I don't know if it's Ridgeville [Pennsylvania] or what but it was some--I think in Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And what about her husband, your grandfather on your father's side? Speaker 2: I know very little about him. Speaker 1: His name? Speaker 2: I don't really even know his name. She never wanted to talk; well first of all I was too young to really get information from her and my father seemed--he talked about everything else but his father. He didn't say much so we don't know. I did know that he was white, that's all. They both said that. Story_ID: 315598 Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up in Huntington [New York]? How far back can you remember? Speaker 2: Well I can remember when I was three, I really can and most people won't believe this, but I can. I can remember that my sister [Marie Groves] and brother [Eugene Groves] had taken me across the street and my mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] was on the other side. She came out and she was angry because they had taken me across the street. I think they wanted to kill me at that point; believe or not children do have those thoughts. And she said, "Bring Vera [HistoryMaker Vera Thelma Shorter] back." And I saw her and a truck was coming and I ran out in front of the truck but it was one of those trucks that have the high--the bottom is higher, and my mother said, "Fall down." I can almost hear it right now. And I just went (gesture), and it went right over me; right over me, I was--. So you know I would--I remember that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You won't forget that. Speaker 2: I was three years old. It was a very--of course I didn't look at it as exciting, I was crying and upset because my mother was angry with me when she should have been angry with those two other folks, my brother and sister. Story_ID: 315599 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about this neighborhood where you and your brother [Eugene Groves] and sister [Marie Groves] spent your early years. What was the neighborhood like, who were your neighbors; tell me about your home? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well we've had different kinds of homes. The early years since my mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] and father [Claude Groves] were separated, my mother was out working, and we were with my [maternal] grandmother [Minnie Allen Hendrickson]. The neighborhood itself was you know, working class with a little upward mobility to it, mostly white. I think we were probably the only black family in that particular neighborhood although there were certainly black people in Huntington [New York], you know, black church and all that. But they were friendly; we--I played with the kids, the kids played with us. We all went to the big field and played ball together so it really--and it was very few racial epithets or anything said that--I can't even remember that too much. It certainly was later on in life that I understood racism but it was in high school [Northport High School, Northport, New York] when I started understanding it because when I went out for the editorial, the school magazine, it was a little something going on there. But being me, I confronted and I became a member of the editorial staff. But--and it was also about jobs for summer, you know for the teenage people. Nobody wanted you to work in the newspaper office or even in the doggone simple minded five and ten [store], the junk shop place. They wanted you to clean and I didn't--wouldn't do it. So I would babysit, you know. But there was --basically it was as pleasant as any growing up experience can be of kids. It was pretty pleasant where we lived and in Northport [New York] it was even better because that was a higher class community that is they had more money so everybody benefits to some extent when it's all around you and your high school is like a private high school. Speaker 1: Yeah. When did you and your mother and your brother and sister leave Huntington and go to Northport you said? Speaker 2: Well, actually I think it was eighth grade. I was in eighth grade and my mother decided that Northport had a better high school, not because it was bigger or anything, it was smaller, but she figured it was better. So she rented a house in Northport and we went there. Well we've always gone to Northport, remember, always, all our lives we'd go over there because we had relatives over there which we'd visit and they had beautiful beaches. So we did go--so it was very familiar to us but my high school years were in Northport. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 315600 Speaker 1: Before you left Huntington [New York] and moved to Northport [New York], what are some of the sights, sounds and smells that remind you of your growing up in Huntington? Sights, sounds and smells (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well a lot of it is right here [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] because you know Northport was right on the water so I used to swim every day. The sea smell here, sounds; the fog horns, the boats. So actually in my later years, I sort of came back to my younger years in place, that is not in time, but in place. And so they were all very familiar to me and very comfortable, I'm very comfortable here. And it's just like those days. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 315601 Speaker 1: In Huntington [New York] and in Northport [New York], can you describe your family life particularly those holidays and family traditions and special things that you and your family did together? You talked to me about your father [Claude Groves] taking you places, but during the year what were the things that you and your family celebrated and what do you especially recall about that part of your life? Speaker 2: Well always holidays, always Christmas dinner, Thanksgiving dinner, Fourth of July, you name it, we were typical whatever. I don't know whether this is typically African American or typically American, but we always did. And one thing happened to me and it should happen to all children of separated parents. My mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] and father often met on those holidays and I used to think everybody lived like that. I didn't know--I mean you hear of the children saying, "Oh divorce or separation, my poor child is suffering." I always thought it was fun; we went there for a while and came here and all holidays especially--most holidays 'cause sometimes my father wouldn't come to Huntington. Later when I got married and moved to Brooklyn [New York], my mother would come, my father would come, my grandpeople would come, everybody would come. It transcends to the--or descends to the younger generation to do all that cooking and carrying on. But we always had fun. And we always--as I said I come from a musical family so we have a party. After dinner there's singing and dancing and God knows what else went on. But as long as grandma didn't--well she would not have permitted liquor, so you couldn't have that. You had--that [maternal] grandmother I meant to tell you about her; that's Minnie [Minnie Allen Hendrickson]. Minnie was a founder of the Phillis Wheatley Society and so in spite of all her rigidity, she had a very strong interest in history--in black history, anyhow. And so she was the cocoa and gingerbread person; that's basically how she entertained. But on Thanksgiving and oh she made great minced pies, she was a fabulous cook; much better cook than my mother. Story_ID: 315602 Speaker 1: Let's move to you--beginning of your quote formal education. When did you start school, what school did you attend, what do you remember about those early elementary grade experiences? Speaker 2: Well I know that I won the Daughters of the American Revolution in the eighth grade they had a little medal. I threw it away of course when they wouldn't let Marian Anderson sing, and I should have kept it because it's a collector's item. But I did win that and that was for scholarship and so forth in the eighth grade. And also for something that I didn't deserve; something mural painting, which I led a group of kids. We were learning how to work in groups and I was the leader and I got them to paint it, I didn't do anything except give orders--I didn't give orders but you know, I worked with them. But anyhow that's one memory I have of the eighth grade. Speaker 1: What about the earlier years, kindergarten, first, second, third grade, anything? (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I don't know if you want to hear this. I remember wetting my pants if that's what you want to hear, because the teacher yelled at me. I wasn't used to people yelling at me, I really wasn't because again I told you I was the baby and obviously I wanted to please everybody, so I didn't get in trouble. I don't think I ever had a spanking in my life and this teacher yelled at me and that seemed awful bad and so when I got home or when somebody picked me up they found out, but I remember that. I don't remember too much--learning too much in the younger things. Speaker 1: What kind of student were you? Did you like school? Speaker 2: Oh I liked school, I liked school, I likes reading. Strangely enough I didn't like math though and I had a teacher by the name of Mr. Ambellum [ph.] who kept saying, "You know you would be good at this if you would try." And he kept doing that. And I'd say, "I'm trying, I'm trying, what does he want." Then I had another great teacher, we called her Pug-nosed Miller, and she was a history or something like that or whatever they called that civics or something, she was excellent. She made you think really; those kinds of teachers are so rare but when you have one you never forget them. I was a good student but a lazy student, you know. I was always passing and sometimes higher up but I could have been, I think, 'cause I never did homework. I did it there; if it was gonna be done, it was done there. Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers in the elementary school that you remember as influencing you in any special way? Speaker 2: Pug-nosed Miller 'cause she made you really think about the history. She did something that I don't think any teacher does in the lower grades, she asked the class, "Who is an American?" and they were saying--named somebody, "John Jones"; every name was a Anglicized name. And she made us realize that Pakowsky, Babadu can be an American name. Now that's tremendous to learn in the lower grades, now that's something that maybe high school, you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And particularly at that time, you know at that--yeah. Speaker 2: Right, right. So she made you think and I mean that's the first time I realized that maybe you are an American even if you don't have that name, you know. But it was very good and I'll never forget that. She influenced my thinking. I really started reading a lot of history from then on. But I had to read anyhow because my father [Claude Groves] was always--that's one thing he did, he'd collect books, old books, and he'd mailed them to us. Speaker 1: What did he like to read, your father? Speaker 2: He read the classics, Greeks, Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], the Romans. I've got some of them here and he liked to recite, I did too, so. Speaker 1: Yeah. Did you have any notions or ideas about what you wanted to be or do as an adult when you were still in elementary school; were there any thoughts? Speaker 2: Oh sure I was going to be the greatest poet in the world. I was a poet, I was a writer and then I was a dancer, so it was both. Dancing and poetry. Speaker 1: Well, we're going to see later that you did those things, okay. Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some of them. Not too well. Story_ID: 315603 Speaker 1: So you spent the grades one through eight in Huntington [New York]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then your mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] moved to Northport [New York]. Speaker 2: Right. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And so you went to high school. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about what high school you went to? Speaker 2: I went to Northport High [Northport High School, Northport, New York] and it's a small high school. The people--as I told you before, the people in Northport at that time were people of influence and money; not wealthy wealthy, but pretty well off. I would say really upper middle class and some of them old money who didn't have the money anymore. And so we had--it was a great high school; because if you didn't like--I was an academic student but if you wanted a commercial subject, as long as your average was whatever they said it was, you could sit in. So I sat in--that's how I learned how to type; I sat in a typing class. You could sit in almost any class you wanted to as long as you had a free period and you were a sensible student. So we had that, we played lacrosse which was way ahead of time in those days, field hockey, basketball, baseball and tennis, and track for a while but then they decided that track was not good for girls don't ask me why but they did. 'Cause I loved track, I loved the dash anyhow. So it was really a very nice school and I was on--I was captain, if I can do a little boasting, I was captain of the soccer team. My sister [Marie Groves] was--if not captain at least the leader of the basketball, so we were all in sports. My brother [Eugene Groves] played no sports; well he couldn't see, but he played no sports; he played in the band there too. He always played music all through high school (laughter). But we had a good time, we really did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's good. In addition to all the athletic participation, did you have a chance to do any writing beyond your regular classroom writing? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I would write poems which I would recite at the Methodist church. I--I never--oh yes one time they got Angelo Herndon--have you heard of him? Some people had read my poems and they took me into the New York Library [New York Public Library, New York, New York] to meet this gentleman and he read my poems and I'm sure they were you know, pretty bad--they weren't that good, yeah. But he was very nice and he read them and he said nice things. And then this couple, they wanted me to mail them somewhere and I didn't. I just put them back in the drawer; I probably still have them in one of these boxes. Story_ID: 315604 Speaker 1: Church life, you mentioned reading poetry at the church. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] and your siblings [Eugene Groves and Marie Groves] and your involvement in church, both in Huntington [New York] and in Northport [New York]. Were you churchgoers and what role did religion play in your growing up years? Speaker 2: Well of course it had to in those times. But actually my mother was a free thinker so if you didn't want to go--to join you had to go but if you didn't want to join you didn't have to. So my sister decided that she was Catholic; don't ask me why. I think she liked those girls walking around in those veils and things. But the rest of us stayed with the Methodist but then I thought if she can be different then I can be different too so I also became a member of the Baptist youth group. So I went to both churches, she went to Catholic and sometimes she had to go to the Methodist because somebody would insist. So church was an important part of our lives. Speaker 1: Was this in Huntington or Northport? Speaker 2: Huntington. By the time we got to high school we were now almost making our own decisions because well my sister is three years older and my mother's out there with the Rockefellers or somebody. So we were at home, I mean we were managing the house ourselves and of course I was the clean up and my sister was the cook and the shopper. So anyhow--and my brother by this time was living with my [maternal] grandfather [Benjamin Hendrickson] 'cause he had come back from his--no he hadn't come back, he hadn't gone yet. Now why was he in Northport? He was still working for these people but my [maternal] grandmother [Minnie Allen Hendrickson] was in Huntington and so my brother was over there with him and I don't know why 'cause he must have finished high school and so now he had to--they had to figure out what to do with him I guess. I don't remember whatever it is, he always had a car, he always had money and I know that he was a very good person, he didn't do anything nefarious. Story_ID: 315605 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Once you got into the middle, high school grades [at Northport High School, Northport, New York] and moving toward high school graduation, did you have any new or different feelings about what you wanted to do. I know you're interested in writing and that but do you have any other career goals at that point; any new ideas? Speaker 2: No at that point I didn't. I really thought that--I was naive; I thought somebody would discover me. My writings are in a folder hidden in a box; somebody would find them, my dancing and I had some plums because in high school when we had a dance concert or anything like that, I was always lead dancer. So I was really like encouraged by some form of small town success. So I figured look I'll go to New York [New York] (laughter) but of course my [maternal] grandfather [Benjamin Hendrickson] as I told you, said I was to go to college and then he fell in love and left the scene. So my mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] said well you've got to learn something, you can't do this the rest of your life, to think somebody is going to discover you. She didn't say that but her attitude was and so that's when I became an au pair girl, worked for Dr. Lee [ph.], worked in his office and went to school at night, business school. Speaker 1: Now this is after high school, yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah after I graduated. Speaker 1: Yeah. Before we leave high school, were there any particular teachers that were particularly influential in your high school years, anybody stand out as being significant? Speaker 2: Let's see I would say maybe our field hockey coach. I think her name was like Minch [ph.]. She was the one who tried to get me a scholarship to Sargent [Sargent College; College of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences: Sargent College, Boston, University, Boston, Massachusetts], because she thought that I deserved it. Speaker 1: Sargent, Sargent what? Speaker 2: I guess it was a college, I don't know, I don't remember now. I thought it was Sargent or something like that. Anyhow it was a school where girls excelled in sports. Speaker 1: Well I think of Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], Sargent College at Boston University that was a school for training people in recreation and sports; Sargent College, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that must be the school. She tried but she was unsuccessful, but she really wanted me. And that was in my senior year and I had won the most valuable player for all island [Long Island, New York] field hockey. She thought that's all I needed but they said, "Well they would have taken me if we could pay." But we needed a full scholarship at that point--we-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --my family. Story_ID: 315606 Speaker 1: At the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the racial and ethnic group makeup of your high school, Northport High School [Northport, New York], as you remember it? Speaker 1: Okay, four black families almost, the Larsons, the Folks, the Groves-three, three (laughter). So we were certainly in a minority and everybody was in different grades like my sister [Marie Groves] was ahead of me, my brother [Eugene Groves] was ahead of her. The Larson girls--and they were very bright young women; they did well in life too. One was ahead of my sister and one was--I can't really get them straight, but it was scattered. You never had a full concentration of African Americans in any class and I'm sure that's one reason why it was easy because there was very little competition in that sense. Of course, we were all--all of us were good. I mean the Folk girls were very good. Some in sports, some in intellect and the Larsons were too, nobody there was not a contributing member of that high school; none of the African American kids. I mean they all thought highly of us because we were good, in fact in some cases some of those people like the Larson girls were superior, they really were. I won't say I was because I was always-what is it, jiving a bit, trying to get over not to do everything. Speaker 2: Briefly as we come down to the end of this thirty minute segment, did you have any part-time jobs while you were in high school and when you graduated, that summer after you graduated what work did you do? Speaker 1: Babysitting, I babysat. I did a couple of cleaning jobs and the lady complained bitterly to my [maternal] grandfather [Benjamin Hendrickson] at that time. That was in the early part, that's like in the first or second freshman or something and he said no more of that, no more; only babysitting. So I would babysit and I liked babysitting. I liked children, I really in fact thought I loved them, I almost thought I'd go into that field but later on I just changed my mind. Story_ID: 315607 Speaker 1: Moving towards your graduation day from Northport High School [Northport, New York] and that event, what decisions did you have to make at that point about your life? Speaker 2: Well they were pretty--it was a pretty serious time because now we were again going to move because high school is over, I'm the last one. And that's the part about my mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] whose life was a bowl of cherries. If you remember in Dickens' [Charles Dickens], Mr. Micawber [Wilkins Micawber] would say, "Something would turn up." Well that was my mother's philosophy. I mean now is a time for change, and so in the meantime I'm supposed to be going someplace to learn something, my sister [Marie Groves] is already in New York [New York] working, my brother [Eugene Groves] was, I guess in the armed services or at least he wasn't needful. So now we're going to move so I have to live with my [maternal] grand pop's [Benjamin Hendrickson] sister, Aunt Ada [ph.] until we find out whether Plattsburgh [Plattsburgh State Normal and Training School; State University of New York College at Plattsburgh, Plattsburgh, New York]--we know we didn't get Sargent [Sargent College; College of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences: Sargent College, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], grand pop was gone with the money. So now we're waiting--well I guess we're waiting for a blessing to come from heaven, I don't know, but we're waiting. And so I'm going to stay there while we wait and also we're waiting for Plattsburgh, which I'm so glad I didn't go there because they insisted that I had to major in home economics. Speaker 1: This was a state school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: New York State? Speaker 2: New York State, right. And so I'm at Aunt Ada's but Aunt Ada was a mean and hateful old lady who the letters did come and she tore them up. So when we heard no answer and we weren't the kind of people who got on a phone and called up and said what happened like today we would--I would do. So that's when my mother made the decision that I would go to Brooklyn [New York] and stay with Dr. Lee [ph.] and his family as the au pair girl, work in his office and go to school at night. Speaker 1: Now who was Dr.--what was his first name? Speaker 2: His name was Dr. James Lee, Dr. James Lee. He was a friend of our family doctor, Granger, Carl Granger in Huntington [New York], they were friendly. And my mother told Dr. Granger the problem, what to do with Vera [HistoryMaker Vera Thelma Shorter], and he made the suggestion and he talked to them because they had two small children and they wanted somebody to take care of them. And they also wanted somebody in the office 'cause his wife was home. And so we-everybody--I naturally said yes, what was I going to say? And so I went in, we met them--my mother and I think my sister came too, sort of we interviewed them too. They interviewed me, but we interviewed them. Speaker 1: He was a physician? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a physician, yeah right. And they were wonderful to me by the way and they allowed for my time to go to school at night. It was fine; you know, I worked in the morning with the kids, I worked in his office for a couple of hours, and I went to school at night. I received a small stipend but I had room and board and they introduced me to the muckety-mucks of Brooklyn because they knew all of them. Speaker 1: So you lived in their quarters? Speaker 2: Oh yeah I had a room of my own, and they treated me like I was--well they had boys; like I was a daughter. I was really, I must say, you hear horror stories about these things but I didn't have a horror story, it was really very nice. I did so I went to Eastman [Eastman Business College, Poughkeepsie, New York], I was wearing all of this stuff that I thought I hated and found out that it just goes to show you that I liked it. Story_ID: 315608 Speaker 1: Now what type of school was Eastman [Eastman Business College, Poughkeepsie, New York], this was a night school? Speaker 2: Yeah it was--well it had day classes, too. Speaker 1: But you went nights. Speaker 2: I went nights, but it was really a, what they call a business school. They had this secretarial program, bookkeeping, accounting. They had all these little departments. And so I tried the secretarial for a while but I was such a lousy secretary. I mean dictation is just ridiculous to me anyhow. I mean why are you going to draw all those little things? So I moved over to bookkeeping and then I moved over to accounting and then I augmented that later, I had to, to work for the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]. But anyhow (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long did you attend Eastman, how long was your course of study? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two years. Speaker 2: I stayed with them [Dr. James Lee (ph.) and his family] two years. I did it for the whole two years, yeah, so--. And then my sister [Marie Groves] said--she really didn't like me in that family because I was meeting all of these muckety-muck kids with cars and all that stuff and she thought you know you don't need that 'cause you don't have that, you don't need it. So she got an apartment and I went to live with my sister. She got an apartment in Brooklyn [New York]. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And I went to live with her. She was pretty well established. Speaker 1: What was she doing at the time? Speaker 2: She had a government job; she had passed--she was a great test taker. I mean give her a test and she was gone with it. Speaker 1: And once you get a civil service appointment you're pretty set. Speaker 2: Yes she was set. So she had that job, and so I went to work--I didn't go to work then, but then I did apply and I got that job I told you about, I think I mentioned it to you before, Kanak [Kanak Company, Inc.] which was a good job. Speaker 1: Would you spell that? Speaker 2: K-A-N-A-K. Speaker 1: And what was that business? Speaker 2: It was a manufacturing business of some kind of a garment which I don't even remember what it was, but it was a garment--it was a small factory, maybe thirty people, machines and all that stuff, and I was the office girl. I guess that's what you called them in those days, and the payroll--I was everything in that job. Speaker 1: This in Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Yeah it was in Brooklyn, it was in East New York, Brooklyn. Speaker 1: East New York, Brooklyn, what is that? Speaker 2: You've never heard of East New York? It's New York--well it's in the east of Brooklyn and it was a place that was occupied by a lot of European Jewish people. Yeah. You know stores and all that. It was pretty much of a Jewish community and that's where some of these small factories were and I worked there. Story_ID: 315609 Speaker 1: Now World War II [WWII] was raging on at this point, because you had just finished high school [Northport High School, Northport, New York], and Franklin Delano Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] was the president. Did the wartime influence you or affect you in any way, or your family? Speaker 2: Well I'm glad you mentioned her, because I met her. As I'm doing whatever I'm doing, I--we formed, Margaret Hunter and myself, we formed a citywide youth committee because we felt that a lot of things were wrong, there were gangs and all, so we formed that. We--Rankin [John E. Rankin] was a senator from one of the southern states and he was calling people niggas and all that stuff in the press and all so we wrote him a letter and asked him to come up and speak to us. It was a polite letter, we don't call him names and of course he wrote us back and I'm so sorry that--I don't know who has those letters because that is really history and he told us to practically go to hell and then we sent a copy of that letter to Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt]. We sent it to the White House [Washington, D.C.], we weren't even sure it would get to her and so she wrote back and said she was coming to New York at such and such a time. We also were associated with the Fulton Sumner Canteen which you may have heard of in Brooklyn [New York], Margaret and I, we were associated with that. So she said she would stop, she was going to be in New York and she would stop at the Fulton Sumner Canteen. So we had the youth committee and we had the Canteen committee people and everybody. And she never came in, but she was outside in the car with all of her people around her, and they hand her a mic and she wished us well and told us never to give up believing in ourselves or something like that. It made such an impression on me to this day, that woman was marvelous. Speaker 1: Now who were theus that had organized this? You mentioned Margaret Hunter; this a volunteer thing? Speaker 2: James Urey [ph.]--yeah volunteer--James Urey from East New York [Brooklyn, New York], me and Margaret and one other person, oh a political person, Maude B. Richardson who was always running for assembly woman or something. She was like--we felt the adult, we were young, but we weren't that young and she encouraged us. We just put a little flyer out and said, "Who wants to join?" Kids came from everywhere. We had rules, if you were a gang member it was fine, you could join us, but you couldn't bring any of that gang stuff. So we had kids--you know who was a member of that group, Patterson's [ph.] wife, she was a member of the citywide youth committee 'cause she was here one summer visiting Miriam Walker and Miriam brought them over here and she said, "Vera Shorter [HistoryMaker Vera Thelma Shorter] do you remember me?" And I didn't because I was a leader and it was a whole group of kids, and she told me about it. Speaker 1: Now this was all based in Brooklyn, where you were living with your sister [Marie Groves]? Speaker 2: Yeah, Brooklyn. I don't know where she--I didn't even know her, I mean I didn't even recognize her. But anyhow it was a very interesting period of my life and it's when I really became an activist, you know. For the Civil Rights Movement, the citywide youth committee, we would picket the places, the Breevoort Savings Bank [Brooklyn, New York] which would not hire any blacks, the Empire Skating Rink [Empire Rollerdome; Empire Roller Skating Center, Brooklyn, New York] which would not, and in fact we were arrested there. Not that we did anything, the sailors tried to attack us, but that was later on. That wasn't at this time that you are talking about, with the Fulton Sumner Canteen. But the citywide youth committee lasted for about seven or eight years. I think it finally fell apart because most of those kids went on to school, went on someplace and many of them got to be somebody. Story_ID: 315610 Speaker 1: You were married in 1943. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So when and how did you meet Rufus Shorter? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I was out on a date with a fellow named Fitz and I loved music and dancing as you know. So we went to a place--I don't know if it was called--I think it was Lucky Millinder's club [Lucky's Rendezvous] in Harlem [New York, New York] somewhere and all the jazz musicians would come there from their various gigs and play. So you really--for a couple of drinks or what have you, you're really getting a concert. And he was there with this very beautiful girl, Leticia Bates [ph.]. I even remember what she wore, she had a white dress with a red cummerbund and here's this handsome fellow and I said to Fitz, "What a beautiful couple," because I always--if I see something and it's beautiful I can't help but resonate to it. He said, "Yeah he goes to college with me, he's a graduate or something, and we had been at the same college. All the girls are crazy about him and he just tosses them over one after the other, you know, he didn't care." I said, "Well I think he's beautiful." And I was just saying all this--so. Rufus came over to us with the girl, with Leticia, and greeted Fitz and stood there waiting to be introduced, so we got introduced. So Fitz and I got up to dance, so Rufus came and cut in, he had the girl with him and he just pushed her over to Fitz. As soon as we started dancing--the first topic we talked about and I'll never forget it, it was Spinoza [Baruch Spinoza], the philosopher and I don't know why but it came out and then the next one was about a farm boy, a book, another book, and it was a slow dance so naturally we had a chance to talk. So he said something. Then he came back again and Fitz said, "Don't take that man seriously because he doesn't take any girl seriously." I said, "Okay I'm not--I just think he's pretty." I thought he was pretty, and I danced with him again and that's when he said, "Where do you live?" I said, "966 St. Marks [Avenue, Brooklyn, New York], if you ever want to see me." That's it. And he came by, so that was it. Speaker 1: And what was he doing at that time? Speaker 2: He had just finished college, and he couldn't get a job which was happening to most of these young people, and so he was working at Grand Central Station [Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York] as a red cap or whatever they called them. I think they changed the name after a while. He was waiting around to take tests for something, you know, you need to--but he was really a nice guy. Speaker 1: So you were married in 1943, your courtship then was short (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Short, very short and everybody was saying, "Oh, oh, oh, you're so young, don't do this, you're making a big mistake." Even though my mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] adored Rufus and my father [Claude Groves] did too. He met everybody and I met his people. He had a wonderful mother and a very bright sister but none of them--nobody felt it was right. But we did, so we went on and got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 315611 Speaker 1: Your career continued--your working career continued in your early years of marriage. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you move next to in your career? Speaker 2: Well I--first I went down to Georgia to see him [Shorter's husband, Rufus Shorter], stay with him for a while because he was stationed there at Camp Stewart [Fort Stewart, Georgia] and then I--Kanak Company [Kanak Company, Inc.] gave me a big shower, you know, and I left that. Then I went to a contracting company to do their work in Harlem [New York, New York], New Jersey contracting company, see it's coming back to me. I did that, but I wanted a better job. It was okay, but I really wanted--so I don't know, I worked somewhere, I can't remember--I probably did some bookkeeping someplace. Then he came home and so I didn't work for a while. Speaker 1: He came out of the [U.S. military] service? Speaker 2: Yeah, the service, yeah. And so I had a baby so now I couldn't work. At first he didn't want me to work and in fact that's another story because by the time--I don't know how old Lynn [Lynn Shorter] was, which maybe she was four--I had gotten back involved with the community again and he couldn't get me on the phone and he said, "You might as well get a job because I can't reach you." But I said, "You're the one who said I should stay home and take care of the baby." Speaker 1: This is Lynn, this is your daughter Lynn now? Speaker 2: Yeah right. So anyhow my mother [Susan Hendrickson Groves] came in and that was one of her periods of time when she was not gypsying it with the Rockefellers or the Vanderbilts or whoever the hell she was working with. So she came in and took care of the kids--that child, and I went to work. Now where did I--I went to Queens College [Queens, New York] then, that's right and I also had to go to Pace [Pace University, New York, New York] 'cause I had to certify my accounting credits. I didn't even care whether I got a degree or not and I didn't, but I did have to go there. So she was there and I was doing that and I had some other kind of job. I was working with a newspaper, I had little jobs, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have-- Story_ID: 315612 Speaker 1: Now your husband Rufus [Rufus Shorter] at the time coming out of the [U.S. military] service, what was he doing occupationally at this point, as you had your first child [Lynn Shorter] in the late '40s [1940s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was--he finally passed the teacher's test, I say finally because they took some time with it. So he was teaching, he was selling encyclopedias, he was teaching English to the foreign born, so he was a pretty busy little person. We were always busy, never seemed to me we were not busy and he was on his way--he had now decided that--he had wanted to be a baseball player 'cause he thought he could play baseball and he wanted to be a outfielder or whatever you call those people out there, centerfield or somewhere. But that was not for him and so he was beginning to enjoy teaching and he developed some systems that were very good that they use today, as a teacher. He was a special needs teacher when he started because that's where they put everybody; you know, I'm not going to repeat that a thousand times, but--. Speaker 1: But he eventually moved up and up and up in the New York public school system and obtained a very top position which was what? Speaker 2: Well he became a--first of all he was a coordinator which meant he worked with different schools, he did that. Then he started taking the tests, assistant principal, principal, so forth. Then he was so good at what he was doing, that he was recognized; I mean he was really like discovered and I can say that Fred Williams was part of that discovery group who saw this man who had talent, he really had talent. And so they called him in to work in human relations and I can remember the big argument at that time was you can't have two blacks heading a department and so they were arguing-- everybody was arguing this. Some people were at my house doing it and I jumped in the middle and said, "Well what about Anker and Hoosey and Johnny and Joe, they're all white, nobody's complaining. What is it?" And so I think I then convinced Fred that he didn't have to worry about it, he kept saying you know something about it. He wanted--he was begging to have Rufus and so then Rufus ended up as being, it's like a quasi-superintendent. It's called director of pupil personnel or something or whatever, pupil something, research and something, I don't remember. Story_ID: 315613 Speaker 1: --In fact he [Shorter's husband, Rufus Shorter] was touted for chancellor way back then. There was this article in the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] where they have this picture and they're saying, "This should be our next chancellor." And Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] was trying to help him and the police commissioner. They were all trying to--they really almost formed a caucus or something to try to get him in but at that time they had never had an Italian and so they picked an Italian for the chancellor. But it didn't bother Rufus; he didn't have that kind of ambition. He liked to be in charge but you know, leave him alone, let him do his job. Speaker 2: Was he the, what do you call it, the community district superintendent in Brooklyn [New York], wasn't that his top position? Speaker 1: No he wasn't a community superintendent but he was--he did something that was called--he had a--at that time which was really big--a $3 million budget as a director of something of these bad schools, that's what it was, East New York [Brooklyn, New York], Rodie [ph.]--remember Rodie I don't know if you remember him, okay those schools. So he did have that. That was a very big position and I remember the budget so well because he asked me help him work out the budget because those budgets are ridiculous when they are big like that. So anyhow, he had all--when he left the board [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education] he was at his top other than chancellor, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 315614 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now as he [Shorter's husband, Rufus Shorter] moved up and up in the public schools [in New York, New York] creating greater responsibility and position and visibility, you then moved on to perhaps what was your major career position (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now I'm moving--yeah, I'm moving up through the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]. Speaker 1: When did you first go with the Internal Revenue Service? Speaker 2: I guess it was in fifty something--'56 [1956] or '53 [1953], I'm not sure. It was in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Well tell me about your work, what was your position at the Internal Revenue Service and you were there I think twelve years you told me? Speaker 2: Right first I was an auditor. That's a federal service entrance exam test which by the way is a very tough test. Anyhow I became--and then I don't know how long I worked as an auditor, maybe a couple of years. Then there was a scandal at the IRS. People were taking money--allegedly taking money and so now it's a chance--we always get in when there are problems unfortunately. So now they are going have--really go out and find you. So they had the tests for supervisor so I took it only as a lark because I worked in Queens [New York] where my family was, which was very simple and once you get into any supervisory ranks you've got to move wherever they send you. So I took the test and I passed it and so they offered me the job. Well I didn't know that they didn't have any black women supervisors in the Manhattan District at all and so two of us came in. Cazetta Green [ph.] and myself and we were the first two. They had people acting but no one who was permanent. So we were looked on as oddities for a while but we straightened them all out and got together and we're fine. So that was it. Then as I could see that--as a supervisor of tax auditors, I could see that we weren't doing right by some people. So we formed a lunch group to teach people how to pass the federal service entrance exam. So I was doing all that and of course the district director--well first of all the branch people were upset because he thought I was using government time but I never did. It was always lunch time. I knew better being--I was as good a bureaucrat as they were. So we didn't do that but when they found I'm doing this on my time and Cazetta helped too, we'd do this. So that's when they threw out the job for equal opportunity to see if I would apply and I told them they'd have to publish it and do--I really went down the line with it. I wasn't going to just take it so they did and I was hired. Speaker 1: As (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As equal opportunity officer, equal opportunity officer on the director's staff. Speaker 1: For the Manhattan office of the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For Manhattan District, right. Story_ID: 315615 Speaker 1: Tell me about that job what was that like; you're a pioneer and affirmative action was a very controversial issue and--? Speaker 2: Well we had a--first of all you have to develop an advisory group of other people who worked there, you know, from the clerks, the so called pros and I did that. I got my advisory group and they were permitted time off like one hour a month or a week, whenever it was necessary to meet. Then you had to train your affirmative action officers who took the complaints. Now I know nothing, right. As Felicia [ph.] says, "I knows nothing." And I'm going to train them. So I had to go real all this stuff. So we trained them and we do a good job, we really do and the director is very pleased because two things have happened. And he was a great man 'cause he was from West Virginia and he had been poor and he understood discrimination, he really did. So, you know, if there's a bottleneck, go to the top of the bottle. So top of the bottle was clear, free, so I could work and I was the only woman on his staff--the director's staff so to speak, and they didn't like it 'cause they were all branch chiefs. At first they were hostile toward me but I, of course, always ignore hostility, you know. What are you going to do, I can't beat them up. So I mean I would be pleasant and listen to them and they just (gesture) me and I would make them have an affirmative action meeting at least once every three months. I forced them into this (laughter). I forced them. And I can remember one Mr. Benito [ph.] or something like that, he was an Italian, who said when I was leaving, he said, "You know I don't know how you did it but you sure did turn my head." I said, "How?" He said, "You made me a liberal." And I said, "You'll never be a liberal, no matter what you try." 'Cause he would say all those worst things, chauvinist things as people say at our staff meeting with the director but he didn't, I guess, do it in public. But it worked. And so I was at the top of my game and Rufus [Rufus Shorter] was at the top of his game at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Any real tough assignments and situations that you remember when you were the supervisor, I'm sorry equal opportunity officer [in the Manhattan District IRS (Internal Revenue Service)]. Any real crisis times? Speaker 2: Oh yeah people wanting to jump out windows, yeah. Yes I do and I particularly remember two cases and I'll try to be brief. This one case was really not a racial situation and that's another problem when you're in this field. A lot of people will have management problems come to you, you know, and this man had come to me and I knew that he was suffering from either acute neurosis or some basic head problem. So I reported him and they didn't do anything about him and so he's on the window sill ready to jump and they go to get me 'cause he's saying he'll only talk to me. And you know that was--they're sending for the police and the security people and the security people are all telling me I can't go near him. Story_ID: 315847 Speaker 1: You were talking about some real crisis situations that you've faced as the director of equal employment opportunity [sic. equal employment opportunity officer] at the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]. Would you continue with that story of the man (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the ledge? Speaker 1: On the ledge. Speaker 2: Well actually I don't even think-he was like on--I see it as on the ledge, I had to report it, I'm not sure. But I know that he was threatening and scaring everybody, and the security people didn't want me to go near him. But I knew that if we're going to keep him from breaking through the window, that we'd have to talk with him and so they let me go some distance not close. So I talked with him, I talked about flowers, nothing about why he was there. I talked about any subject that came in my mind and I could see he was relaxing and then I said something about his job. I said, "I know that you've had some problems and I think I have your supervisor out there, let's go have a conference." And he came down just like that. It was certainly no magic or nothing that I said really, it was just he needed that attention and he got it 'cause everybody was crowded around that space. That was one. The other one was a racial situation where they were going to fire the mailman--young man. You know how mail is delivered in an office (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Delivered the mail. Speaker 2: I didn't know why and he came to me and he didn't know why. I mean he didn't seem like he was on narcotics or messed up or anything. Anyhow we couldn't get an answer and so it finally came to the fact that--came down to some kind of facts that his supervisor didn't like him, just didn't like him. So it was really--. So my mail person went ballistic. That was very scary because now there's two men and me (laughter). So they're in each other's faces and blah, blah, blah, blah. And I really learned something from that. That you first talk to everybody separately. See I didn't talk to the supervisor separately, I just talked to him, and we went to the supervisor. And so it was a telephone book, one of those big telephone books there so I just threw it at him and they looked so stunned (laughter). I didn't laugh at that time and I said cut this out, I'm not quoting what I said, stop it now and I'm calling the security people if you don't. So they don't want the security people. So they sat quietly, we talked about it and it was because this guy had his nails too long, his hair the wrong way, it was all appearance which he was unwilling to modify, but he would--the nails. He wasn't going to nothing with that hair. Yeah so, that was that. But that was a scary incident and I was glad there was a big telephone book there 'cause I don't know what I would have done. I didn't want to be one of those screaming females running through the building hollering, "Help!" I hate to see myself in that role. But I only knew that I did a reflex thing and it was fine and they both seemed to get along fine after that. And they always nice to me. Story_ID: 315848 Speaker 1: During your years at the Internal Revenue Service [IRS], did you continue in any community activist activities because you had been involved in one in Brooklyn [New York], you had started something [citywide youth committee] there. Did you continue in community activism or did you--you had a family, did you have time to do those things? Speaker 2: Oh sure I've never have given-well, first of all while the kids [Lynn Shorter and Beth Shorter-Bagot] were in school I was PTA [Parent Teacher Association] person and later president and after that now that they are either high school or what have you, I was a member of the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History], I know the name is African American now. And we used to meet in the big Queens [New York] library and we would have people like Julian Mayfield, I'm not sure whether it was Langston Hughes, I don't know but I know he came to the school that I worked--where I was the PTA president, I'm not sure he came there--but these people were so willing to come and talk to us. And basically we studied books--oh Franklin--not Franklin, Lincoln, his name was Lincoln. He had written a book. And the other guy who came was the fella, other person, was the Westchester [Westchester County, New York] situation that they had about bussing or something and he had a name that was sort of Cuban sounding. Well anyhow our president seemed to know all these people and people loved to go to these meetings because you were always meeting somebody of real importance who is out there in the forefront in the fight. So I was working with that, I was always a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], no matter where I went. I was there and what else did I do; 'cause I didn't join the social clubs, I really didn't. It was enough with what I had to do there. Story_ID: 315849 Speaker 1: You always liked to write, and you've been a writer. Did you do any writing during this time that you worked for the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]? Speaker 2: Oh well, yes, I should have brought--looked for that. I helped them put out their bulletin (laughter)--our bulletin for the IRS which was basically news about affirmative action and some news about a various supervisor each month. I did all--my staff was me and my secretary for this. So I did that right there at the IRS and I have some copies somewhere, I can probably find them if I really start throwing things out. I also did some guest columns for the Amsterdam [New York Amsterdam News], I reviewed one of Killens' [John Oliver Killens] books, I think it was 'Youngblood' for the Amsterdam. I did a few things but nothing serious, nothing big. Speaker 1: You wrote for a travel magazine did you also? Speaker 2: Right the Black Odyssey yeah, I was features editor there. I did one on tax--a big article on income tax which of course probably is not relevant today because laws change, but fairs and food. I don't remember what else I wrote for them but I did. And these were two people that I had written for in Queens [New York] years ago when the kids [Lynn Shorter and Beth Shorter-Bagot] were smaller 'cause they had a newspaper called Community Chatter so I wrote for them, it was a weekly and it was a pretty nice little newspaper, chatty that's why they called it Chatter but it wasn't gossipy, it wasn't out to hurt anybody. Story_ID: 315850 Speaker 1: You mentioned that your first child, Lynn [Lynn Shorter] was born I think in the late '40s [1940s]. You had a second child (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Beth [Beth Shorter-Bagot]. Speaker 1: And when was she born? Speaker 2: Three years after, Lynn. I'm sure I have the date somewhere. I know it's -- Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty [1950] was the date I think you were telling me. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I said something--June. Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me about Beth, and where she is and what is she doing today? Speaker 2: Well Beth of course was a very loving, lovely child, and a lovely woman, a gracious woman. She always wanted to dance and so we had put her in dance class with--I'm not going to name these people 'cause they became pretty well known and they had the old fashion method of teaching and that's hollering at the kids. And Beth is like I am, don't holler, talk to me. So then we found another woman who was really good and I wish I could remember her name it just goes to show you all the people that help people along the way are usually forgotten. The ones that hurt you are remembered. So anyhow she started dancing and she wanted to go to the high school for performing arts which she did. She was successful in that and in fact she was featured on their covers for their magazines and so forth and of course she had a very busy program because she had to keep up an academic schedule as well as a very big dance schedule. So when she finished she apprenticed to Harkness Ballet for a year. Now we wanted her to go to college and so she wasn't going to go to college because all her friends in the high school of performing arts had gotten scholarships--full time scholarships and she didn't have one and one was a judge's daughter and this and that. Her father [Rufus Shorter] is a teacher and her mother's a bureaucrat why can't she get a scholarship. So at Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] they offered her a partial, she was interested in the money. So finally a friend, Theresa Merrick [ph.] I think her name is had some connection with not Bard [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York], what's this one up here--Tufts [Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts], yeah Tufts, I think it was Tufts-some connection, and so she talked to them if they would give her a scholarship. So she got a scholarship for one year. After that, I think there was a deal worked out so we could get her in there. She went there for two years and then she transferred to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], the girls' part, Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York] and she graduated from there. Then she went into Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] as a teacher of the second group or something. They saw her and they asked her to come to the first company and so she went into the top company and she worked there for a number of years and then she went on Broadway with Bob Fosse in all those numbers (singing). She was written up in The Times [The New York Times] and in The New Yorker. She had some talent but she really was not pushy, you've got to be a little aggressive in these performing arts areas, in almost any area but in this one you definitely do. Also she was not tall but she had great legs, long legs but not long enough I don't think for the dance people. They like short torso, long legs you know the [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison type. That didn't bother her because she was still getting good plays with it and all she ever wanted to do was to go to France and live in France for a while. So she saved her money and she was making good money when she was on Broadway, she saved her money, she went to France and she hasn't been back since. She was in plays over there. She was in a play about Billie Holiday; in fact she met her husband in a play. It was a play about Julius Caesar but it was a play within a play and that's where she met Jean-Pierre who by the way is a classical actor, he really is, he acts all year. So that was that, so she's fine. Story_ID: 315851 Speaker 1: And your daughter Lynn [Lynn Shorter] whom you are expecting to arrive here any moment hopefully. What is Lynn doing today, where is she and what's she about? Speaker 2: Well Lynn of course had some of the smoky, day dreamy things that I had about writing and so she did write. She wrote poetry though and some of it was rather esoteric and some of it was good except one I really loved which is the anthology that I showed you which is Valdomo [ph.]. So she wrote and she also wanted to be poor. She was a product of the '60s [1960s] the let's be part of the poor folk stuff. So she took a little time getting herself together but she did and she's now a clinical social worker. She was living in New Mexico. She is allegedly on her way to Cambridge, England with a job there and she's basically on her way to New York to see her godmother and come over here but if she gets here it will be a miracle. But she's fine, she has a very--she's developed this--like my sister [Marie Groves] this real sense of worthiness and helpfulness to people. She really has the right, I think the right--probably having gone through what she went through to get--she's there, you know. I really have a great deal of respect for her intellectual capacity--by the way she is very bright-intellectual capacity and also for her humanity; she has a lot of humanity. Speaker 1: Like her mother. Like her mother (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yes, right. Story_ID: 315852 Speaker 1: You have been on the island of Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], if my arithmetic is correct, for twenty-nine years. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And you have become, if I can say this, an institution. An institution on this island and in this community. Tell me how you came to Martha's Vineyard; why did you come here and when? Speaker 2: Well actually I was following--I was trailing my husband [Rufus Shorter], that's how I got here. He came down as superintendent; I didn't come right away because I had to firm up my job. Speaker 1: Superintendent of what? Speaker 2: Of schools. Speaker 1: Superintendent of schools (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Superintendent of schools of Martha's Vineyard, yes. And I came to be his comfort and joy so to speak. In fact I was offered the same job in Boston [Massachusetts] but after I found out about the ferry and the commutation, I figured I don't need that. Speaker 1: You mean the same job you had with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]? Speaker 2: Yes they wanted to transfer me. The Boston people--we work in conferences so they get to know you, so they were quite willing to have me and I was flattered to be asked to do it to tell you the truth but it looked like it would be too hard. Six o'clock in the morning getting over there and getting back and anyhow I also thought that my husband being a handsome black man that I have some of the old maybe it's old wives' tales or what but some of it is true, that the women start sort of running after you and if you're caught even smiling, you may get in trouble. Now I know this seems very--today who would think like that, but remember Emmett Till. So anyhow I felt he would be safer with me because he used to call me his butler and his shield and I was. So I said I better go and be your butler and shield kid 'cause, and of course I had to do something too. I had to explain to some ladies who wanted him to come for lunch at their houses that he would go to a public place with them. But this is a small town, your car is parked in front of somebody house, you better be the plumber, the electrician or the landscaper, you can't be a male visitor if you are a married or a public figure, if it's too many times. So anyhow we worked it out; so I stayed here. Speaker 1: You arrived here to live on Martha's Vineyard, your husband was the top school official on the island. What was it like for you when you first got here, how do you remember the island when you first arrived? Speaker 2: Well I wasn't exactly real thrilled to tell you the truth. I liked the Vineyard as a vacation spot. Speaker 1: Had you come here before? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh I'd been here any number of times. Speaker 1: Okay so you knew the place. Speaker 2: And we even had a house before this house. We had bought a house over in Sea Glen. Speaker 1: Before he became superintendent? Speaker 2: Yes so we had a house there. So I did know the island but I wasn't sure about--remember I'm leaving a very busy situation where I'm important you know, and now I'm coming here and I'm a housewife, I'm not sure that I like this. But I do love him, so I want some happiness here for him too. So I said, "Now what can I do." I don't want to join any of those committees that he--or boards that he is on because I don't believe in the husband and wife team on those things 'cause it's one vote. So I said I'll just be a housewife. So for about the first six months well I entertained all the people that he wanted me to because he was new and he was the first black and therefore they were curious. So I had a busy time just having the cocktails and the hors d'oeuvres and having the teachers come over and the principals and the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] people come over so that was fine. Story_ID: 315853 Speaker 1: So then, and then I saw the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] so I said, "Ah, ah, I'm going back to (unclear)--I'm starting back again." So I joined them and I had a nice interesting time with them and I just stayed quiet for the next few years. I worked with the NAACP, I didn't go on any--oh yeah I worked on one situation and that was because it was the actors people, the acting people. They came to me, they really did; and I don't know how they knew that I knew something about finance because they came and asked me would I be on their finance committee, and I didn't want to be on any board so I said yes. So I was on a committee and not a board but after I worked with them maybe through that year they said I had to come on the board. So that was the only two things I worked on and I was perfectly content and I was playing tennis, and taking walks, and enjoying myself. And he was (makes sounds). Speaker 2: Well you have been a very important in the NAACP. Would you say a little bit more about your activities with this chapter over the years, were you president of the branch at any time, or? Speaker 1: No, no I never really want to be pres- I don't like president--being a president. I think I could have, I really do, because those jobs go wanting, I mean people don't want those jobs (laughter). So it's no big deal, but I didn't want to be president. What I always was interested in was and is affirmative action. So I always worked from the background with that. It was not a designated committee way back there then, but we did things like talking to the merchants about hiring African Americans in their stores and they--we did it quietly, and they did. They cooperated, so those are the things I like that aspect of it. I don't care for the--all the bureaucracy stuff of it, you know, forty-five copies of this and that, but if you have a job, I will do it. Story_ID: 315854 Speaker 1: And I also chaired certain fundraising functions, too. Speaker 2: Which ones? Speaker 1: The one with Tony--Tammy--what's her name--Tanya Hart, I chaired that one. That big musical thing, you know she sang and I chaired that only because I like her and she was so nice with celebrity tennis to play with us--to come play. So when they thought of her I said okay I'd volunteer, I'll chair it and I worked on other things. Speaker 2: Tell me about celebrity tennis what was your--did you play a major role in that? Speaker 1: Well I think I did. Speaker 2: It was your idea wasn't it or was it? Speaker 1: Well actually it was a sort of a joint idea. Judy Baylow [ph.], not Lynn [ph.], she came in later; oh a well to do woman here, Hackney [ph.] one of the Hackneys. They were all saying they'd like to do something for Nathan Mayhew [Nathan Mayhew Seminars, Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts] and somebody there, I'm not sure if it was I who said it, somebody said well let's give a tennis match for us or do something and so out of it was born and we had a fairly good committee then. Our first one, the Ecksteins [ph.] he's dead now and they have an estate next to where the senator or congressman Lauterman [ph.] or something down here on Main Street going to West Chop [Tisbury, Massachusetts] they have a going to the water a big lawn over here and a big lawn here. So our first party was held there and her husband who was real go-getter wouldn't let us charge anything, he made them give donations and so that time we made $20,000 at a cocktail party can you imagine without that kind of help from him. That was after the tennis match. Then they put Lynn Pureot [ph.] who was the tennis pro in charge of the tennis and her husband was very helpful too to arrange--you know you have to arrange all these round robin things. But my work was to get the troops, the rank and file (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was for raising money for--? Speaker 1: Nathan Mayhew Seminars. Speaker 2: Tell us what the seminars (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nathan Mayhew Seminars are an education institution that was founded by Tom Goethals [Thomas Goethals] and Jim Norton and Woody Sayre [Woodrow Sayre]. They started out very small, they did great books and they then affiliated with some colleges for some college courses but their biggest plum came from Rufus [Rufus Shorter], my husband 'cause he had sixteen teachers through either Lesley [Lesley University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I think it was Lesley College get their master's [degree] through Nathan Mayhew and that really put them on the map, he did a great job there. So it's an education and it has some community type education and it has college courses and the last course they just had was LPN what do you call them the nurses--what does the L mean? Speaker 2: Licensed. Speaker 1: Oh licensed practical nurse, okay I wasn't sure. But anyhow they just had a course on that and it's growing back. It went through some very hard times. Speaker 2: The seminars. Speaker 1: Yeah seminars-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 315855 Speaker 1: I'm aware of the rollercoaster (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. Right. Speaker 1: --experience of the seminars and struggling to continue to provide these courses and seminars and workshop but you were very instrumental in keeping that thing from sinking. Tell me how you--you were really involved so tell us more about your direct involvement in salvaging the seminars. Speaker 2: Well I had resigned as a board member when things got out of hand and in fact I thought I was kind of old for this stuff but then they came to me again, I sound like I'm the--like the Greeks you know the Adelphi people. But anyhow somebody came to me and said would I chair a nominated committee because they needed to get back into sync. Now I'm not a board member at all. So anyhow I said yes, I could be a member of the corporation so I did and that's how I got back involved with them. But I said I will not be a board member, I will be a member of the advisory committee and that's what I am. And I've tried but we had other wonderful people who have moved or gone or died who really helped with Nathan Mayhew [Nathan Mayhew Seminars, Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts]. But I do believe that the institution is on its way upward now but it will take some more work and hard work and we need some board members. We have a few but they're not necessarily--well it's not enough anyhow to begin with. We need some--I've got to be careful of what I'm saying because I'm sounding like I'm criticizing them and I don't mean it that way 'cause sometimes you really can't say what you really mean. The truth gets mixed up with everything (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well every organization needs new people coming in. Speaker 2: Right, yes, that's what it does, okay. So if you know anybody who would like to be a board member, I would love you to tell me, so we could approach. Because I'm going to messing around with the nominating committee again in five years or six years which I didn't intend to be but there we go. Story_ID: 315856 Speaker 1: What are some of the other Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] wide organizations that you have been closely identified with and have participated in? There's more than just the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], it's more than Nathan Mayhew [Nathan Mayhew Seminars, Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts]; what are some of the others? Speaker 2: Well I don't know if I would say I'm closely identified, but I was on the board of the hospital. I was on the hospital board way back there when they were in trouble, community services; I was on that board. I was president of the Lagoon Pond Association here before it enjoined with the Oak Bluffs Lagoon [ph.] so it's now joint but I was their president and I had to write their newsletter too and work with them. Speaker 1: What is the Lagoon Pond Association, who belongs to that? Speaker 2: People whose property either borders or is in the environs of the pond out there all the way around Hines Point so it covers a pretty good--a large area and in fact it's open to anybody who wants to join; really have to live next door. Their purpose was to maintain the quality of the water and they have tried very hard to do that. Now I no longer go to their meetings because once they join Oak Bluffs they had enough people to work they didn't need me. I sort of work from where I'm needed and maybe that makes my ego feel better, I don't know 'cause if we ever get before a psychiatrist it's going to be a whole lot of things that we're not going to be sure of (laughter). Anyhow I don't really like to use my time when you've got a whole bunch of chiefs there who can take care of things and so they're doing fine. They have of course had some court cases because people want to build docks and piers and all that stuff and others have built them and others say if he has it why can't I; it's a common feeling. But it's a good organization and I would advise anybody who has the time and wants to protect the water to join it. So I think--that's enough isn't that enough organizations. The plate packing people, I've forgotten what their names were--what the name of that thing is but that's back in the past though. But right now I'm really only working with two groups and that is the NAACP. Story_ID: 315626 Speaker 1: Your husband, Rufus [Rufus Shorter] was a very accomplished educator and leader of the schools on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] for some roughly four years and he passed, and you faced some real challenges with his death. Would you share how you met those challenges because I think you probably had to make a decision about whether you would stay here on this island and you did. So would you talk about the challenges and the decision? Speaker 2: Well yes actually I really was at a loss to tell you the truth, because remember I had given up my job, I moved down here, I had to make new friends and all that and now he's gone. So your first feeling is really anger, you're angry why did this happen, why me, why him, and in fact Walter Green walked to the door and looking so masculine I wanted to push him outside, get out of here my husband is gone, you know, I mean some silly things. Also I was quite, I guess you might say quiet, I was very quiet. I know that as a child when I really would get very angry or something happened I got very quiet. I was born in the year of the dog so it maybe that I have to go someplace and curl up and so I really curled up and I wasn't doing anything. My children were both wonderful really wonderful. Lynn [Lynn Shorter] had stayed here for a while and Beth [Beth Shorter-Bagot] came down and they were here off and on. Lynn gave me sort of a philosophical feeling about life and Beth gave me a very practical feeling, get up, take a walk, do something, make your face up, you know, that kind of thing. So I can't say that I just came out of that with flying colors, I didn't. I was really at a loss but in a short period of time I was back on my feet and I decided that I would be active 'cause activity in the past had saved me from taking a gun and shooting people when I felt that discrimination was so horrible; so activity is good for me. So I became active with whoever and whatever came across my path for a while and some of it was the school system believe it or not because they would call me from Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts] or something that had a problem and I wasn't representing the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or anybody, I was just Vera [HistoryMaker Vera Thelma Shorter]. Vera, wife of the former superintendent but they would call me and I would go and I felt good if I could work something out, some things I couldn't work out but I felt good. So I went through that and then I always had good friends. I don't have a lot of them but I have a couple of good friends who sort of--and then I went on visits. I finally said I don't know if I'm going to stay here, sell this house or what. So I went to visit one friend in California and this is the first time I ever stayed in anyone's house for a month 'cause I don't usually like it but she was working which was good and I slept all day and out of it she found a husband. Because Ricky Bird [ph.] who was a photographer of our world was there and she called him and said, "Vera is here." So he came running over and we all chatted but I was in no mood for romance. But she said, "Listen if you don't like him,"--he was good looking too--she said, "If you don't like him, I do." And they ended up getting married which was a nice thing for both of them. But it also cheered me up because I--well he took us out and all that but I just had a quiet time. Then I said I don't know where I want to go so I went to France and stayed there. Where else did I go? I went to New York, I went places and I said I want to go home and when I said that I knew home was here. So I came back and I will probably never be my old self, but I didn't mean to get worked up, but I'm at least a shadow of it (laughter). Speaker 1: I think more than that. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know, you think that after all these years I wouldn't get a little teary eyed about it, but you never leave--it never leaves you. I mean that is, it's not painful anymore, it's just a feeling (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 315627 Speaker 1: There are at least two facilities, important educational facilities I believe here on the island [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] that bear your husband's [Rufus Shorter] name; could you tell us what they are? Speaker 2: Oh yes Nathan Mayhew [Nathan Mayhew Seminars, Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts] named their building--which of course has been sold now--the Shorter House [Rufus Shorter House], which was their classroom building where they had the classes. But the high school [Martha's Vineyard Regional High School, Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts] has a wing which is called the Rufus B. Shorter Wing and that's because he really worked very hard to develop their comprehensive education system there because it only had a few components. It wasn't really enough for the kids here, for the young people. I always said maybe that killed him because this is a place where you have to persuade everybody and every town is a fiefdom. The school board has to agree but the selectmen have to agree. So we were marching--I was with him with this, we were going to town to town with the model; we're selling this extension to the high school, to Aquinnah [Massachusetts], to everywhere. You can't believe the arguments and so forth that went on and disagreements over this and Rufus always stayed very cool. I was ready to go smack somebody but I didn't, I stayed in my place and finally they passed it. So I think in appreciation they said we better name this wing after this poor guy who spent all his--almost a year persuading them and they had the money. They had the money 'cause they had a bond for it already; but you know the island, we're independent. Story_ID: 315628 Speaker 1: All right we have some wrap up kinds of questions and the first one is--is there anything else that you'd like to add about anything that I've not yet asked you about, anything you'd like to add to this HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview? Speaker 2: I'm curious as to what you all do with this, what happens with this. With these interviews what do you do, do you put them in some kind of folder or--? Speaker 1: They're going to be in a digital archive. Speaker 2: Oh, I see. Speaker 1: They're going to be available to museums, colleges, universities, public schools, in fact the Chicago Public Schools [CPS] are already using the images and the text and the oral history in the educational programs for the young people. Chicago [Illinois] schools actually provided $250,000 to The HistoryMakers program. Speaker 2: Oh, that's wonderful. Speaker 1: So what we hope is that this will be the largest oral history--video oral history ever put together and we've done like 1,500--maybe close to 1,500 interviews, the goal is 5,000 of these. So we're going to be in business for a while, okay. Speaker 2: And you select your people on what basis? Speaker 1: Based on their life accomplishments, what they've contributed to their family, to their community, what they've done professionally and we're talking about people across the range from people like [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and people like that to people like you and other very ordinary people--nobody's ordinary everybody's got a story, everybody's got a history. Speaker 2: I'm happy to hear that because I'm always interested in the ordinary people. If I'm interested in anything at all, I'm interested in those who don't always have a free ride or a pathway lit up for them to follow. So I'm very interested in that. Speaker 1: I think it's important that particularly for our young people that they understand the history of America that they understand something about the fact that there were black families on Long Island [New York], okay. We all know about the Internal Revenue Service and you were a pioneer in the IRS in New York City. You came here and when we look at the African American ministers okay black ministers who become institutions and build great churches do not this without a wife. I've done black history, superintendents of schools, Rufus [Rufus Shorter] made a tremendous contribution in Brooklyn [New York] via public schools here on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] to very different kinds of places. You played an important role in his achievements as a national educator. So this is what we're trying to capture. It wasn't just Rufus, you were there with the model trying to sell this wing of the high school [Martha's Vineyard Regional High School, Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts]. So I hope that that's something (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No that's fine, that's a very nice--good explanation. Story_ID: 315629 Speaker 1: But I forgot to tell you when you said models that I also (laughter) was about to start a modeling agency when I was in Brooklyn [New York], a couple of us. And I know that Billy Eckstine was playing at one of the places in a bar in Brooklyn and I had about five girls. We had worked on a show. See the non-profits knew that I was interested in this show stuff; don't ask me what period of time this was. I'm sure I wasn't married, I don't think I was married, and so I'd done some shows and so these girls I used them in the shows. So the man who owned this nightclub and Billy Eckstine was going to perform said he needed some models and I don't know how they knew me but they got me. And so I did have these models strutting behind Billy Eckstine (laughter). But it was a very short-lived project because we had a singer too and when we went to Small's [Small's Paradise, New York, New York] and the manager made certain indiscreet requests, I said I've got to get out of this business but you've got to be tough for it and I wasn't tough enough. And they were young women; so that happened. Speaker 2: Any other memories that you want to share that we haven't talked about or things I didn't ask you about that you'd like to add to your interview? Speaker 1: You just made me think of it. Well I just guess it sounds kind of confusing to somebody, I mean somebody who likes to dance and write poetry and write articles and is civic minded, I mean it sounds like a jack of all trades and master of none and I probably am multifaceted but I do think that the one thing I did conquer was accounting. I think when I had a practice here [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], I really had customers. If I had wanted to go into the computer age, I probably would be functioning pretty heavily but I did not. I don't want to see any machines. Speaker 2: So you did continue your accounting work on the island? Speaker 1: Oh yeah I had a practice. Speaker 2: Well tell me about that. Speaker 1: I didn't know I didn't; in fact there is a newspaper article which I probably have the clipping somewhere or may not 'cause I didn't often keep my clippings, I kept his--Rufus' [Rufus Shorter] where they discussed three of us. I think it was Blake Lee [ph.], myself and Schlowsky [ph.], the three people who had a business going and they wanted to know how much we charged and all that stuff. So I did that for about three years but I did it by hand. See I worked best by hand. So I enjoyed that but you could see that the world was going really computerizing and I said let me get out before (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who were your clients? Speaker 1: Oh I had a lot of people from Chilmark [Massachusetts], people around here, neighbors and friends too, but my rich clients were upper island. I mean ones who were willing to pay $250 and at that time that was a lot of money and because I'm doing it by hand. If I'm going to do all of the stocks and bonds and all that stuff, I mean, its hours. And the other people I charge--. Speaker 2: Did you do a lot of income taxes? Speaker 1: That's what I did. Poor people, people who didn't have a lot of money fifty dollars, seventy-five dollars especially if it was a short return but then when I stopped that, I did it for AARP [American Association of Retired Persons; AARP, Inc.] for the senior citizens. I would go to Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts] to Edgartown [Massachusetts]. Jean Leonard [Wilma Jean Leonard] who's unfortunately dead now was a wonderful person and she and I would go and do it for the senior citizens. But I stopped that after a while because those senior citizens some of them had more money than God and more papers to fill out than God and they would not--and they should go to an accountant or at least a tax specialist so that's that. Now I think--what was the other thing you wanted me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well anything else you wanted to add. You've added some very interesting dimensions that we hadn't touched. Is there anything else you want to add? Speaker 1: Well I would like to say that this has been a very rewarding experience because I think you've covered a lot of my life that I haven't thought about and I find that as I said rewarding, to be redundant. Story_ID: 315630 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life? Speaker 2: Well sometimes I have some regrets and other times I feel so rewarded. So who knows I guess it depends on my arthritis how I'm going to feel that day. But most of the time I am a bit of a clown, most of the time I really feel I was very fortunate, I really was because there for the grace of God go I. I had a wonderful marriage [to Rufus Shorter], I have two lovely, crazy kids [Lynn Shorter and Beth Shorter-Bagot] but they are not kids anymore. But--sometimes I say, "Ooh"; in fact a friend of mine said, "Never say I should have." He said, "If you feel that way paste it up on the wall and throw at stone at it or a rock at it or a rotten egg at it." So I have very few I should haves, but I would admit the truth, every now and then I do. Story_ID: 315631 Speaker 1: By the way mentioning your children [Lynn Shorter and Beth Shorter-Bagot], we should not leave out your grandson. Speaker 2: Oh, Gabriel [Gabriel Bagot]. Speaker 1: Yes, tell us about him. Speaker 2: Well Gabriel will be fifteen June, oh my God, oh, June 21st and I didn't call him but I had said to him that his present would be here when he comes July so and so. Speaker 1: Will be here this summer? Speaker 2: Yes he's coming again this summer. Gabriel's--of course it's very hard to be objective when you are a grandmother. It's hard enough to be an objective when you're a parent. He's a very nice person. Speaker 1: Well I've met him so I know he's quite a guy. Speaker 2: He's nice and he's a soccer maven, and he's right now very disappointed because he's not sure that a sports center school like he's going to, I guess it might be called middle school--no middle school's what, eighth grade people, I don't know. But anyhow he has not been accepted even though in his tests for one he made two goals and in another test he made one goal and he kind of felt that takes him in but somehow it didn't and so we'll see where he goes. The whole point, he doesn't lose out anything because he can always play soccer because they have almost like leagues there, soccer is there baseball. But he's fine; he wants to work this summer. He worked last summer for Lynn Pureot [ph.] with tennis, he plays tennis. Speaker 1: Who is Lynn Pureot? Speaker 2: She is the tennis pro. She teaches at the high school [Martha's Vineyard Regional High School, Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts] in the summer and she was the tennis pro for celebrity tennis years ago and he worked for her but he wants to work--he wants to make money I think 'cause she gave him a stipend but I think--and he did get his work papers last year but I think they have to do something each year, I don't know about it. But he'll be here; he's easy to live with. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 315632 Speaker 1: For young people and I'm talking about young people in college, just out of college in their twenties who are interested in community activism, being involved in the community, what advice do you have for young people today with regards to getting involved in some dimension of their community as you have over your lifetime? Speaker 2: Oh what advice? Speaker 1: To young people, yeah. Speaker 2: I would say look for what they like because if you work in the area that you relate to you do a better job. I mean just don't do it to say I want to do some good somewhere. I mean that's okay but you have to maintain your own interests and your creativity is developed when you're working with something that you enjoy, that you feel good about. So I would say that. I mean it could be any number of different groups but it's better to do something than nothing, so okay. Shine your light, that little light. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you still want to do that you have not yet done? Speaker 2: I told you before; I want to be a ballet dancer (laughter). I don't think there is anything I really want to do, I really don't. I think I've tried--I've been such a dabbler that what else is there except to become a cook and I don't want to become a chef or cook (laughter). Story_ID: 315633 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Yes, I have some concerns, I definitely have. I think we have an attitude that is not constructive, many middle class blacks; it's not a constructive attitude. I think we're not taking into consideration that this whole revolution or whatever you want to call it did certain things. It did bolster the middle class, it put them up on a level but it forgot about all the cotton picking and tobacco people who are at the bottom level, who moved with the swing and became almost an--they are an underclass of people and we have sort of not looked out for them as much as we can. I mean a slogan won't do it and I feel very strongly like right here [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I feel our scholastic requirements are way too high, I really do. I think we should better go into need than into all this achievement. The reason we do that is because that's how hard it was for us and we think it's just like boot strap, get up. And I don't believe in that. I believe that if you give somebody a couple of inches they'll take a foot in the right direction but if you slam the door they'd never get through the door and I really feel that we have to work with youth much more than we're doing. Every group should work with youth and I'm very happy to see that (unclear) is and the NAACP is attempting it because I've been crying this oh for the last five or six years. Had I had the energy, I would have organized it myself, I really would have but I don't have the energy anymore, I really don't. It's a lot of work there but I do have a record and I can show it to you of every child--not a record a list of every child of color but the list is old but at least you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The list is what? Speaker 2: The list is old, it's about three years old but I do have such a thing in my file. So we can find out but of course it's probably many more other people particularly people of color (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'd like to look at that in the near future in planning for our second African American Historical Essay Contest, you know, for our young people. We have the first one this year but we've got to get ready for next year so we can talk about that later. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 315634 Speaker 1: Last question; how do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a person--let me think about this. You know these kinds of things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you--another way of putting it is what do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: Well I think I'd like people to say that I was a person who respected other people and demanded respect for myself; that's one part of it. The other part would be that I believe in the goodness of people. I believe that most people are, no matter how it shows up, but we have to do is help them. Help people to be more human, more humane, and more considerate of other people. I don't know if I want that on my epitaph or anything but I really do feel that people have innate goodness even with this war in Iraq [Iraq War], even with our president [President George Walker Bush] acting like there is no way he can change from the way he thinks. I still believe that there is some good. I still believe that Muslims and Christians and Buddhists can live together if they really learn how and we have to work at that and we don't. What we do is become iconoclastic or into ourselves and maybe we're going to look at religion a little differently. Every religion thinks that that is the chosen group and right away it's divisive. Well I don't know how to change that because that's too much. You've got the Catholics; you've got a whole big group. But as I said before, I do believe this, you have to fight for what you believe right where you are. And that's why I use--my favorite expression is, shine your little light in the corner there because I believe that people say you can't buck city hall. I know I've bucked city hall and other people have and we didn't get printed up in The New York Times but we won the battle and I think we can and we should. Just keep on fighting--keep on a-trucking, slow but sure. Story_ID: 315635 Speaker 1: This is my mother. Her name was Sue Groves [Susan Hendrickson Groves], she was eighty-six at this time and she was at my house. We were having a little gathering. Speaker 2: This picture is of my two daughters, Lynn Shorter and Beth Bagot [Beth Shorter-Bagot]. They were about six and four at the time and my mother-in-law took that picture. Speaker 1: This picture is of Gabriel, my grandson his name is Gabriel Bagot with his mother, my daughter Beth Bagot and they are out in my yard at this time. Speaker 2: This is Beth Shorter-Bagot when she was dancing with Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], one of the prime dancers there and she's gorgeous. Speaker 1: This picture is of [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison who was at that time the lead dancer of Alvin Ailey who became its artistic director and Beth Shorter my daughter who was one of the dancers there and another dancer. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me Vera Shorter [HistoryMaker Vera Thelma Shorter], one of our beach days on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: This is my husband Rufus B. Shorter and he's I think we were at a party or something, I'm not sure. Speaker 2: This is Rufus talking to some children when he was superintendent of schools of Martha's Vineyard schools here. Speaker 1: This is at our apartment in Brooklyn [New York] when we were all young, Vera Shorter, me first person, my sister Marie Dunham [Marie Groves], my mother Sue Groves, my [maternal] grandmother Minnie Hendrickson [Minnie Allen Hendrickson] and aren't we cute (laughter)...