 Story_ID: 21411 Speaker 1: Allright, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: Arnold Stancell, S-T-A-N-C-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Alright. Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: Yes, Francis. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, do you have any nicknames? Speaker 2: I started out with Sonny, and now it's Arnie (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, alright. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 16, 1936 in New York City, Harlem. Speaker 1: Alright. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Now I'm a consultant on the National Science Board of the United States. I was recently appointed by President [Barack] Obama. And then I'm on the Board of the National Academy of Engineering as well as on the National Research Council. Speaker 1: Alright. And you've had a career as a chemist, basically, and uh-- Speaker 2: Well, we say chemical engineer. Speaker 1: Chemical engineer. Speaker 2: You get into a fight over a chemist and a chemical engineer (laughter). So, as a chemical engineer, right on from my bachelor's degree to my doctorate degree. Speaker 1: And a career in management, too, I guess in terms of-- Speaker 2: Yes. Oftentimes when you start off with a technical degree, you might start in research, which I thoroughly enjoyed. And I did not ask to move over to the management side, but then over time I was moved to that side, and a primary way of doing that is through a planning job, and then you start growing more on the business side. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is May 14--let's see, today's date-- Speaker 1: Yeah I think it's the 14th. Speaker 2: Yes today is the 14th, right. May 14, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in New York City at the Skadden Arps Building. Story_ID: 21412 Speaker 1: Alright. Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as kind of a warm-up. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, and that is beef tenderloin. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Europe. Speaker 1: Alright. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Everything comes to he that waiteth, if he worketh while he waiteth." Story_ID: 21413 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Maria, M-A-R-I-A, Lucas, L-U-C-A-S. Speaker 1: Alright. And Lucas is her maiden name, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes, that's her maiden name. Now, Maria Stancell. Speaker 1: Alright. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It was January 3, 1918, in Emporia, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in Virginia? Speaker 2: I can't go back too far. I can go back to my grandmother on my mother's side. And they were, you know, remnants of slavery, that they ended up working on other folks' farms making ends meet. And of course there were incidents that happened at that time that my grandmother recalls. I think she said something sharply to a little white boy and then some man came to the house and beat her. I remember her telling me about that. Eventually she and her husband Walter, Walter Lucas, moved up to New York City and they settled in Harlem with the nber of people that moved up from the south that went into New York. Speaker 1: Do you know about when they moved to New York? Speaker 2: I'd say that was about--let's see--I would say that was in the early, I would say around '25' [1925], '26' [1926]--1925 or 1926, somewhere around that time. Speaker 1: So your mother was already born at the time? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. So, you take it then that things in Virginia weren't that good for them? Speaker 2: No, I think it's a typical story, unfortunately. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. , so what did your grandmother and grandfather do in New York? What kind of work did they do? Speaker 2: Whatever jobs they could find, menial work. My mother after a time ended up moving in with her aunt. I don't know much about the background of the aunt, but my grandmother couldn't handle taking care of all of the kids and so my mother went and lived with an aunt. Speaker 1: How many siblings did she have and that she had a responsibility for? Speaker 2: She had all five. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she was taking care of five brothers and sisters while her parents worked, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Annie Lucas. Speaker 1: And your grandfather? Speaker 2: Walter Lucas. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your mother, did she have a chance to finish school when she was living with her aunt? Speaker 2: No, she didn't. She went through eighth grade and then she started working menial jobs. Well, my mother was very bright in school. She wanted to continue in school, and she just couldn't do that, she had to work. Speaker 1: Now, did she have an aspiration that she shared with you that she wanted to-- Speaker 2: No, she never said anything about that. My grandmother said that to me. She would say Maria, my mother, was really smart in school. She didn't elaborate more than that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was your mother a reader when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, but not avidly. But anything that she did, it was always at the highest level of getting it done and getting it done right. She always had a--and nothing was beyond trying, or trying to do. She always had the quality of whatever she tried to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did she grow up--I mean when they moved to New York, did they live in Harlem? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: And my mother was living with an aunt in Harlem. Speaker 1: Alright. Now, did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared with you, about what life was like in those early days? Speaker 2: No, she didn't. She did not even mention how she met my father. She didn't mention that. Story_ID: 21414 Speaker 1: Alright, well let me ask about your father. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: It's Francis Stancell, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, S-T-A-N-C-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Alright. And what was his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is 1917. I don't have the exact date. Mom never said. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--but I have a good indication of what the year was. Speaker 1: Okay. About, I mean, where was he born, as far as you know? Speaker 2: In Harlem. Speaker 1: In Harlem, okay. Now, what do you know about your father's ancestors? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I really didn't, I barely, I do recall seeing my grandmother on my father's side maybe once or twice. Speaker 1: Is there a story about where they were from originally, or were they always in New York as far as-- Speaker 2: I have no background on that. I'd have to really go in and dig myself. No one ever communicated a storyline for how they ended up in Harlem. I don't know how my father met my mother. Speaker 1: Okay, because that's one of the questions we always ask, how that happened, but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you know what kind of work your father's people were involved in? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: But, do you know if he had a chance to finish school at all? Speaker 2: He did not finish school, but I don't--I think he had a chance, but he did not finish school. Speaker 1: You say he was, he became a drmer. Speaker 2: Right, he was interested in music. Speaker 1: Alright. So, what kind of music did he play? Speaker 2: Just regular, the music of the day, you know, popular music in a band. Speaker 1: That would be like big band music, or orchestras and all this jazz and swing or whatever? Speaker 2: Right, but yes, it would be, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, he was in a band playing the drs, and he, did he have a regular gig as a drmer or was he, I mean, was it something he-- Speaker 2: I had the sense from my mother [Maria Lucas] that it was not regular (laughter) okay, because they separated after being--they weren't married--living together very long. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 21415 Speaker 1: But, so, you don't know how they met, but they met, what, around the time that you were, by the year before you were born? Speaker 2: I would say a couple years. Speaker 1: A couple years? Speaker 2: Yes. So, I was born in '36' [1936]. Speaker 1: So they met and they got married. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But it didn't last. Speaker 2: It did not. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you see your father [Francis Stancell], growing up at all? Did he come around? Speaker 2: Not until--I remember when the war ended. Well, first, I knew that he was drafted and served in World War II [1939-1945]. And when the war ended I remember him coming to the nursery school. We had an after-school, because my mother worked, so I would be at this nursery school or after-school program until she finished working, and I'd go home. So I was really surprised. This man walks in and introduces himself as my father. And I was so proud, you know. I had no male figures around all that time, and I had a father, and we spent the afternoon, the rest of the afternoon together. He came by and said hello to my mom and I didn't see him again. Speaker 1: Never again? Speaker 2: Well, maybe once, but it wasn't anything that started and then had some legs to it. Speaker 1: So you were about ten? Speaker 2: At that time in the '40's [1940s]--well, '45' [1945]--ye I was about ten. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you remember that day, but do you know what happened to him? Was he still in Harlem? Speaker 2: I think he stayed in Harlem. That's from my mom, nothing much. I think he started drinking and then we lost all knowledge of him. What I understood was that he started to a lot of drinking. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, you just kind of lost track of him? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: And my mother didn't communicate on that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you grew up in a household consisting of you and your mother and--did you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I had a sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Is this an older sister or younger sister? Speaker 2: Two years older than me. Jean was her name. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so, so did you hear stories about your dad or anything, about what kind of person he was after he started drinking? Speaker 2: No, I had a little tiny photo of him and then I remember a photo my mom had when my dad was in the service, in the Army. He was playing in the Army band, and it was a shot of him and other people in the band, and he was seated there in front of his drs. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, now when you think about, I mean from what you know about your father and what you know about your mother, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think, I think my mother, I really do. I didn't know my father well enough to know his traits, and the traits I do know about weren't very complimentary. So... Speaker 1: Do you look more like your father than your mother, or your mother than your father? Speaker 2: I think it's a blend. It's hard for me to look at a photo and say that I look more like one or the other (laughter). When you see the photos you could probably tell. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 21416 Speaker 1: Okay, so do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Well, the earliest, it's a bright light shining on me as I would look up, and I do remember the bars on the crib, and I heard, I'd hear voices, you know, around me. So that's the earliest I remember. Speaker 1: That's good. Speaker 2: (laughter). Speaker 1: That's pretty good, that's pretty good. now, so you grew up in Harlem. Were you in the same neighborhood most of the time, or the same place? Speaker 2: Same neighborhood, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your family move a lot, or did you pretty much stay in the same-- Speaker 2: I pretty much stayed in the same place, 113 West 131st Street. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Well describe the place you grew up in. Speaker 2: It's a brownstone. You know I remember those lovely old brownstones were built I guess in the early 1900's and then as African-Americans--one group came through there and bought those and then they moved out and African-Americans moved in. So, we lived in one of the brownstones. We were in one room with a curtain that separated off the kitchen, which was just the rudiments, but the rest was just the bedroom and living room. Then there was a common bathroom for other folks who lived in that brownstone, who had similar types of apartments like we had. Speaker 1: Okay. So, these are, these are the days where a lot of people lived--like they had a room for a family. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Would you say that it was like a rooming house in that sense? Speaker 2: Yes, you rented the room, and again, you did have your little kitchen though in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so it was myself, my mother [Maria Lucas] and my sister. Story_ID: 21417 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Of--? Speaker 1: Of growing up. Sights and sounds and smells. Speaker 2: Well, as I think back over it, sounds-- certainly great music, popular music with nice rhythm to it, but that you could see how it didn't, it didn't radiate out from Harlem to the rest of New York. Smells--fried foods. neighborhood sights--what comes to mind is playing stickball in the streets using the cars that are parked. Home plate was the sewer, sewer opening, and then first base was a car down that way a little bit, and then of course, second base was the other sewer. They were separate. And then third, and so on. And then you had your outfielders. The streets weren't all that wide, so you got used to trying to hit the ball hard, it was a rubber ball, Spalding, we called it. And you'd hit the ball and you hoped to get it over the outfielder's head so you'd get a single or whatever. So it got to be pretty avid. We'd have different neighborhoods playing each other. Your block was your neighborhood, and our block would play some other block. Speaker 1: So, what, now stickball is played with a, was it a broomstick or something? Speaker 2: Oh, broomsticks, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just get your broomstick and get the Spalding, which was just the inside of a tennis ball, but they sold the rubber inside. It was a pink ball, and you bounced it, and then up it would go into flight, and the batter would try to hit it, so you bounced it once and tried to get it past the batter. It was a great game. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So it was a kid's version of baseball in some way. Speaker 2: Oh yes kids are, they're really creative. Or we'd play stoopball. Stoopball is where you take the Spalding and you would throw it against the steps of a brownstone. Brownstones had these steps, steps that would go on up to the first floor. So, you had a series of steps. So you'd take the pink ball and you throw it. You're trying to hit the edge of the step, so when the ball hits that edge, it would go up into the air, and you hope it goes over the head of somebody who's the outfielder. But that's only the width of the street and car, so it wasn't as long a distance as with stickball. But you could have a lot of fun playing stickball. Similar kind--it's just a play on baseball, but now instead of having a broomstick and the ball, you now got the stone steps that you threw the ball against, and hopefully it would go and not be caught once it bounced off of-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you could win the game by making sure nobody caught the ball? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, if you get a home run--if you can get it up and over and into the basement across the street without the other guy catching it, you had a home run, which was great. Speaker 1: Well, you know, it sounds like fun, but it sounds like it might be dangerous for kids to play in the street. Speaker 2: Well, that's right. You play in the street, but you get used to it. You get used to pausing to let the cars go by. You didn't have a lot of wild people driving through there at high speed, but sometimes you would. So, most of the time--not most of the time--you had time to get out of the way. And people, they knew the kids were playing, so they would not get annoyed that they'd be held up a little bit, but you did have the game interrupted a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, so what else did you like to do, kind of growing up? Speaker 2: I was crazy about getting a bicycle. So my mother surprised me one Christmas and I got a bicycle, and that was great. And I could now move around Harlem. I could go to parks that weren't all that close to the neighborhood. But then when you're riding on a bicycle, you're on the main avenues wherever you go, so you got a lot of traffic, but you get used to it. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how old were you when you got your bike? Speaker 2: Oh, that was about--oh my goodness, I was, I was twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got my first bike. Story_ID: 21418 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started at the local school, the neighborhood school, which was PS 68. I believe it was PS 31 or 68. You didn't have to walk far to get there, maybe about five or six blocks. Speaker 1: Okay. So, was any, so you're at 131st and-- Speaker 2: In between--those days it was Lenox and 7th. Now they've re-named it. I think one is Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard now. Speaker 1: 7th, and then, what is Lenox called now? Speaker 2: I think Lenox is now--gee, I'm not sure what Lenox is now. Speaker 1: Is it King or Douglas? I know I'm not familiar with New York because I always get-- Speaker 2: It could be Douglas, but I'm not sure of that. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, what was, so did you basically stay around the neighborhood when you were growing up? Did you have any stories about what Harlem life was like in those days? Speaker 2: Yes, I stayed around the neighborhood. And you--in terms of life, it was, you had your friends, you would play the games I mentioned to you after school, you would meet up with them. So I remember I'd do my homework and as soon I finished my homework, I'd go out to the corner and meet up with the guys and we'd talk. So, it was a good group of guys. In fact, no one even smoked. I never smoked, and the group, it was just guys. And then of course as we got older--then going to parties and dances, and then the hormones kick in and so you have girlfriends. I remember we formed a social club, and that was fun. Speaker 1: What was the name of your social club? Speaker 2: It was called the Masters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was the treasurer. We didn't have much money, but I collected the dues. We met once a week. We had--and we started giving parties. In those days we gave a party and you charged at the door, a small amount. And you had recordings, so that was the music for dancing. And you'd have the lights low. And those places were getting pretty crowded, I mean, a small space. So we tried to find a place we could rent, either a church or hall or something. Those were very pleasant days. Story_ID: 21419 Speaker 1: Now, did you like school when you started school? Speaker 2: Yes, but I just never even thought of it as in terms of liking or disliking it, but of course I certainly enjoyed going. And I got good grades, so my mom was proud, but it seemed easy, and I did enjoy learning. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So was school sort of easy for you? Speaker 2: , yes, I'd say, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think going then--I was at grade school, the PS I think was 68, when I was asked to meet up with a visitor. And the visitor must have been from the New York City Board of Education who would go around, and the teachers probably selected students to be interviewed, so there's no preparation or anything. I just got notice I should go to this room, to a particular room. And I did, and I met with the person, and this gentleman asked me a lot of questions just right off the top. And so I guess as a result of that, I was selected for an accelerated junior high school program. So after the sixth grade, instead of three years in for the junior high, well, I did that in two years. And then from that I--once I was in that program, which was still in Harlem, it was 164th Street. Speaker 1: What was the name of the--? Speaker 2: Stitt, S-T-I-T-T, Junior High School on the Westside around 164th Street. And they drew kids from that general--Harlem and maybe some other areas, into that junior school for an accelerated program. And I met some really nice people, and the fact is that I recently had the occasion to meet up with an old friend. I got an e-mail the other day, and he said he'd seen my name here and there, and he said he's getting to an age that he thought he should look up old friends. And so his name was Peter Sutfeld, and he was in the special junior high school class, and I got to know him pretty well. In fact, he invited me to his house, and he was a refugee from Germany, so his family had a tough time going through the Holocaust in Germany and then getting over and then settling in New York. But he was a bright kid and we kind of hit it off. I remember going to his house, and in those days we didn't have them, but he had in his home a television. It was like that, this little tiny screen, I still can remember. So, we, my wife and I, were going to be in British Columbia because we took a trip up to Alaska and we had come back through British Columbia, and Peter is a professor at the University of British Columbia. He's a psychologist. And so we met up with him about a year ago. So, this was after almost sixty years (laughter) to see Peter Sutfeld, so that was a lot of fun. But, so, you had some good folks and some good people, but that really got me particularly interested in science, going through this accelerated program. Speaker 1: Had you had any interest in science prior to the accelerated program? Speaker 2: No, but I just loved knowing how things work and what things were made of. Speaker 1: Were there any people around you that kind of sparked that interest prior to the accelerated program? Speaker 2: I quite frankly just didn't have anyone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do remember a talk given at our church in Harlem by a young man who was a student at that time, , at a program. I think it was Cornell [University], I'm not so sure, but he was in the science field. And I felt what he was doing was interesting, just things that he was describing sounded of interest to me, but nothing-- Story_ID: 21420 Speaker 1: Now, was church important when you were growing up? Speaker 2: It was, yeah, it was, because it tied religion--but also it had a social context, and singing in the choir. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what church did you attend? Speaker 2: It was Friendship Baptist Church right down the street. Speaker 1: Friendship Baptist Church. Was there a social activist kind of-- Speaker 2: Not heavy at Friendship, but they had an excellent minister. I can't remember his name--Reverend Kilgore. He was a visionary person. His messages had a message to it. And he wasn't a fire and brimstone type but I thought he made points about living, aspects of living that made a lot of sense to me. So I wasn't devout, but regularly would attend. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. There were so many religious leaders that were in Harlem in those days that gained national kind of prominence. Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. and... Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: ...Danny Graves, Father Divine and so on. Speaker 2: Yes. (laughter) Reverend Kilgore was as far away from Danny Graves and Father Divine as you can imagine. I did go to hear Adam Clayton Powell speak. Abyssinian Baptist Church was five blocks away, but I didn't attend. I stayed with our little Friendship Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were you associated--did you go to the 'Y' or were you in the Boy Scouts or any of that? Speaker 2: I was in the Boy Scouts. I got my first uniform, I was a Cub Scout, wow. My mom took me down to the Scouts store. The Cub Scouts had that beautiful blue and then the yellow trim, wow. So that was--you'd go to the Cub Scout meetings and so on. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Were they at the church or at school, or-- Speaker 2: They ended up being at another church. Our church, Friendship Baptist, didn't have a troop, but there was Salem Methodist Church across the street on 7th Avenue. It was a bigger church, and they had a troop, and so I'd go there for the scouting. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you continue on in the Boy Scouts after Cub Scouts, or did you just do-- Speaker 2: The Boy Scouts, I didn't stay with it, didn't continue, no particular reason, just other interests. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21421 Speaker 1: Alright. So you go to the accelerated Stitt Junior High School? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, is the work there--were you challenged by the work at Stitt? Speaker 2: I don't think so, but I enjoyed it. I still had my routine, meeting up with the guys. I'd do my homework fast and meet up with the guys and we'd talk or--talk and play stickball. So, but Stitt did give me a good preparation, because I took the exam for Stuyvesant High School, which was open to, the exam was open to all students in the New York City, so it's not just Manhattan. And it's a competitive exam, which I think was the way it should be. So, they don't know anything about background. You go and you take the exam, and then based on your grades on the exam--and they have only so many slots open for all of New York City. They will, you'll hopefully get a letter that you passed. So I got such a letter and so I was really happy, and I showed that with great relish to my mom [Maria Lucas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She knew I was taking the exam that day. Normally she doesn't know when I'm taking a serious exam. Speaker 1: So you really wanted to get into Stuyvesant then? Speaker 2: Or then there's Bronx Science and Brooklyn Tech. But I like Stuyvesant, but I didn't apply to Bronx Science. I applied to two, Brooklyn Tech and Stuyvesant. I passed both of those but I chose Stuyvesant. I liked it's location in Manhattan. They seemed to have a really strong program and a great reputation. So, that's why I chose Stuyvesant. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, at this point were you focused on science? Speaker 2: Interested, but not focused. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject, or were they all pretty much the same? Speaker 2: I loved everything. I really, I just loved learning, and really it was just a delight to learn. Speaker 1: Now, did you have any favorite teachers in grade school or middle school? Speaker 2: In grade school, there was Mrs. Cassius who was very encouraging and Miss Reynolds who was very encouraging, so, and I remember visiting and I remember Mrs. Cassius introducing me to her family. Because we had in elementary school, grade school, we had an athlete kind of day at the end of the term. We'd have races and games and so forth for our kids in the public school. Speaker 1: Like a field day? Speaker 2: A field day, that's what it was called. So she brought her family. Her husband and kids came to be part of this at the end of the school year celebration, field day, so I remember meeting them. She was very encouraging, so she had an influence. And then in junior high school, I think all of the faculty there were very helpful. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21422 Speaker 1: Alright. Now at Stuyvesant High School, is this where you start like focusing on chemistry? Speaker 2: Yes, because now you're taking more advanced work and accelerated work. So, and the curriculum was set with a science emphasis. But the curriculum included a lot of literature and social studies and English and on and on, and I loved them all. So then, within Stuyvesant, if you do well you can go to an accelerated program in Stuyvesant. So I went to advanced English, advanced mathematics. I took more mathematics at Stuyvesant than you can imagine. I took advanced chemistry. I remember those two programs, three programs, yeah. So, it was just, they kept challenging you and it was just so, so interesting, yeah. Speaker 1: Now were there many other black students at Stuyvesant when you were there? Speaker 2: No. I was--the classes are large. Entering class at Stuyvesant, 600 students, and there were two of us, you know, that I saw there. Speaker 1: Two out of 600? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That makes you like one-sixth of a percent of the incoming students. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, well, were you treated well at Stuyvesant? Did you have any problems? Speaker 2: I never had any. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think you have problems when you look for problems (laughter). That's been my philosophy. So, no, just happy to learn and it was just a great environment. Accomplishment is what counted and it was a great place to be challenged and to grow, and so many different subjects. That's where I really started loving literature, even though I took all the various science courses. And we had a professor who--no, that was later on in college, where we had to go see a Shakespeare play, but that was later. I ended up graduating--I had a 98 average at Stuyvesant. And so I graduated. I didn't think that much of it, but I graduated. I was 14 out of 600 students. Speaker 1: Okay. So , at that point in high school were you thinking about chemical engineering at this point? Speaker 2: I started thinking that I would like to be an engineer. I didn't have chemical in mind, but I didn't know enough to know the differences between the fields, but I felt--engineering--it was a time-Sputnik [1957] going up. The U.S. government was putting a big emphasis on going into engineering. But I wanted to have applied science, and I just loved how things work. I like understanding how things work and I like to make things that work and do. So when I was ready to apply to college, there was no guidance. A place like Stuyvesant did not have a guidance counselor that could steer you to or give you guidance. Since no one in my family went to college, I had no resources in terms of how to apply for a fellowship here or a scholarship there. I mean, you took the SAT exams and all of that, but the strategy in terms of going to college and what was available to you, no clue. Speaker 1: So, this sounds incredible, that Stuyvesant, here's an accelerated program... Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But there's no counseling for it. Speaker 2: There was no counseling, or if it was there, I wasn't aware of it. Maybe it was there and you just had to know and go ask for it. Story_ID: 21423 Speaker 1: So in your mind, did you want to go? Speaker 2: Oh, it was clear it was going to be the next step. It was just a question of where, and so I ended up applying to City College [of New York]. And I remember the exam that you took then for City College. They would take that average and they would also take your grades from that, and then take your average in high school, which was Stuyvesant, and add them together and then when would you sign in, when you go into City College for your first registration for classes, they would have some faculty people there helping with the registration and being there to answer questions. And so, the--I remember this faculty member saw my average at Stuyvesant and saw my grade on the entrance exam and kind of looked up (laughter). So, it was just wonderful that New York City had available a free quality education, just wonderful. And I could just walk right where we lived in Harlem, 113 West 131st Street, walk up through Mount Morris Park and there was City College up on the hill there. I made that trip so many times. Now, in those days you had to be pretty fast going through the park. The park had deteriorated over the years. The drug addicts got in there, crime was starting to build up. But to have a beacon of hope and opportunity such as City College up there on the hill was just terrific. I thoroughly enjoyed the school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in terms of--well, back in high school for a minute. Did you, how was your social life in high school? Was your social life basically in the neighborhood or was there anything in high school? Did you run for office or anything? Speaker 2: No, I joined the, I did join the Glee Club. And I joined in to help on a play that was put on. I drew the curtains (laughter). So I participated that way, but there was no social life there at Stuyvesant. It was all business. A number of my classmates, some had jobs, too. My mother worked and made it possible that I could get by with just doing a little part-time, but that was during the summer. But a number of, some of my classmates had jobs during the week at Stuyvesant. So there was no social life back there. Story_ID: 21424 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, City College in New York. So you astonish them with your grades and you get admitted (laughter). So what happens? Did you, I mean, we know you did well at City College, but who were some of the people there that were interesting or known at the City College? Speaker 2: I think all of the faculty--I mean it just, you know, I remember the first calculus, just wonderful to do calculus. And the math professor, he always seemed to defer to me, and was very encouraging. , if I'd ask a question, he'd say it was a good question, but "Mr. Stancell..." they called you Mister in those days. "Did Mr. Stancell ask that question? This is important." He'd say that to the rest of the class because I did well on his exams, and I thoroughly enjoyed the subject, I loved chemistry. I still had a social life, but it was the neighborhood social life. It was the neighborhood life during--at Stuyvesant. And the fellows, the guys, they knew I was going to Stuyvesant and they knew I was going to City College but they never made much of it, and I didn't make much of it. I was just one of the guys. They thought I was pretty bright, but they didn't say, "Oh, what subjects are you taking?" And I wouldn't try to wild them with a derivation of some mathematical rule. I stayed--we talked about things that interested them and which also would interest me, so it was an interesting life. And it wasn't phony. I was one of the guys, but I was also a student. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is 1953 when you started City College? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. So this is the Eisenhower administration, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The beginning of the Eisenhower days, and the Cold War is going on. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Sputnik has not been launched yet at this point. Speaker 2: Yeah, not at this point, yeah. Speaker 1: I'm just trying to set it up here. Um, Willie Mays is still in New York, isn't he? (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. I'm trying to think now. Sputnik--because I had that tied to high school. I'm trying to think. Speaker 1: I think it was '57' [1957]. Speaker 2: '57' [1957], yeah, okay. Speaker 1: That would be the satellite, the first satellite launched. So, there was a, I think an increasing interest in science in the country because of the competition of the Cold War with Russia. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, did you feel that when you were going to school? Did you feel that you were, that we were competing with, or you were competing with scientists in the Eastern Bloc or-- Speaker 2: No I didn't, but I felt, just the excitement of Sputnik and space exploration. But then all that you could do, and with the developments that were going on in science, that it was just an exciting field to be a part of, and that's why. And then also I was thinking about being a medical doctor, but I thought that that would take too long and that if I got an engineering degree first--I was interested in science, but I was interested in anything. And so, but if you got an engineering degree you had a quicker path to starting a professional career, so that was part of it too, and getting interested in it. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So you were majoring in engineering? Speaker 2: Yes, chemical engineering. Speaker 1: Chemical engineering, okay, alright. So, alright, so there weren't any particular professors that stood out or anything in terms of-- Speaker 2: Yes, there were. Science and math professors, all the chemistry professors. The English professor, he introduced us to Shakespeare and that was great. And by the way, that brings me back to preparation at Stuyvesant. We were into Greek literature there, and we had a guy in our class, Gazentumin, and Gazentumin was always the clown of the class. And so we were reading, you know, Euripides plays, and there were characters like Amenidades and we read the Odyssey and all of that. So a question came up later on in the course, so Gazentumin gets up. Now keep in mind Gazentumin would always sing the loudest at assembly. You could hear his voice, you know, when we sang the Star Spangled Banner. So Gazentumin gets up and he says, "Oh a thought just occurred to me. This Italian man went in to see a tailor, an Italian tailor, and he says to the Italian, the Italian tailor says to him, 'Euripides,' and the man says, 'Oh, you mend da dees.'" So Gazentumin thought that this was the greatest thing. But I tell you, all these years, I still remember Gazentumin getting up and giving us this version of Greek Euripides and Amendidades (laughter). So, the faculty did interest us that we could have fun like this. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was the status. And then it carried on to City College. And I had a particular professor in chemical engineering, Dr. List, who was most encouraging and was very, very helpful to me in chemical engineering. But he was helpful to others. He was just a good teacher trying to nurture talent as he would see it and to help bring kids along. Speaker 1: Now did you know of any other black scientists at this point? Speaker 2: No, I did not. Speaker 1: Okay. I know in those days--I guess the model of what a scientist should be was Einstein, I believe, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I remember going to the library in Harlem. It's called the Cullen Library, I think, now. Speaker 1: Cathy Cullen? Speaker 2: Yeah. They changed the name. And I was interested in Einstein's theory of relativity. So I went there and got a book and took it home and wanted to--I'd had enough math now that I could at least understand where he was heading, and I understood the logic of what he was trying to do. So that was just great, but you do that on your own, yeah. Story_ID: 21425 Speaker 1: I've always felt that probably, just as my mother [Maria Lucas], you work hard and--or you work and you try to do the very best you can. So it sounds, you know, that everyone says that, you say. But when you really believe that, and when you believe that and you're not carrying baggage--certainly there are incidents that happened that I can easily have some baggage, but I never felt burdened. Quite frankly, it sounds immodest, but I thought I was smarter than everybody else (laughter) and had the grades to prove it. I had the respect of all the classmates. Everyone wanted to work with me. It was a team project. and even though my whole experience was a black experience, I liked everybody. I mean, I wasn't intimidated, but I was friendly to everyone and they were friendly to me. But you can easily get sidetracked. So, at City College I tried to maximize meeting people of all kinds of backgrounds. We had a group at City College, I have to say they weren't engineering students, but they had a corner in the cafeteria, of African-American students who would meet and play bridge. And that's a great game. You can get sucked in on bridge. But they had their group and they didn't relate to others. Maybe they did in their classes, but I felt we were there to learn and also to learn about peoples, other styles, and so I never went to the corner group there to play bridge. Why should we segregate ourselves? That's the way I looked at it. But other people have different points of view on that, and other people feel they are uncomfortable. Well, if they're uncomfortable, they've got a lot of baggage, and we all have baggage coming up at that time, or could have baggage. Or, is it do you let it burden you or do you just keep charging on to be the best that you can be. Story_ID: 21426 Speaker 1: So what is going on in Harlem in '53' [1953] in those days in terms of the black community in Harlem? Speaker 2: Let's see. We've--in '53' [1953], rather quiet. It was ahead of drugs coming into Harlem. That came in the latter--I graduated in '57' [1957], '58' [1958], maybe '57' [1957] '58' [1958] kind of timeframe in Harlem. And so at least from the character, the neighborhood started to change--bars up on windows, more robberies and violence, young friends who would be doped out and stooped over in the street and could hardly stand up. So the scourge of drugs was starting to come in and was changing the nature of things. You didn't go to the park at night. I used to go the park at midnight, you know, on a hot summer night on a weekend. A lot of people in Harlem did. All of that changed. People stopped going to the parks at night. my trip up through Mount Morris Park to City College up on the hill, you had to be sure that you could outrun anybody (laughter). So, there was a lot of mugging and so on. So, it, the character changed just around the time, just at the time I graduated from City College. But between the time I entered and the time I graduated, it was pretty good. There was no particular movement that I recall. Black power movement came in later. There was a man on 125th Street who has the famous bookstore. I learned later was a famous bookstore. He had all kinds of slogans on it and was painted in African colors and people near that store would get on soapboxes and preach black power, black enrichment. I remember listening to some of that on my way to the theater on 125th Street. Speaker 1: The Apollo? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd go to the Apollo, yeah. You'd see some of the old-timers at the old Apollo Theatre. In those days, the Apollo, they were crazy. They would, you could go in there on admission--see they always had a little cheap movie for you to see, and then they had the main attraction, which was the act. You know, Nat King Cole, Sarah Vaughn, these are the greats. But when the show was over, they didn't clear out the theatre. You could sit there and go through it all over again on the same entrance fee. So, just as the line was around the corner, people were eager to get in. So, finally they cleared out the theatre in between acts. But really, you could really go there and stay all day. But it was an exciting time, '53' [1953], '57' [1957], before the drugs came in. Speaker 1: Did you like music earlier? Speaker 2: Oh I loved, yeah I liked it. I did my homework by rock and roll. I just loved doing my math homework with the rock and roll going. Speaker 1: Now, rock and roll, you mean, what artists are you talking about? Speaker 2: Like, oh, it would--it's ahead of Elvis, really, because he kind of popularized really music that we were already listening to in Harlem. But some of the old tunes, you probably don't even remember the Orioles. They started this with 'A Kiss and a Rose.' These were lovely, melodic love songs that you could dance slowly to. Oh, this was good stuff. So, it was a quiet time in terms of the mood in Harlem at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21427 Speaker 1: So, now, what were you learning at City College [of New York] that--because you become interested in plastics at some point. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you start learning about plastics at City College? Speaker 2: I'll just think a moment. Now, yes, City College was blessed to have outstanding faculty. That's why they graduated so many fine students. There had to be a good reason for it. And there was a member of the chemical engineering department, Professor Schmidt. He was a tough old guy, and he wrote a groundbreaking textbook on the fundamentals of plastic materials, and he taught the plastics course. We call them polymers, because you make the plastics by linking together small molecules to make bigger ones. So, in just cutting through it all, you make these little guys that just look like normal liquid gases, but if you get them to add one to the other, you can do that. Then you can make big molecules that then are solid and that will melt and you can calibrate properties according to what's the little guy that you start with. So, and he taught that course, and I was, it was wild. I loved the textbook, I loved the course. And so that really got me interested in that field, and, but all the other subjects, too. Chemical engineers work on processes, whether it's a pharmaceutical to make medications. It's a process that's involved, and each process involves a heat transfer, fluid flow. These are fundamentals of chemical engineering as applied to taking components and making a final product. And refining, you take crude oil and you have a process to separate out its components. That's called distillation, and it's a fine technique that the U.S. led on and it's called continuous distillation. Those little towers that you see in a refinery, there's a lot going on in there. And when you start seeing the principles that's involved in designing those, you could sit at your desk and start off with some raw materials and sketch out steps to make a product, but not on a small scale. You've got to make it where it's going to be commercial quantities. You know, now, we're talking now for plastics materials, you're talking hundreds of billions of pounds a year that are being produced, that didn't exist, was just even barely thought of when I was in school. But the principles of chemical engineering, and other engineering disciplines play a role, too, in terms of the ops and so forth in mechanical engineering, and, the electrical engineers in terms of the circuitry that's involved in running all that machinery. So, this was like great engineering. I mean, you could, commercially you could design a process, put the boxes together, and have separation steps and come out with a commercial product at the end. And then you can make an estimate of its cost. The chemical engineer is concerned about, yes, you can do all of that, well what's the cost to make the product? And are you going to make a profit? So you make an assessment. And then you look to try to get further improvements if you need to squeeze more costs out of it. You try to get the most efficient process you can come up with. So, I just had a great education there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was the, I guess the state of the use of plastics, I guess in '53' [1953]? I mean, half the country started using more and more polymers. Speaker 2: Yeah. It started with the, it was a terrible plastic, because when it overheats it gives out fumes, and that's bakelite, and that was done by an American company, American Chemists, that put that product together. That wasn't very versatile, so you did take little small molecules and have them added together to give you larger ones. But it wasn't as flexible as the properties you could get with others. So then-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what do they use it for, primarily? Speaker 2: it was used for telephones, where like the housing for a telephone. They were heavy, too, because, you know, that black plastic--it was used for housing for radios, and you could always get that smell when the radio would overheat, and that was the phenol, it was a phenol formaldehyde resin. Uh-- Speaker 1: Was that dangerous, I mean, I'm just asking? Speaker 2: Not dangerous. I think, now these days if you had those smells coming off, somebody would say oh, you shouldn't be using that material. But in those days, in terms of the impact of the phenol coming off--and so it certainly gave you a material that had some usefulness, but it certainly was the just the beginning of the story. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So when you were completing your four years at City College, were you thinking about, you know, focusing on polymers as a chemical engineer? Speaker 2: I was thinking about focusing on any process to make anything, because it was so, it was so exciting that you could do this. And we had now a lot of chemistry, a lot of chemistry that we understood, so that you could pick out components and make stuff. So, and I felt though, that of the various industries, the oil industry could be interesting. It was certainly a big driver in terms of our energy needs, and all the processing that goes on in the refineries, delightful for a chemical engineer. So I was leaning towards the oil industry. But the oil industry led on polymers, too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Plastic materials. Story_ID: 21428 Speaker 1: So when you graduated in 1958, you graduated magna cum laude in chemical engineering. And so, what did you, did you have any counseling at City College [of New York] (laughter) in terms of what you should do next? Speaker 2: I did have through Professor List, who was in the chemical engineering department-- Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: L-I-S-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we had recruiters who would show up at City College, and City College was known for its engineering programs, science and other things at that time. So companies would come to City College and interview students. And I was interested in any company that made things involving processing, the knowledge that we learned in chemical engineering. And when Exxon came around, I got interested in them. I interviewed with them. I interviewed with a lot of companies. I was made offers through all the companies I interviewed, and I accepted the one from Exxon. And they were right across the river from Harlem with the Bayway Refinery, Bayway, New Jersey near Linden, New Jersey, and it wasn't a bad commute. Speaker 1: Now this is, this is--? Speaker 2: '58' [1958], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is before you started at MIT, or just as you were starting? Speaker 2: Before, because I fully intended, you know, it was so exciting. You can imagine, first professional job. I had done, as other students, menial this and menial that, just to get a summer job. Exxon hired me the summer before I graduated. That was the main interview. And they knew I was going to graduate, but they brought me in for the summer. And wow, I had my slide rule and I went to work. I had these exciting processes to work on. And by the way, Exxon is the first company to manufacture polypropylene in this country, down in Texas. And I designed, just like my training, I designed a key component of that process, the steps needed, separations needed, in order to come out with an overall process to make polypropylene. So, that was great summer work and I continued that when I graduated, when they hired me permanently. So, I fully intended to be at Exxon, a good company. I was the only African-American-- Speaker 1: In the whole company? Speaker 2: In Esso, no. They're in the marketing and refining part, two big divisions--expiration and production marketing and refining, and then they had the research entity. In Esso Research and Engineering, I was the only African-American. They had a kind of reputation like a Bell Labs relative to processing, and it was exciting to work with such talented people. in the product area, I met a really nice fellow that we've been friends over the years, Henry Brown. He was there in the product area a couple of years before I joined the research. He's a very talented student, and he continued on having a career in industry. And then there was Jim Porter who has now passed away. And he was also in product research. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Esso Research and Engineering was that--people were extremely proud, it's a good company, and extremely proud to work on their research and engineering. It was when I was there that I needed to get data for the design of this process. And you can get data in the research laboratory. So, it's the engineer that designs the process, but you need information as to how this thing reacts, or its properties and so on. I won't bore you with all of that, but the point is when I would go over to see those guys, I need certain information so I can design this properly to handle this plastic material, and make it economically. They were great to work with, and they seemed to be having more fun than I was, because they were getting the basic data needed for my design. Where I did calculations for the design, they all had doctorate's degrees. So I said, gee, I should back to graduate school, I should go to graduate school. So I fully intended to go to graduate school, but I loved working. My first professional job, I had no intent I would leave, but when I went to enroll at night, I thought I could go at night at Columbia University which is right near Harlem, go at night at Columbia and get a master's degree and then continue working at Exxon. So I thought that would work out really well. (laughter). So when I went to Columbia, you go to enroll. So Professor Gaden, who was a chemical engineer, he was the enrollment officer for the evening. They rotated amongst professors. So I went up to see him. There was this line of people registering, or wanting to register for night school. So he looked at my grades at City College. He says, "Why are going at night?" I said "You know, I've got to work. This is my first professional job, working at Exxon and I'm excited about that." He says "You don't have to work." He says, "I will get you a Fellowship. We'll pay for everything for you to go to school at Columbia to get your advanced degree." And he said, "Don't forget about master's degree. you should get a doctorate's degree." And he said, "By the way, while you're at it, apply to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], too, with these grades." No one ever told me to apply to MIT. So I did what he said. I applied to Columbia. And he came through. There was a nice Fellowship. They paid living and everything. I wouldn't have to work, just go to school and get a doctorate's degree there. But I also applied to MIT, and then MIT gave me the same deal. So I wrote him a nice note to thank him, and told him that, gee, it hadn't even occurred to me that I would get a Fellowship. Story_ID: 21429 Speaker 1: Now, when you reflect back on this, is this like a disadvantage of growing up a poor black kid in Harlem with nobody that went to college? I mean, not even, were you even aware of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] at a certain point in your life? Speaker 2: I knew the name, reputation, but I never even thought that I would, you know, I didn't even think about graduate school other than finally when I got to Exxon [Mobil Corporation]. I said, gee, maybe I should get a graduate degree. But, it is, it is when you don't have that connectedness to at least know the opportunities that I needed to actually have, and it's a stranger, a professor at Columbia [University] who-- He didn't have to tell me about MIT. He could have just said apply to Columbia and I'll make sure you get a scholarship Fellowship. So it is. No conversations that I knew of that would led me down this path. So when I got the offer from MIT and also from Columbia, then I advised Exxon that I'd be leaving. And I was only there a short time. They were not pleased that they brought me in and then I was leaving, but they understood that I had a desire to get a graduate degree. I think they would have preferred that I had that straightened that out before I accepted their job offer, but it wasn't that I--I had planned on going at night and continuing to work at Exxon, at Esso Research and Engineering. But it turned out that by having everything paid for, that I wouldn't have to work, and it was an opportunity. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, now MIT. Now, are you starting to get intimated at all by these places? (laughter). Speaker 2: MIT, now I'm a graduate student. Now that-- I got to just share this one thing. It's probably going to bore anybody that looks at this tape. (laughter). But it says that at City College we had to experiment in the process lab in chemical engineering. And you take certain data, experimental data, and then you compare that with a calculation, the theory. And we did this, I had a lab partner. We did the experiment, and I was home on the weekend working over the data, and I saw the experimental result versus the calculated result. It was off by a factor of three point something. I said that's strange. Why should all the data, the experimental result versus what you calculate using the theory--and if the professor who ran the course awhile back developed the theory... And I said this is not right. So, I went back and did my own derivation of what the theory would say. And there was an error in a conversion factor that the professor had. And this calculation that students were using for I don't know how many years, and never said that their data, that the data had to be right, so there had to be something wrong with the theory as it was developed by this professor. So, I showed that to Professor List, and said "Could you check this for me, something's strange and I conclude that it's in the conversion factors." He says, "You're right." So all those years, students were doing the experiment and saying they agreed with the theory. You gotta talk about intellectual honesty there. But they never challenged the theory. So, professor List says, "No matter what you do in this course, you're getting an 'A'." (laughter). So it's just this excitement of being able to pull all the tools together. So as I got to MIT now, the challenge, it was even more, it was challenging, but it was exciting, and excellent students. and coming in where they're paying for everything, you're kind of like in the elite part of the incoming class. Speaker 1: Now, what is your mother [Maria Lucas] making of all this? Speaker 2: She was very happy, of course, when I had the job at Esso, Exxon. It was called Esso Research and Engineering in those days. She was very happy with that. And Mom's inclination is that I should be dressed properly. And my mother's version of being dressed properly was some pretty sharp suits. Now that I look back at how I showed up at Esso Research and Engineering (laughter). Speaker 1: Give us an example, now. This is 19- Speaker 2: Well, I started in 1958 and I remember--she had great taste in terms of the colors and all of that. But I felt a little uncomfortable in that one suit that had a sheen to it, you know, like a silken kind of sheen. So here I'm glowing, you know (laughter), and all the other engineers are there with their kind of drab looking outfits, and here I'm sharp. Story_ID: 21430 Speaker 1: So, we were just discussing off camera the difference in the way young people dress in the black community, young men especially, they dress differently than their white counterparts, completely so. so you were-- Speaker 2: I was still part, I'm part of the black community. Speaker 1: Ye and you were sharp in Harlem, right? Speaker 2: Well, let's say I blended in better in Harlem than I did showing up in the shiny suit over at Esso Research and Engineering (laughter). So, my mother [Maria Lucas] had impeccable taste, and everything of quality, but it was a little sharp, I would say, yeah. Speaker 1: What color was the suit, was the suit-- Speaker 2: It was a light-ish color, and then there was another one that had like a checkered pattern. It wasn't stripes, but it was kind of like a checkered pattern, nicely tailored, nice slacks. I mean-- (laughter). Speaker 1: These are expensive clothes, too, aren't they? Speaker 2: My mother always, no matter what--she was a seamstress, that's how she earned her living. And she had a good eye for quality clothing. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, in the lab, you're the sharpest guy in the lab. (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] I was just one of many sharp students. And students tend to not congregate, but those who tend to be at the top of the class, even there, you tend to form groups, not exclusive groups, but people would relate to you more. So, I was part of the upper part of that group. As one student said to me, I saw him years ago after I graduated, he said, "Oh, Arnie was one of the smart ones." So, even in MIT context, one of the smart ones. It's all relative, of course. They had some excellent students. But we had to compete against each other because you had the qualifying exam for the doctorate's degree. And at that time, in those times, it was now 1958, September 1958, and I took the qualifying exam in '59' [1959]. You have one year of courses, and then your whole background in chemical engineering--you take a rigorous exam--I've forgotten how many total hours--six hours or something. And then you have to give an oral presentation to the faculty. And that, I tried to study hard for that. I was, that was a trying time. But I worked hard on that, I felt a lot of tension. I'd just take walks late at night just to kind of clear the air. And so when I passed, I mean that was like joy, that I passed the qualifying exam. And also, in those days the faculty didn't have a lot of research money, so only so many students are going to be supported in research. So the qualifying exam was certainly one to test you on your abilities, but they want to get through that about half of them you knew wouldn't pass. There wasn't enough money to, they were good people, but it wasn't enough money to support them on research. The faculty didn't have that much in the way of research grants. So, I did pass and did my thesis, of course, for the faculty member that had research money. Story_ID: 21431 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was there any particular faculty member that served as a mentor or, you know, gave you any special guidance at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]? Speaker 2: No. But as I look back over my career, a lot of it, unless a faculty member actually approached me to give me guidance, I was of the school that you didn't ask. It gave me thought of the thing, too, going back to Stuyvesant [High School] when we talked about this. That you do on your own. And so I didn't, I didn't ask. But Professor Reed was encouraging, and my mentor, the fellow who I did my doctorate for, Dr. Michaels, he was encouraging. He was tough, which I liked, but he was encouraging. And then also I got to know other students. MIT had within chemical engineering, a Course 10 club. And the graduate students in chemical engineering, only ten of them would meet for dinner, and it was not publicized, and I was brought into that group. So, it-- Speaker 1: What's it called, again? Speaker 2: Course 10. Ten was the number of the chemical engineering course at MIT. So, it's the Course 10 Club. We'd meet for dinner once a month and we would invite faculty from all the different departments of MIT. We would rotate and get some excellent speakers to be with us, have dinner with us. And that was just great. So, you start--that association happened, but it happened because-- just as I met people in my courses and in my classes at MIT. Story_ID: 21432 Speaker 1: What was your dissertation about at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]? Speaker 2: It was improving the recovery of crude oil from an oil reservoir. Oil reservoirs are not just a big hole in the ground with oil slushing around in it. It's rock. The oil and natural gas are trapped in a rock. And when you penetrate that rock with a drill bit, then the oil and gas come spewing out to the pores of that rock. So to increase the recovery, you've got to know what's limiting, how much you can get out of there. And what's limiting is, the rocks have little tiny pores. When you have tiny pores you can end up with difficult high forces not allowing you to get more than 30 percent recovery, 40 percent recovery. So even to this day, about half the oil we've ever discovered is still in the ground. It's trapped by what we call capillary forces, very strong forces in very tiny pores. So my thesis was to adjust those forces to increase oil recovery, and it was, I illustrated the approach that we were exploring, how it worked. And I think my advisor was surprised, because, surprised in the sense that normally you just use a sand column, sand packet, and you've got little pores in the sand, and you make that like your reservoir, and you put chemicals through there and try to release the oil and all that. So, that was fine. But my advisor, Dr. Michaels, introduced me to a researcher in Tulsa, Oklahoma working for an oil company. It was Phillips Petroleum--no, it was Exxon. He was working for Exxon in their research in Oklahoma. And he showed me, this researcher showed me a glass model of little tiny pores. He just etched in a glass plate, put them together and he could flow fluids through this matrix and see how oil and water and so forth are moving. So I thought, gee, you know, I could adapt this to what we're trying to do, and I did. And I could then show a motion picture of what happens when our treatment goes through that pore structure with residual oil in it. And Professor Michaels went "Wow, I got these videos." So I had my old bolex camera mounted on top of the mike. I jerry rigged this whole thing. And I had a little micro pump that was used for something else. I adapted it so I get very slow rates and modeled it. We knew how to come up with the model parameters so we're representative of an oil reservoir with full flow conditions. And it was, I said wow, I was excited when we could actually show the theory, and how the theory did predict what would be the effect of the chemical that we put through to loosen up the oil, and did it graphically. So, that was exciting. So I did my thesis for him in two years, my research project. And no one ever finishes with Alan Michaels in two years (laughter). So he was very complimentary, and it was just a great experience for me over there. Story_ID: 21433 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is 1962 when you earned your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: '62' [1962], yeah. Speaker 1: Now that same year here, did you start working for Mobil? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. You were, from what our notes say, you started working right over here in Edison, New Jersey, right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about that experience. Now, you've worked for Exxon, now you're going to Mobil? Speaker 2: Yes I interviewed with Exxon again, a great company. But when I went to Mobil, they were just starting Mobil Chemical, and this is now the early days that you and I were talking about. plastics and processes that make plastics. And Mobil was just starting their chemical research, which was largely plastics processing, putting together these chemicals to make plastics of all kinds of different properties, useful properties. So, I was excited about that--brand new lab, we were all joining, a whole bunch of us joined at the same time. And we had a great spirit. I felt the spirit when I interviewed there. So, that's why I went with Mobil. And I fully intended to be in research the rest of my career. I'd say Boy, if I could just, maybe one of these days before I could retire I could be head of this laboratory, that would be just great. I just loved research. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, you published a text--I don't know where--I guess it's during this period, called the Effect of Chromo-- Speaker 2: Chromatographic transports. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the thesis, the doctoral thesis. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, alright, okay. So let's take care of that. Okay, so, well what exciting things did you work on at Mobil in research? Speaker 2: The, I wasn't there long, uh--and there is a key component that goes in polyester. Polyester was really starting to take off. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Now, how do you make that from petroleum? We knew the chemicals that we had to purify to make the polyester. And the purity has to be extremely high in order to have these things link up and give you big molecules, getting back to A and B reacting, and you get AB, AB, AB, but extremely high purity. And now you got chemicals like polyester that has, it's a different A and a different B than what you'd have in the case of polypropylene, I'd say, where it's AAA. So, Mobil was pioneering a new process to purify a key ingredient for the polyester. It's called terephthalic acid. And they charged ahead with the process and it wasn't working. I mean, it was awful. And they have a commercial scale project out there that's hemorrhaging money. They were not getting the yield. They purified it, but they were losing too much of it in the purification process. I mean, this stuff is an expensive ingredient. You know, getting like an 80 percent recovery, where you've got to be like 98 percent, 99 percent with those expensive chemicals. So, my job, I was hired to provide what ideas we had to straighten that out. And we set up a little tiny bench experiment right there in the lab to simulate the process. This was so great. You can design these things on an miniature scale and you can quickly test out--because you have control over the ingredients and the variables. And we concluded that the catalyst that they were using to purify it was destroying the product we wanted, that the ingredient that they were putting there to do the main job, maybe it's not a big surprise, was destroying the product (laughter). So, now you already built the plant, you already got stuff in there. So we built our little bench scale so that we could try different catalysts. And I had a sidekick working with me. We concluded that the catalyst they were using clearly wasn't the right one, but maybe we should try--they were using a noble metal, it doesn't matter what it was. We changed the catalyst on our little bench scale and we got 99 percent recovery on a bench scale. So we told the plant people the process schemes, okay, you just got the wrong catalyst. So, they went and took out the old catalyst and put in our new catalyst. And they got 99 percent recovery. Boy, they were over the top. The plant was in Beaumont, Texas. So I took a trip down there as they were developing the process further. So when I showed up at the lab, they were doing this [making gestures]. (laughter). I mean, they were so happy, just simply changing the catalyst. But you needed the fine tight experiment which we simulated at our laboratory in Edison, New Jersey. So that was an exciting time. And they had another problem on a process, and we in the laboratory straightened that one out, too. So, those kinds of problems you get excited about, and when you can come up with solutions. Story_ID: 21434 Speaker 1: Okay. So, now tell me if I'm moving too fast here, but in 1970 you started serving as a visiting associate professor at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]? Speaker 2: Yes. I've been now at Mobil for eight years, and we had a professor from MIT who was a consultant for Mobil Research, Ray Bradure. And so I think Ray was behind it. He saw the work I was doing at Mobil, because he was a consultant. He would, he'd review what we we're doing with them. And, of course, the head of the laboratory and the people in New York knew what we were doing because of some commercial successes we were having. And so Ray floated the idea to Mobil management that why not let Arnie come up for a year as a visiting professor, associate professor. So they agreed, and the deal was I would come back after the year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's how I ended up doing that. I was first not going to do it, but I spoke with some people--now, you got mentors. I knew people at Mobil who were well regarded in the academic and commercial field, and so I asked their opinion. I was having fun at Mobil. I said, why should I go up to MIT? I had moved up now as a, I had a research group now at Mobil, so I had other people that I was supervising, and we could do even more things. So why should I go up to MIT? So, this wiser person said to me, Jimmy Wei, W-E-I was his name. He said, "Oh, you definitely should do it, it's a whole new experience for you", et cetera. And so I did it, and I'm very glad I did, yeah. And once I got there I really did enjoy it. And so now I'm the professor at MIT, and I taught the graduate course in thermodynamics, so now the incoming class who just have gotten their bachelor's degree, now they're intimidated (laughter) as they come in. Because this is a, it's called 1040. chemical engineering, graduate chemical engineering thermodynamics, great subject, just like poetry. So, and-- Speaker 1: How do you mean, it's just like poetry? Speaker 2: It's symmetry and stream of discovery. As you stay with the symmetry, it's like wow. It is just like poetry. You start with premises in certain key laws. There are three laws of thermodynamics. And you take those three laws and you can, through sitting at your desk, derive key elements of our being. I could sit at my desk and tell you, you just tell me the chemicals that make up the battery, and I could calculate what the voltage is going to be. I could sit at my desk and say if you take A and B and you're trying to make C, in thermodynamics I could tell you that you don't even got a prayer. You can try everything under the sun, whether you can even make A and B under any condition go to C. I could tell you if you have an engine and you got the regular heat that goes into an engine that creates power, whether you have a chance of having 40 percent efficiency. You have a limit. You can't take heat directly to power. It's the second law of thermodynamics. It's so powerful. And then once you have these principles, all the things that you can derive that are useful--I used to wow them going back to Mobil when a chemist would come by and say they're going to try to make a product by taking this A and this B and try to make the product. And I'd say, yeah you got a shot. I can't tell you the rate at which it would happen, but yes, it's possible. But I could tell them also it's not possible and save them a lot of time. So, it was so practical. So I enjoyed teaching, and that's where I took research I had at Mobil up to MIT. And that's when I started work on plasmas. I started it at Mobil but I took my equipment up to MIT. Speaker 1: Okay. The reason why I asked you that question, I often hear mathematicians talk about the elegance of an equation and that sort of thing, and the beauty of math, you know. Speaker 2: Yes, there's an element of elegance. I think there's some elegance in, you know, the way things are said poetically. But there's this surprising 'wow' kind of, that comes from it through just understanding the principles. So yes, mathematics has elegance. So it has an element of elegance, but the huge impact right up front in terms of practicality in our daily lives, it's just, it's poetry. Story_ID: 21435 Speaker 1: Okay, now, polymer, I mean plasma, rather. What is a plasma? Speaker 2: A plasma is, of course, you know, these days we have these plasma screens on televisions, and it's an ionized gas. It's ionized gas. You have a gas that's under high energy, like a voltage, that it will become very reactive at low pressures. So a plasma is a ionized gas. So you've taken the gas, you've taken off some of the electrons from the molecules of that gas, so it's charged. And those charged particles at low pressure are very reactive, and they can react with the TV screen in terms of the color phosphorus that you have on your TV's. They react very fast, and so you can use them, and certainly in that application. I was using them to, I was fascinated first that these reactive gases could have so many applications. I had no clue that they would eventually be used for a reaction of surfaces such as TV, plasma TV. No one was even thinking about that at that time. But it could react with anything, because it's so highly energetic. And so I was using it at Mobil to tailor a separation membrane. Chemical engineers were concerned about separating molecules, and I could come up with a much more efficient membrane by using the plasma, cutting through it all. And I demonstrated that at Mobil. I put a very thin layer onto a plastic sub-strain, and that thin layer separated out the molecules without a lot of resistance. So I had a great separation device and I thought it illustrated what it could do. And I wanted to have a student when I went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] to understand what's going on when you have an ionized gas reacting with the surface. And that was David Lam's thesis. I told them I'd very likely go back to Mobil, but he chose me to be his doctoral advisor. I'd just joined the faculty as a visiting associate professor so I didn't have any research money (laughter) to support him, but that's where Professor Badure was instrumental in convincing me to go up to MIT. He provided me with research money so that I could support David on his doctorate in plasmas, these ionized gas reactions and understanding the rates at which these reactions take place, and they're extremely fast. So this whole new area, I started it from a separation membrane standpoint, but I got interested in it in terms of a fundamental phenomena that I felt could have all kinds of uses. Because you could put stuff down on other materials, so that was really what it was about. Story_ID: 21436 Speaker 1: Did you join NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers] in the early '70's [1970s]? Speaker 2: Early '70's [1970s], NOBCChE called me and said they'd like to make their first award for professional work, and so the group met down in Washington and I joined them and had a nice event. I gave a talk to the group and we had dinner together. So-- Speaker 1: Now, did you know about them prior to the award in '75' [1975]? Speaker 2: No, I did not. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So they, well they hadn't been formed that long, from what I understand? Speaker 2: No, maybe a year or two. Speaker 1: Yes right, right. And this the National Organization of Black Chemical Engineers? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: So they gave you a professional achievement award in '75' [1975]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, in '76' [1976], you are elevated to vice president of Mobil Plastics in Macedon, New York, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, how did this come about and what did it mean in terms of your research? Speaker 2: It's now making the transition from being in research, which I had been up to that time. Oh, I should mention that at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] that's where I did meet my present wife, but MIT-- Speaker 1: Had you been married before? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now we didn't get that. Now, let's see, let's see. hen were you married the first time? Speaker 2: The first time was 1958. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a while back. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were at City College, or? Speaker 2: I was just graduating from City College and getting ready to go up--now, I'd been at Exxon Research and Engineering and decided to go back to MIT for a doctorate's degree. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And just ahead of that, I got married and then went up to MIT. Story_ID: 21437 Speaker 1: You said your mother [Maria Lucas] was against your first marriage. She kind of didn't think it was a good idea, right? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. And truly I was too young, and as oftentimes with the rest of people, it was that my first wife was too young and immature. So, both immature. So it did not work out and it did result in an added burden in terms of, you know, it's an added stress going through graduate school, because it was during that key time that things really weren't working out well in the marriage. And then I had a daughter from the first marriage. So, anyway, that's, it worked out. But my mother was very, very wise and I really should have listened to her. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, so you met your second wife in--? Speaker 2: 1970. Speaker 1: 1970, ye alright. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: So, because after the first marriage, I said I'd never get married again. (laughter) So, I met her in 1970 and we liked each other, et cetera. So I said I'm not going to get married again. And she said that's okay. She went and told her parents that I'm not going to ever get married again (laughter). So, at any rate, things worked out and we ended up getting married in 1973. But it was three years that we-- So, obviously, it was going to work, and I've been since 1970 with just the most wonderful person you could ever meet. And it's just been, I'm very lucky. Speaker 1: Your wife is an artist, right? Speaker 2: Ye that's right. But she studied with a bachelor's of art at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and so she majored in German for some reason. Not that her parents are German, it's, she just thought it was a more challenging language, and so--but she ended up using that working for a German company when we lived in New Jersey, American Hertz (sp), and she was later in my career, she was very, very helpful when we visited Europe. Story_ID: 21438 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, alright now, we were talking about the transition to president of Mobil Plastics. Speaker 2: Yes, Mobil takes you through a planning job. So, you come into world headquarters which is New York, and you now work with the heads of the divisions in chemical. So the chemical company has a plastics division, they have an agricultural chemical division, just to give you an idea. And people who head up those operations, now these are profit making, you hope, operations. Those people work with you because you're handling their plans and summarizing those to the head of Mobil Chemical, the president of Mobil Chemical. The president of Mobil Chemical gets to know you. The operating vice-presidents get to know you, and if you do pretty well in that, then one of them will ask for you to join their operations. And so I was asked to join the operations of the plastics division. And now I'm moving totally out of research into the business side. It was exciting. Speaker 1: Now I have a note here that you developed a clear plastic that replaced the cellophane. Speaker 2: Yes, I could see the development of this clear sheet, because I did an assessment for Mobil at the time crude oil prices were going up so high. This was back in the '70's [1970s], early '70's [1970s]--no it was in '76' [1976]. We saw crude oil prices starting to rise. So the management was very concerned. If crude oil, which is the basis of all the raw materials for plastics, if that goes up really high, what's going to happen with our whole business in making plastics and other chemicals from petroleum and raw material's going up? So therefore your product prices have to go up, data profit. But you're competing in almost in every instance when you have a plastic product or a chemical, you're competing with a natural product. And in the case of cellophane, cellophane is based on trees. So you go chop down the tree in the forest and you process the heck out of it to get the chemicals out of the tree that you can process and then make a clear sheet that works on wrapping machines, and cigarettes and overwrap, and all of that. So we wondered if a plastic film could do that. So as we were developing the process--now, I wasn't involved in the development of the process. That work had been done, but the decision had to be made, do we invest heavily in this business? With oil prices going up, isn't cellophane going to wipe us out? Because they're not seeing that kind of cost pressure. God grows the tree, but yet you've got oil in the ground increasing in price, and hence, cost to you. So, we did a simple--just ahead of taking the job, we actually ran the plastics division. We did a simple analysis. I started with oil in the ground and went through all the energy you had to put into that oil to make our product that's going to replace cellophane. Then I started with the tree in the forest, including the energy needed to plant the seeds, grow the tree, then haul it out, cut it down, cut it up. There's a lot of processing needed to make cellophane from that tree. I added up all the energy needed to do that and compared the two, and our product even though it's based on crude oil, required less energy than the cellophane. So I made a presentation to the Mobil board that our chemical--and I used other products to illustrate for other chemicals that we were making, that our chemical business is safe. In fact, if anything, when crude oil prices go up, we get even more competitive. Cellophane, we're going to eat cellophane's lunch. And a plastic pipe versus a steel pipe, we'll eat the steel pipe's lunch. All the plastics required less energy to make, and that's what happened. Speaker 1: So, what is this product? Speaker 2: The product is that you take a plastic polypropylene, which is very versatile. So, that's taking propylene glass and linking it together until you get a solid. And then you can melt that and put it into a sheet. But we had to get the sheet where it's clear and has good sparkle and that we have it have good moisture protection properties. And so coating was developed for that sheet. By stretching it, we got, we ended it stretching it in two directions to give it good stiffness and clarity. When you stretch it in two directions, it feeds better in wrapping machines. And we felt we had a cost advantage versus cellophane and so we pressed ahead. So it's used--look at your--you don't smoke, hardly anybody smokes these days--but we attacked the cigarette overwrap market first. They were using tons of cellophane. and so if we could approve our film in that market, then we could approve the film and get it approved in other markets. Like several things--I never thought I'd be talking about Weis Potato Chips. That bag is not cellophane. That's our product. Today Mobil still has-now, Exxon--still has 50% of the market for this product that was developed. But I commercialized it. We thought we had an advantage, and Mobil management backed us at the board level. So as vice president of the film's business I expanded to Oklahoma. We put up a plant there. We went to Canada, Europe, Vertone, Belgi we built the plant. And I was on my way to do a deal with Japan, but then I got promoted. So that's how that business came about. And to this day, it's still a good profitable business. Story_ID: 21439 Speaker 1: Is there a commercial name for the wrap, the plastic? Speaker 2: Yes, it's just that it's not a household name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because it's sold to the people who then use it to wrap their products. So, but it's called biaxially-oriented polypropylene. It's a mouthful. Speaker 1: Biaxially Speaker 2: Biaxially, because you stretched it two different ways to get the clarity, and it is based on polypropylene. BOPP, we called it, biaxially oriented polypropylene. And it's, of the various chemical businesses that Exxon took in from Mobil's business when they merged, that business is still going. I'm proud of that, that we made that so successful. Speaker 1: And you were referring to the oil crisis of the '70's [1970s], I guess, where the speed limit in the United States was reduced to 55 miles an hour. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Because everyone was afraid that we were going to consume all the reserves again, so-- Speaker 2: That's right. And the, and it really has come true, because now we have oil at a hundred dollars a barrel and we're still competitive against cellophane. Oh, by the way, there's no cellophane produced now. Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know. Speaker 2: Any clear sheet you see that has some stiffness and sparkle, that's not cellophane. Speaker 1: Cellophane, and people still use the name cellophane. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: But it's not cellophane. Speaker 2: You remember that movie, the play 'Chicago'? There's a nice little tune in there, 'I'm Mr. Cellophane.' Because the guy is taken advantage of by his girlfriend, and he's just a little, you know, she pushes him, she disrespects him and it's like he isn't there, you know. And so he sings this heartwarming, somber song, 'I'm Mr. Cellophane.' And I told Connie, I said, they should be saying I'm Mr. biaxially-oriented polypropylene, but you'd never get all those words out. (laughter). Speaker 1: That's, well, that's, I had no idea that cellophane was out of existence. Speaker 2: Absolutely out. Speaker 1: I think most people don't know. Speaker 2: And we attacked their market, we started down in Richmond, Virginia. I went down because we felt that if we could get the cigarette companies--they used a lot of the overwrap--on board, that gave us a base load for our product. And so, and what I did was, since it's a new film--you've never seen a cigarette wrapping machine. But in my day down there they were doing 300 packs a minute overwrapping. If the film breaks or doesn't operate properly and seal up nicely and make a nice tight package, and they have to shut that down, they're not happy. So I put technicians in their plants until they got used to running our film, because we thought the existing operators wouldn't want to put up with any kind of problem. They don't want to have their production go down, and they'd blame it on the film. So we had to put people in. We did a little pre-investment, but it worked beautifully. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you also developed plastic plumbing pipes, right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's the polybutylene. That's another thing where you link molecules together and make a solid, but this one is now butylene molecule. And so, yes, I did develop the process for that. We sold that. We thought the plastic itself had some promise. We didn't think it was going to be huge, and we sold the business to Shell, Shell Oil. Speaker 1: Okay. I know for years in Chicago [Illinois], the plumbers in the city struggled over--I can't remember who was on what side now, but it was that the city code demanded metal pipes and they tried to get it changed for years, and I think they're all plastic now. Speaker 2: Right. Certainly cold water, and I think even hot water, because the plastics now have a, different materials can take that high temperature, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. So when you develop a product like that, I mean do you have to, I mean, do you kind of lose interest after it's developed, or do you kind of follow the, you know, follow how it's, you know, the struggles for it, you know? Speaker 2: Follow the struggles, but we had a motto in our film business, the business I ran, that when you come up with a product, we try to work hard to obsolete it. Come up with new ideas. I ran the business, but I had a research arm in that film business that we just went through. And the challenge I gave to our research arm was a great job. You had everything. You had the P and L, profit and loss statement, you have manufacturing, you had a bunch of people working in those plants, and you had a research group, my own research group that reported to me. And so we tried to obsolete, come up with other products. So if it's going to be obsoleted, we wanted to be there first. And that was our motto. But we came up with new applications. We, those little aluminized packets that you see that have peanuts in them? That's our product, but we, before I left we developed a process that put the aluminum coating on it so it would have even better barrier properties for peanuts, et cetera. Speaker 1: That's the kind they pass out on the airplane. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Story_ID: 21440 Speaker 1: Now were you all concerned, or were you concerned back in those days with the biodegradability of these products? Speaker 2: Yes, we were, but we thought, I think we were attracted, that there was an exaggeration about the business of biodegradability. Even if you have paper crunched down in a landfill, hardly any oxygen gets through that paper. And so, you know, people can read newspapers if they dig down deep enough in the landfill, and read a paper from 1900. So it's overdone about the biodegradability. I think, certainly, I would say it wouldn't degrade as fast as paper, but paper takes a long time in a landfill to degrade. And the preferred thing is to recycle it and recover its energy, recover the energy from paper and recover the energy from plastic in an incinerator and get energy from it. And then scrub the gases coming off of that incinerator so you don't have pollution, so that you're able to take the petroleum and make a useful product from it. And then after you make the useful product, take that petroleum waste product and burn it and get the energy. So it's really, it's a recycle. And the public doesn't see that whole picture, but it's starting to get through. But we have not, certainly we're concerned about it, but it has not, it's not something to be overly concerned about. You recycle it, it's better. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, well, while you're in the process of burning some of these chemicals, is it dangerous for the public to, I mean, the plastics--is there-- Speaker 2: No, the plastics are, they're just straightforward. They don't have noxious, concentrations of noxious materials. It's the same as if you burn heating oil. Imagine if we took those molecules that are in the heating oil that you burn to warm your house, if we took those molecules and instead of burning them in your heating oil, but removed them from our process for the ingredients that we're going to then convert to plastics, then make plastics. And then after we're through using the plastic, then burn that plastic and get the energy that you would have gotten directly from the heating oil. So, recycling is the main thing. But in terms of the components that's in there, there's nothing of concern on the hazard. Story_ID: 21441 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, now in 1980, you were in the management of Mobil Corporate Planning in New York? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ye that's-- Speaker 1: How did that come about, first of all? Speaker 2: Well, I must have done a good job on the vice president of plastics, so I think the president of Mobil heard a presentation from me on our plastics business. And so this particular job, when you come now to New York--I came from the Rochester area, Macedon, New York, down to New York City headquarters. Now you're in a position where you're handling planning for all of Mobil, and you report to the senior vice president for planning of Mobil. And he's on the board. So now the board directors, the presidents of Mobil's major divisions and the chairman and the president of Mobil all get a chance to see you up close. You make presentations, you make points regarding strategies of the different businesses and so on. And I guess I could have used a little mentoring more at that time, so that now I've been with Mobil for awhile, I mean, I just, I'm coming right out--first I was in research, then I ran a business--I'm coming into world headquarters. I mean I don't know the rules of the game, and I'm in a very visible position, being this manager of corporate planning, making presentations to the board and so on. So, you start picking up on what's the way things are done. I always called it the way I saw it, though. And so I must have done pretty well with that, but that was a very exciting time, because Mobil made a bid for Marathon Oil, and I started getting more into the financial aspects of Mobil, of course through the business of my prior job, running the film business, plastic film business. So with corporate planning, you get heavily into financial matters, but a president asked me to head up a task force within a small group, and he wanted to keep it quiet. To select the target, Mobil was ready to make an acquisition that we would be an oil company, and of the various oil companies, what's our recommendation? And so, that was really exciting. We worked, obviously, secretly and so on, and we chose Marathon Oil. We thought they were heavily undervalued compared to their real underlying value. I came up with estimates of their underlying value, and we had experts from the financial houses worrying about how you structured a deal, and it was a heady time. we mounted our offer. It was on the low side, and Marathon rejected it. Now, Marathon's another oil company, so they knew that if Mobil takes them over, you know, we didn't need their whole super structure. So, they held us up and they filed an antitrust suit. We increased our offer. We kept increasing our offer. But they were successful, as you might expect, really, that they filed an antitrust. That takes time, and people had started at sixty dollars a share and it got up quickly to 70 dollars a share, 80 dollars a share. We finished putting our offer out there at 120 dollars a share, and people didn't take our offer, they took the 120 dollar a share offer from U.S. Steel. U.S. Steel joined in, and U.S. Steel bought Marathon. And of course, there was not going to be antitrust issues that Marathon had some refineries, they had some service stations, and if Mobil and Marathon got together, it would restrain trade. There were no issues, because U.S. Steel is a steel company. So they quickly closed their deal and we were locked out. So, people thought we would never close on our deal, it would take too long. But here's a guy who was 120 dollars a share right now. So that was very disappointing that we missed out on the Marathon acquisition. Story_ID: 21442 Speaker 1: This is in the '80's [1980s], right? Speaker 2: Yes, this is '80's [1980s]. I was listed as a key person on the team, so I was deposed. The deposition was taken just ahead of Thanksgiving, I'll never forget it. I came to New York and I was deposed. Their lawyers were fishing for some evidence that we were concerned about antitrust or something. They were on a fishing expedition. But I remember coming in from Connecticut and being deposed and being asked questions. Speaker 1: This is your, this is your first time being deposed, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: How did it feel, facing the brunt of that? Speaker 2: You just try to stay focused on the question and answer the question and not elaborate. And of course, everything is truthful. You never get hurt, obviously, by telling the truth. And so it was, yes you feel drained, because the deposition went on for three hours. But we're trying to unearth something. Speaker 1: Okay. So what were your options to do at this point? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Did you have other things-- Speaker 2: Yes what's the next target? And then after Marathon, Mobil bought a company that was in the business of looking for oil, finding it and producing it, but not in what we call the downstream, not in selling it, not in running refineries. Because, see, that's the area where you're going to end up having overlap with a company like Marathon or some of the other candidates. Because we looked at every oil company. And so they did acquire that, no antitrust issues when you go and just buy a company that's in the finding of oil and producing oil. So, that went through. That was Superior Oil Company. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you, now did you go to London in '82' [1982]? Speaker 2: Right. So then, right after that, then I was promoted to the London job. And that's another rung on that ladder. If you do okay in corporate planning, then your next job should be an operating job. So after the look-see that they have of you and senior management have of you in corporate planning. I really wasn't delighted about going, the first time going overseas where you got a one-way ticket. It's a strange feeling. And when we get into London, you have only so many days to register so that--and you go down to the alien registration office, (laughter) the alien registration. So we get, you get these little bumps issued. We get into London--but we loved it after a while. So, my wife cried when we went over and she cried when we came back. Speaker 1: Now, this was this your first trip overseas? Speaker 2: The first working one overseas. We'd been over visiting, but first time working overseas. And it was really wonderful. It was marketing and refining now, the business of, of course, selling gasoline and oil, and your service stations that flowed gasoline to automobiles, and we had commercial customers. The business had great geography. It went from Finland, all the countries down to Turkey, including Turkey. That was called Mobil Europe and I was vice president of Mobil Europe. I was the number two executive in Mobil Europe. And we had the presidents of each country report into London. So we had the guy in France and we had the guy in the Netherlands, in Germany, et cetera, Italy. And the cultures and the business, it was like you pinched yourself. It was fascinating business. Speaker 1: Was it like being an ambassador? Speaker 2: No, you made the operating decisions. So there is an element, because you're the senior executive, but it was where we're responsible for the profit and loss. Each president has a P and L statement for his country that he operates. But then we have the responsibility for the whole smash, and so we're concerned about their strategies, their opportunities, business plans. And we get the monthly reports and scrutinize those and see where we may be able to improve. Story_ID: 21443 Speaker 1: Alright, we want to go back to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] to get the story of David Lam again, and then talk about one other thing. Speaker 2: Oh yes, David was a new graduate student. He was ready to do his doctoral thesis. At MIT, the students choose the topic. Professors advertised the areas of research that they're, the professor, is interested in. So, even though I was a visiting associate professor--and I told David when he came around asked about my topic, the topic I had for a doctoral student to work on, to explore, was plasma reactions at the surfaces, kinetics. In chemical engineering we're concerned about the rate of reaction, the kinetics of plasma reactions that surface. It's a field that no one had studied, but I was fascinated by these reactive gases when they're ionized how they could react with almost anything. So, David did his thesis on that and we published a paper. In fact, I took the equipment I had at Mobil--Mobil had no problem, that I had used for my experiments at Mobil, and took it up to MIT and David used that equipment. He got his doctorate. I had no idea at that time, I just felt that it had great promise, that it would end up being used as a key area for etching circuits in the computer chips. Computer chips were using hydrofluoric acid at that time, but if you could have a fluoride ion, through a plasma, attack the surface, it happens much more rapidly and you can squeeze more circuits together on a computer chip. So, it's a key development. David formed Lam Research. It's listed on the NASDAQ [National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations]. It is used in the majority now of plasma etches worldwide, where computer chips get their circuits, their intelligence as these circuits are etched in. It's a key component. And that is still improving. You can still squeeze more and more on a chip. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's David Lau, L-A-U? Speaker 2: L-A-M. Speaker 1: Alright. And there is one other-- Speaker 2: When I was at MIT, and because I did tell David I would probably go back to Mobil--so I cautioned him about doing his doctorate under me, but I said I would supervise him from Mobil should I leave MIT to return to Mobil. MIT offered me tenure, and so I had a tough decision to make whether I'd stay at MIT. But I decided to return to Mobil. Speaker 1: What was the, what was the reason for your decision? I mean, it must have been tempting to-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was tempting. Especially that we had successful research, and so it was tempting. I thought the variety of the problems that I would see in industry would be greater than the variety of the problems I would see as I started becoming a professor and focusing in on an area of research. I felt plasma research certainly had promise but, you know, at Mobil I could be involved in all kinds of other experiences. So that was a primary reason. Story_ID: 21444 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, when we broke, you were in London as a vice president for Mobil Europe, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the '80's [1980s] were a time, I was thinking about this during the break, that British Petroleum started, you know, making inroads into the U.S. market in the '80's [1980s]. I don't know if they were doing that when you were there, but it was-- Speaker 2: Yes, they were, they had a presence in the U.S. market through Standard Oil Ohio. and their exploration and production, they were active in the Gulf of Mexico and other areas of the U.S. They were not aggressive, but they had a presence. The early '80's [1980s] in London, Europe was going through where like Margaret Thatcher was putting in her conservative policies in Britain, and there was a big fight with the coal unions. And it was a time of transition in Europe to more of a market economy, even more of a market economy, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. I know that was the beginning of it. That was, Standard Oil of Ohio was basically taken over by BP. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: By the end of the '80's [1980s], they had not only Standard Oil of Ohio, I think, but Standard Oil, period, right? Speaker 2: They had Standard Oil of Indiana, Amoco. They ended up merging with--around late '80's [1980s], like '89' [1989] or something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: So, what were you doing? So you're in London, and what were some of the highlights of what you're-- Speaker 2: It gets a little--my district--the advantage of having a technical background, and you're also running a business, I think you can maybe see some issues. And in terms of when you build a refinery, it's not just saying I'm going to run some crude oil through here and get some products. You've got to be concerned about the location of those products, because the transportation costs of those products to the different markets can be considerable. So, people recognize that, but then also the configuration. What hardware do you put in a refinery? If you just put in simple hardware--so, you got a refinery, it takes crude oil and gives you some products, but it's the type of products you get. You want to maximize gasoline, jet fuel, heating oil and diesel. Those are the products that have the value to them. The heavy part, after you get through refining, has low value. So, you really want to take the heavy part that has low value and put investment in to convert that up to these higher value products. So you want crude oil to come into the box, and out just comes gasoline, heating oil, jet fuel, and diesel. And if you don't have that, your refinery is going to be uncompetitive. You won't have the margins to survive against refineries that have all that hardware. So, we cut through all the issues of in terms of what refineries you should keep, which ones we should invest in, by having this simple picture, and we use that very powerfully. We ended up as negative, but we ended up shutting four refineries. But we invested heavily in the remaining ones to make them only produce G and D, and overall we were more profitable. So that was very exciting. I had a strategy that made sense. The, just the different countries, I'm trying to think of any particular issues-France--we had a lot of union issues because we were trying to make our operations more efficient. But the laws of the country gave a lot of strength to the unions, and you couldn't close, you couldn't shut down... As I mentioned, some refineries you want to keep, some you don't. And so it was difficult, very difficult. In France we tried to shut down a refinery which was a negative, but it made economic sense. We were going to continue with the workers in other operations, but we couldn't move them. See, the mobility of workers in Europe wasn't, isn't like the mobility here in the U.S. If you have an operation and you say, look you can be more efficient, you can have your job, but you'll have your job over here. I know it disrupts your family, but, et cetera. But people, a lot of people will do that. But in Europe, they won't. And so we had union people bust into our offices in France and Paris armed with bats and threatening the general manager. So I got a call from the general manager, the president of Mobil France, and he says, "Arnie" (laughter), because they call me Arnie, "We got a problem here. The workers are rioting here, threatening and so on." So, I said, "You've got to call the police." (laughter). Cooler heads ended up prevailing, but you know, they took to the streets on that one. We ended up convincing enough workers to take the deal and things calmed down, but it was a trying time. Speaker 1: What was the deal? Speaker 2: The deal was that we had another refinery location and a refinery we thought was competitive that had the kind of hardware that I was telling you about. And we were going to expand that. We could move a bunch of those jobs up north. So they were down in this lovely area near the Mediterranean, charming restaurants, charming hillside, and we were going to move them up to Ravensheugh, north, and they didn't want any part of that. So, and then for those who didn't want to move at all, they agreed in negotiation with the union on a payout. But a bunch did take it, and moved up to Ravensheugh. There were those kinds of things in Europe. Speaker 1: Alright. So you were there for-- Speaker 2: I think it's almost three and a half years, or four years, three years. Speaker 1: Okay, so you arrived in '82' [1982], right? Speaker 2: '82' [1982] and left in '85' [1985]. Speaker 1: '85' [1985], right. Speaker 2: Yes three years, yes. Speaker 1: So you became vice president of Mobil Global Marketing and Refining Planning in New York. Speaker 2: Yes so that's Mobil's deal of, now you've finished an operating job, and now you go back to world headquarters and now back into planning, but now for broader knowledge and strategy for a major division. I had the corporate planning job, but this is a way now of getting more familiar with the marketing and refining. I had not been in marketing and refining. So, with that job--I mean, I was in marketing and refining, operating--now I'm getting marketing and refining, a broad overview. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So what are some of the highlights of that? Speaker 2: That was, I'm trying to think of the, at that time, now we were, in terms of the particular operation, you know, it really was a continuation of this thought that I started in Europe where now I could apply it to Mobil's global marketing and refining, where you look to your refineries that are going to be your keepers, because you're going to invest heavily in them with this upgrading to make more valuable products, and less investment going into closure of the office for overall better efficiency. And we applied that worldwide. of course we operated-- marketing and refining, you know, we had Japan, we had, you name it. We were marketing and refining throughout the--well, Singapore, Australia. I didn't start it, but we started in Saudi Arabia with marketing and refining, mainly refining. So it was a continuation of the strategy that we started in Europe, but now applying it more broadly [unclear]. Story_ID: 21445 Speaker 1: Okay. It says here in these notes that you, in '73' [1973] you were the co-author with some others of the Process for Crystalline Polybutylene AIChE Symposium Series, Volume-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah that was the process for making a plastic material that we thought might have applications in pipe, and also certain other materials, engineering materials. And the process worked well. And we developed the process. I learned about the process when I was at Mobil Chemical Research. And that symposium was just to--I was the invited speaker to give a talk on the process. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Let's see. Okay, so in '85' [1985], you're vice president of Mobil Global Marketing and Refining Planning in New York, alright? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Alright, we just said that. So, then in '87' [1987] you become the vice president of Mobil U.S. Explorations and Production. Speaker 2: Yes that was exciting. Now, the first time it was called the upstream business. But we are now actually drilling for oil and producing and marketing it all over the United States, and that includes--it was a huge operation. It had 7,000 employees. The capital budget was $800 million a year, and at that time that was a lot of money. With the profit plan for it, the profit responsibility was $500 million a year, $600 million--and the excitement of bidding on properties against other oil companies--and if you win then you have to go and drill and see if it's successful. In the Gulf of Mexico we bid back in the late '80's [1980s], $50 million for a 5,000 acre piece of the Gulf of Mexico. And the government takes that money up front. If you win the bid, or somebody outbids you, they get it. And you got five years to drill, and then you'll see if you're successful, if you found something. And if you find something it's got to be commercial quantities. And when you do find something, then you pay the government a royalty of 12 and a half percent on the value of what you find as you produce it. So, the U.S government gets quite a bit of money out of the expiration of production and the companies have to bet on what they think is there, against other companies who have their theories as to what might be there. So, really it's fascinating. And to drill a well in my day was $40 million in the Gulf of Mexico, just to test your idea after you've already spent $50 million to outbid the others for the lease. And then these days it's $100 million to drill a well in the Gulf of Mexico. Anyway, it's big bucks and it's exciting. When the well's going down and you're getting the reports coming back--but then when you get success, when you get disappointment, it's only one in four that's successful. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what are the clues as to whether there's oil in a certain area? Speaker 2: It's just fascinating, the technology. The public doesn't realize it. You use a boat first, and like if you, if you're out in the Gulf of Mexico, use a boat that has streamers behind it and air guns. They give off puffs. Then right behind those streamers, a little bit further back, a good distance from the pack, there are receivers, aqua phones that pick up sound. So, you go puff. Vibrations go through the water down below to the sea bed and then the hydrophones come along and pick up the reflected signal. So how are you going to find oil that way? Well, you then take those reflected signals and you process it by computers. Having computer horsepower has just been a big, big assist in finding it. And you have ways to knock out the noise and see what the underlying reflection, main reflection, is that's coming back at you. A strong reflection will indicate likely a structure down there, and knowing the geology of the area, whether it's likely you may find oil. So, you process these little squiggly lines. When I went to my first review of the data as to whether we were going to drill or not, I saw those little squiggly lines. And you say, you got to have confidence that there's oil down there from those lines. But by the time the geophysicists got through interpreting it, you have more confidence, and then you've got more experience, and you go ahead. But it's still only one in four that's going to be successful. But, it's just fascinating. Story_ID: 21446 Speaker 1: Okay. So in '89' [1989] you became vice president of Mobil Europe Middle East and Australia Exploration and Production, but you were located in Fairfax, Virginia, which was the new home of Mobil, I guess. Speaker 2: Yes we had moved our offices to Fairfax, and the, let's see, ahead of that, because that was in '89' [1989] and I was with the U.S. Exploration. It was a fascinating opportunity that we could find. I was heading the operation when we produced natural gas in Mobil Bay, in Alabama, offshore Alabama. And then we had a big celebration of treating that gas and getting it to market, and so that was exciting, too, when you do have a good discovery and can bring that onshore, but that's, there's a variety of the business. In California we had heavy oil, very viscous oil, but we produced that in California. We made a big project to produce our leases in California. It's totally--U.S. years, we did quite a bit. And we put carbon dioxide down into the reservoirs to help release the residual oil. My thesis research was in using chemicals to assist oil recovery. Well, you can use carbon dioxide which solubilizes that oil, the oil that's trapped, and you can increase recovery. So we had, it was a lot of stuff that we really felt good about. But when I went to the middle east job, and Europe and Australia, the key thing that came through there was that Mobil had long been criticized by the analysts, financial analysts, that it had made a big discovery in Arun, Indonesia, and Arun natural gas, which had to be liquefied--that is you take the gas as it comes up, you cool it to minus 260 and it's a liquid. Then you can pump it on to ships. So now, even though the gas is--natural gas is in Indonesia. Once you liquefy it, you can economically move it on to a ship to the big markets in Japan, Korea, Taiwan, et cetera. So, the analysts were criticizing Mobil that, what's going to come after Arun. We were earning $600 million a year after tax, which was a substantial piece of earnings for the company, but we had no answer on that. We hadn't found another big field. So, when I went to the Middle East, I was brand new now to the Middle East, I took a courtesy trip to the country of Quatar, Q-U-A-T-A-R. They pronounce it 'gutter'. Speaker 1: Okay, like 'guitar'? (laughter). Speaker 2: No, not guitar. Speaker 1: Alright, Quatar. Speaker 2: (laughter). I thought I would faint, I mean, as I'm listening to the presentation, the courtesy presentation by the Quatarees. And they got to know me and so on. They're sitting on the north field in the Persian Gulf. At that time, 300 trillion cubic feet--I mean, it doesn't, the number is so huge it doesn't really mean much. It is just humongous. Arun, that we were getting $600 million a year, is only 13 trillion cubic feet, 13. This field had 300, so, we started working and negotiating to be part of that. And it was an opportunity which I won't bore you on in terms of quick opening that had happened, that we could get into it. And, but we wanted to do it under certain conditions. So I worked with the board, presented it to the board of Mobil, the conditions under which we should get into it. Because they offered us seven percent of the project, and I said we needed 30 percent. We wanted to be involved in all phases of the operation from the natural gas in the ground all the way to the market. They weren't so sure about that, because they'd have to give us ownership of the natural gas in the ground, and they weren't, they wanted us to just get a processing fee. Anyway, cutting through it all, we ended up negotiating the deal. So I did initiate it with the Quatarese. I think I hit it off pretty well with the Premier. In those days you negotiated with the ruler of the country. The country had oil-- Speaker 1: So it wasn't an agent of his, but it was the ruler? Speaker 2: Yes, the ruler. I have a photo of-- Speaker 1: What was that like? Now, did he, I guess, deal on a basic western fashion or did he have another, or was it something else? Speaker 2: It was, you know, with his culture, he was comfortable when I met with him. He sat cross-legged with no shoes on,(laughter), very respectful. I had to speak to him through an interpreter. he was upset that the gas had not gone to market yet. It was discovered a while back, we did not discover it. So, we don't take any credit for that. But I saw with the markets assessment I had our guys look at, that the time had come for that natural gas. Indonesian gas, they weren't finding a whole lot in Indonesia. Quatar has this huge gas resource, could now start supplying Japan, Korea, Taiwan as a start, and then could go to Europe, because Russian is only going to go but so long, going into Europe. And we saw an opportunity, and so I thought it was timely now. It wasn't that people were dumb. I mean, the gas, natural gas was there. But they were, all the companies that looked at it before thought the marketing time was not ready. But we assessed that it was, and so we took the lead on the project. We did get 30 percent share, we did get ownership and all the steps from the natural gas, and then underneath in the Persian Gulf all the way to the customer. And this is a huge, huge project. Speaker 1: This is a $70 billion deal? Speaker 2: Yes now it is. We started, when I presented it to the Mobil board, it was $18 billion. And we would be, round numbers, 30 percent of that. But now we felt that was just a starting piece. They've got so much gas, natural gas. So now it's up to a $70 billion investment and still going strong. Mobil has made huge amounts, now Exxon Mobil, from that project. Speaker 1: Now this is a big feather in your cap, I guess, that Mobil, I would say-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah I still reference to--a lot of people didn't believe we could do it--and actually some references to the senior president, senior level executive high up who was discouraging on it, and wanted to pull the plug on it, but we did it. And it's just, it really is. So when I go for any kind of company get-together, people refer to the Quatar deal that we did. Speaker 1: The Quatar deal, okay. Story_ID: 21447 Speaker 1: Now, that same year, '89', [1989], we had a big oil crisis--Exxon, Valdez... Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: ...ran around in Alaska, I guess and spilled oil all over the place, and they're still cleaning that up. Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure you could find something, but it's not anything that I'm aware of that has deleterious effects. It was heavy oil and took more time to clean up, but it's not anything lasting, from what I hear. Speaker 1: I apologize, I just represent popular thought about it. (laughter). Speaker 2: (laughter). Speaker 1: But that's-- Speaker 2: That happened where the captain of the ship wasn't on the bridge and the ship ran aground and got a big gash in it, so then the heavy oil spilled out. And then the guy had an alcohol problem. But then it was understood that he had recovered from it. Anyway, I don't know all of the details, that was Exxon. See, Mobil had not merged with Exxon yet. They did that in 198--no, no, no, no, not '80' [1980]. Oh, my goodness, I tell you, time is really going. 1998, I think. It was in the '90's [1990s] that Mobil merged with Exxon. So that's-- Speaker 1: That was like a good ten years. Well, it's fourteen years. Speaker 2: Yes about fourteen years. Speaker 1: Yes about ten years before. Okay, yes there merger came--yes I have it in, not '98' [1998], '99' [1999]-- Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. Story_ID: 21448 Speaker 1: What you were saying about the Quatar deal just now is exciting, I think, so you should tell that. Speaker 2: Oh, the, after I signed the agreement for Mobil to enter into the joint venture, we have, at Mobil we would meet every Monday if you're in town to have our briefings. And so, after I gave the briefing the Monday following that weekend when we did the deal and signed it, and I reported--it was the first time that I really, it kind of warms your heart--I got a standing ovation, so it was really, it made all the effort worthwhile. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, at this time are you still the only black executive at Mobil? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, in terms of operating responsibility. We have people who've moved up in employer relations. We started, oh, we started I'm trying to think, in terms of operations. No, we put Paul--Paul, we posted to Nigeria. So, we did have an African-American executive who was running Nigeria. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now, let's see. And during this time period, what, I know you were named Black Engineer of the Year in 1992. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: And you served on the advisory committee for MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and did you some lectures at the University of Wisconsin, I believe. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, this is all leading up to your retirement in 1993? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, seems like you're, well, you're 57 in '93' [1993]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It seems like it's still-- Speaker 2: (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that. Speaker 2: It was, I had a great career with Mobil. I really wondered, quite frankly, how many more years I had, because no one in my immediate family lived past 62, 64. And so I had a career, but I just wanted to make sure I had some time for other things. My job just took all my time, which I enjoyed the challenge. So, it's almost like forcing myself to wind down. And so it was a huge surprise to Mobil when I said I wished to retire. I think they finally did understand that I just needed the different experiences. I had a great career and could certainly continue to achieve at Mobil, especially that I had just done the Quatar deal, a huge deal. But I went ahead and retired. The chairman of Mobil at that time, Alan Murray, would often say, "Tell me again, why are you retiring?" "Now, let me listen carefully." (laughter). So, and then he, because you know how anytime somebody leaves such as I was in my position, you know, is there something behind this? People didn't believe that was the reason that I gave. So Alan would always emphasize. "Believe me," he told the board, "Arnie can keep his job as long as he wants." Again, just the Quatar deal, and there's no question I could have stayed. So, it was a big surprise to everybody. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a, what was your plan, just to relax? Speaker 2: First, some quiet time. I was like forcing myself to have some quiet time. But it wasn't too long before Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology] called and asked if I would join the faculty, and I said "No, I didn't retire from Mobil to go work somewhere else full-time. I would have stayed at Mobil." And then they called back and asked under what conditions would I do it. And that's when I talked to my wife Connie and we felt we would go down to Georgia, join the faculty, but be in Atlanta [Georgia] half of the year and back in Connecticut the other half of the year. And that kind of balanced--see, you're getting some free time, ah, it worked, that balance worked. And so, I ended up doing that ten years--six months with me down in Atlanta, and six months back in Connecticut. So-- Speaker 1: Would you spend the winter in Atlanta? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: And then I had the students, they were just wonderful students. The young people, it's uplifting. So, I did enjoy that. So, when I did retire, then I retired as professor emeritus. And I recently was down there to give a talk on the BP oil spill. We were just there in April. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21449 Speaker 1: So what did you think about the BP oil spill [2010], since you mentioned it? Speaker 2: Well, I was tapped to be on the committee to study that and make recommendations to the U.S. Government. So our report went out in December. In a nutshell, it's, one of the toughest things in any organization is to have safety be part of a culture. That is, this is the way we do things. Not that this is the way we, have certain rules, but you know you can bend them. But this is the way we do these things. We reinforce each other in doing things the safest way. Safety is the most important. And you have to have the organization believe that and reinforce that. Then when you do that, then you can avoid human error. Human error is 80 per cent of time--severe accidents, it's human error. And so, how do you get at getting people to focus and do things the safe way and not cut corners, or with human nature being impatient, not taking the time? And that is very tough. So, they made a serious error in declaring the well safe, that the cement was holding, blocking off the reservoir. You have to block off the reservoir for a while, until you can come back and produce it. And when you have the cement down there blocking off the reservoir, you have a test to see if it's blocking it. You don't want to take off the safeguard. There's a safeguard on the well, and that's the drilling mud. The heavy weight of mud will hold back the oil and gas. But then you got to take that mud out, because you're going to want to produce this at some point. So, now the cement has to hold back the oil and gas. And they have a test, and they totally misinterpreted the test. The first result of the test said the test failed, the cement was not sealing. Then they said oh, maybe that was because of this, let's do it again. They did it again. The test failed, which tells you the cement is not sealing. Then they said oh, let's try it another way. And I won't bore you with trying it the other way, but the other way said the test was successful. But the other way, you can explain why they thought it was successful, but they didn't challenge themselves. And they didn't explain why were the other tests unsuccessful. They got this one result, charged off--yes, the well is safe, we can remove the safeguard, the drilling mud that sits on top of this whole thing over two miles. It really generates a lot of pressure, and once they started taking that mud off, boom, oil and gas came out. And the blowout from that air is designed to cut across the well. It's a steel plate, [soaring sound], and it shut off the well, but the blowout preventer did not function. And then oil and natural gas just gushed on up and the gas ignited in the engine room and a fire started. And it's like a torch, a huge amount of natural gas oil coming up blasting across the platform. And they were fifty miles out at sea. The water depth, they were about two miles above the reservoir, and it was, it eventually sank. Eleven men lost their lives, and then five million barrels ended up spilling into the Gulf of Mexico before we could cap it, before BP could cap it. So, that human error of declaring the well safe. And no one understands their logic and how they declared it safe. We felt that all those spurious results should have been investigated. They should have spoken, they, being the people on the rig. They've got experts on shore that they could have spoken to. Speaker 1: Do you think the oil industry is regulated well enough at this point? Speaker 2: Well, you're asking that of an old oil guy, so (laughter), being objective, I think it is. I think there certainly are risks, but I think that the record of the industry has been quite good. And you'll have an incident like this, unfortunately, and, but it's not just enough to say it's human error. You got to say, how do you get your arms around that, and how do you get your arms around a lot of things we do where human error could be disastrous? Nuclear reactors--so it really, this whole thing of safety culture sounds kind of nebulous. I guess you can say it is, but how do you deal with organizations where you don't do that, you don't, you go back and challenge yourself, you bring in other people to help you assess whether that's a safe act. That's a tough one. I tried it at Mobil. We had a lot of people working in factories making the plastic film that was actually running machinery. See, so it's not running a big refinery where you know equipment is behind walls, the processing's taking place. But walking around the factory floor with the machines going, if I saw some unsafe act, unsafe act, I would talk to the person. We strongly reviewed safety. I would shut down or have the manager shut down a production line, because there are cutting knives on these, to cut the film. If it looks like a dangerous situation or a person getting their hair tangled into that, shut it down, or actually penalize that worker. Two safety incidents with a worker, they're out of there, they're fired. So, you start building a culture. It's hard, it's something you've got to work at every day. Speaker 1: Okay. So, there's more diligence on the part of the company? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's what you recommend? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 21450 Speaker 1: Alright. Are there special students or highlights at your stay at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology] that come into mind before-- Speaker 2: Well, I did have David Lam come. Now he's a successful entrepreneur from those days at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]. And David gave a talk to the students on the entrepreneur, you know, taking the technical idea and then building a company. So, and that was a hit. The students, just wonderful kids. They stay in touch. I've been invited to a couple weddings at least. And their careers, I'm so proud of them as they've moved forward. And Georgia Tech has an excellent program and excellent students. So, I have no doubt about the future of America when I see those kinds of kids coming through. And it wasn't just in the technical fields. Georgia Tech has other programs. I like the general values of the kids coming along. Speaker 1: Do you think there's enough science programs in the schools today? Speaker 2: I think so. I think we got to be careful in trying to reinvent or come up with new ways. I think techniques can be improved and more clearly explained to students for giving students a chance to get their, what's troubling them, straightened out. That's generally what prevents the progress of the student, is trying to straighten out some piece here, but the faculty member is going ahead to another piece, and then trying to get attention on what's troubling you, and getting it explained carefully sometimes gets gobbled up. So, there's always improvements in that. But I think the basic approach that we had is good, and it can be improved, more personalized learning, that computers make possible through, or you think you make a mistake, giving you some hints or helping you so you can etch your own pace to straighten out the fundamentals, straighten out your learning. I think there's something to say about that. But we've got a system that is the envy of the world. We've got to beat off students from other countries who want to come here. So, I think it's a little overdone, this business of how we rank, and we start seeing how these things are developed, and the ranking, you've got to know what the ranking criteria are. Some people are exaggerating to have an article, a published article. So there's a lot, it's not apples and apples, its apples and pears on these comparisons. Story_ID: 21451 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Help all of us recognize the opportunity that we all have, and that we strive for that. You know, you can only relate to your own experiences, and there can be some disappointments, but you continue to strive. You get rid of the baggage. Quite frankly, I still see some of the black community, the youngsters, they've got baggage. And it's, there's just too much opportunity in this country to have baggage. And you've got to work clearly for what you want. I remember a little sign in Harlem when I was growing up, in a candy store. And the guy had this sign on the other side of the counter and it said, "If you want your prayers answered, get off your knees and hustle." (laughter). And so, and it's true. And there can be all kinds of excuses. And I'm saying this because, it's not, I mean I certainly have had slights. But I think you, you got to build your own confidence, and you build that through trying and doing. Anyway, I know different people have different experiences, but you got to keep going. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Positive. Story_ID: 21452 Speaker 1: Okay. You served on quite a few boards. I think you were on the advisory board, you were on the advisory board of the City College of New York, right? Speaker 2: I was, I'm no longer participating in that. I was on the advisory board at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]. A number of advisory boards I have not renewed participation--because it was MIT, Carnegie Mellon, City College that were the prime ones. But now, more time at the national level with the National Academy of Engineering Board and then the National Research Council board. So, those are taking up time. But you do have a little something or input into national policies at that those boards, rather than individual school policy. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Say, in performing in so many jobs where I was the first African-American, that I think I did a pretty good job. That I hope that helped in terms of not only in encouraging African-Americans, but also in terms of the mindset which I think, no matter what we say, some people will have. So, I think we have more and more examples of accomplishment. I think maybe we'll get to a point where those mindsets won't be there, or will be greatly diminished. And, of course, now having a black president, you say certainly that should be a step forward in terms of at least the aspects of mindset, and I think it is a big huge step forward. But there are a number of people that have been coming along over the years in the jobs that they're doing and contributing, and are proving everyday that the opportunity is here. Grab it, move forward and don't be burdened by old baggage. All incidents are examples to grow from and achieve from. I mean, we have more and more examples. So, I, of course in the science arena, think being somewhat early as a scientist and then also in running major operations and businesses, that there's been some pioneering nature of that, in terms of being able to handle so many complexities and business problems. And we have more and more leaders of companies these days that are coming through, leading major companies. So, I think it's an up swell--ground swell that's happening, and I'm proud to put my little piece in it. Story_ID: 21453 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you've been married since 1970. Do you have any children? Speaker 2: I have a daughter from my first marriage. None from the second unfortunately. Speaker 1: Okay. How's she doing, can you tell us something about her? Speaker 2: Well, my daughter went to NYU [New York University]. She got a degree in journalism. She pursued that as a career for a while. I think it was Value Line, the publication that gives out, publishes business data on a variety of companies. She worked doing editing for them with her background in journalism. And then after that she got married, so I have two grandchildren. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, she hasn't pursued beyond that--some early work that she did at Value Line. Speaker 1: And your wife is an artist, as you were saying before, right? Speaker 2: Yes, right, yeah. Yeah, she's just, she's got a variety of interests. I think she should have been a scientist, she's got a good--in fact, an engineer. She would have been a very good engineer. She's always telling me about fluid flow and this, that and the other, heat transfer. She's, she's very smart. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother [Maria Lucas] live to see you get your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Yes, she did. She was really proud. It was in June, 1962. She came up to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and just had a wonderful weekend. Story_ID: 21454 Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered as contributing to pioneering technology such as the plasma. As an educator. At MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology] I interacted well with the students, and hopefully I had some lasting impact with those students that they would remember. As a visionary business person through the huge L&G Project at Quatar. While it's a project, you say well, it's just a big industrial project, it opened up where at least in the case of Mobil, now Exxon, where you now have ownership of the resources, and the creation of energy for the world from that huge resource that's going worldwide. So that makes me feel... If I could be remembered in helping energy supplying, it's a good combination of Quatar and Mobil, and the way we did the project, and we did the project with the highest ethics. I'd like to be remembered that no matter what the business was or the technical issue was, that we did it with the highest ethics, and it--even talking to students and the caricatures you see in movies where it's the unethical that seems to come through. Good ethics is good business, besides doing the right thing. You have people come to you with deals. I had people come to me with deals for Mobil where because they felt we'd be a good ethical partner to work with. So, if I could be remembered that I ran our businesses at the highest standards of ethics, that we opened up new areas for jobs and opportunity and energy supply, and that I helped train and hopefully positively influenced some students, I'd feel good about that. Story_ID: 21455 Speaker 1: That's my father. I got that photograph much later in my existence, and didn't see my dad that much or hardly at all. Speaker 2: Give us his name just for the-- Speaker 1: His name is Francis Stancell, my father. Speaker 2: There's me, a street in Harlem. I think that's 131st Street, and my sister. That's my sister, Jean. So at that time I'm about, what, three years old or something like that. Jean would be five. Speaker 1: That's '39' [1939], I guess. Speaker 2: This is where, after the negotiations with the State of Gutter, signing the agreement to commercialize the field, a huge field, not--300 trillion cubic feet which it has now, 900 trillion cubic feet. It's just huge, and this is a big deal for Mobil. Speaker 1: This in Germany, near Munich. We had a company there that made the equipment we used in our film business where we actually stretch the film and make it, capable of replacing cellophane. This German company is named Brouchner [sic] and, again, located near Munich. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is in the Bronx, I think it's, yeah, Pelham Park, Memorial Day kind of celebration with my mom and a friend of hers. Speaker 2: First job at Mobil in research. This Mobil Chemical Research, and I'm doing an experiment there. Speaker 1: That's about nine sixty-- Speaker 2: That's 1962. Speaker 1: My mother, Maria Stancell, my sister, Jean, and that's me. After I retired from Mobil--well, actually, when I announced it, people were surprised I was retiring at 57, 58 years old. And my boss, who was a director of Mobil, after I presented the Gutter deal to the board, incidentally, I must be the only person to present a huge deal to the board and then retire about four months later. So he wrote the, his name is Paul Homens (ph.), he wrote a note to me as I left the presentation of the deal to the board, which they hardly approved. He says, "A super job, you leave Mobil in a blaze of glory." Speaker 2: This is David Lamb. I taught at MIT in 1970, and I had a tough decision about whether I'd stay as a professor when they were offering me tenure. But David did the research on the Plasma and since formed his own company. Speaker 1: This is offshore, this is actually on shore, but we're in Alabama. That's the governor of Alabama, myself. My boss, is to the other side of the governor. I was in charge 'cause he was in charge of all of exploration production. I was in charge of the U.S., and I'm standing next to the governor. Speaker 2: So you don't know the person on the extreme left? Speaker 1: That's the manager for that part of the U.S. Speaker 2: Okay, and the governor is the tall guy in the red tie? Speaker 1: Yes, um-hum. Speaker 2: It's Mobil, Mobile [Alabama]. Speaker 1: All right, and now, this is offshore in the Gulf of Mexico. And the helicopters is in the distance there. I made a review visit, business review visit to the platform. Speaker 2: This is in the Netherlands. I make trips to review operations, have business discussions and see the operations. And we're on shore--we're offshore, Amsterdam, into the North Sea here. Speaker 1: This is Ambassador of Cutter, Mark Hambley (ph.), at the time when we negotiated the deal with Cutter, the Ambassador is very helpful in terms of what's going on in the country, etc. Speaker 2: The Ambassador Hambley invited me, and then the gentleman with the suit jacket on in the center, that General Hoar who was key in the Gulf War and leading the U.S. forces. Speaker 1: A meeting in Cutter. One of my assistants is leading the way, and I'm coming along for a strategy session, for a review session with Cutter. Speaker 2: This is sometime around early college days. Oh, no, no, no, this is about, one second, I'll tell you in a moment, so this is about 1980, just a photo. Speaker 1: We're in, at a refinery in London, the Coryton Refinery making a business review meeting. I took Connie along with me, and the fellow coming down the steps, a colleague, and that's his wife. Speaker 2: A group of the managers of various countries. We call them presidents of the individual countries. Not all of these are presidents. That includes key executives of all the countries as we go from Turkey in the South, all the way up to Finland. We met, we meet once a year. That's in Shamanee in France. Speaker 1: This is the Black Engineer of the Year award presentation. Ozzie Davis was kind enough to give his time to make the presentation. This was around 1990. Speaker 2: "Black Enterprise" ran a piece on careers in terms of oil careers, etc. And so they put their front piece, their cover sheet, they highlighted me at Mobil. Speaker 1: That's my wife, Connie and me, and this is about 1982 because this is just before we went to London. Speaker 2: This is some of the facilities in producing natural gas. The natural gas is below the water, gotta drill down below the seabed, and now, you bring it up and you can't see the pipelines bringing that to shore. And at the lower part of this, down at the bottom, that's the L and G Plant. You chill the gas to minus 260 degrees Fahrenheit, at minus 260, it's a liquid. And now you can put it onto ships. I think the next one has the ship. So, now, once the gas is liquid, now you can economically load it onto the ship. If it had stayed at a gas, you couldn't get enough on there, and those containers are insulated so that the, it remains liquid, even though the trip to Japan--we're gonna go to Japan from here, from Cutter in the Middle East to Japan. It'll take two weeks. Speaker 1: Those keep the gas cold-- Speaker 2: So the gas will stay cold. Speaker 1: --stay cold. Speaker 2: Yeah...