 Story_ID: 485165 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please? Speaker 2: Cedric Lamar Smith [HistoryMaker Cedric Smith], C-E-D-R-I-C, L-A-M-A-R, Smith, S-S (laughter) S-M-I-T-H. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: May 17, 1970. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: Fine artist. Speaker 1: Okay and today's date? Speaker 2: February 23, 2007 [sic. January 23, 2007]. Story_ID: 485166 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you five People magazine-ish type questions, okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color I would say is probably burnt orange. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Probably winter, I think I like cold better than I like heat. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite destination for vacation? Speaker 2: Not really, I just like driving around and seeing anything new, so I don't have like a specific place or anything like that. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you like to eat? What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Catfish (laughter), catfish and also barbecue salmon. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: Well, I always just tell kids when I do shows and autograph posters, I always say, "Never grow up." Story_ID: 485167 Speaker 1: All right we're going to start the interview with your family history. Let's start on your, your father's side. What, what was your father's name? Speaker 2: His name is Orlando Olivia [ph.] and actually I never even met him. My mother had me and I guess, excluded him out, so I've never even met him. I don't know nothing of him. Speaker 1: Well tell--can you spell his name? Speaker 2: Orlando, O-R--hello (laughter), O-R-L-A-N-D-O. Speaker 1: Okay, and his last name? Speaker 2: Olivia, I think it's O-L-I-V-I-A. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so let's go to your mother's side. Tell me your mother's name? Speaker 2: Geraldine Smith [Geraldine Smith Burke]. Speaker 1: Okay and you can go back as far as her parents, is that right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me your [maternal] grandparents' names. Tell me your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Catherine Smith [ph.]. Speaker 1: With a K or a C? Speaker 2: C. Speaker 1: And your grandfather? Speaker 2: George Smith [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about your grandmother and grandfather? Speaker 2: Well, as much as I remember, my grandfather died when I was pretty, pretty young, probably around I'm thinking like eight years old, I'm thinking. But as far as I remember he was always in a wheelchair and I use to hear all the stories about him doing like a golf course thing and my uncles and all of them were being caddies, so, that's pretty much the stories I heard of him, so I don't, didn't know too much of him because like I said, he died when I was a younger person. My grandmother I know a little bit more about her because as during--as kids we use to live with her during the summer and that's mostly where a lot of my ideas come from as far as my art, it's things that I saw her doing whether it was her being in the garden or just her just being nurturing and stuff like that and we went there every summer, so from the discipline part for her taking us to church and her being an usher in that church for a long time, those are probably most of my memories of her. Speaker 1: Okay. Where did your grandmother live? Speaker 2: Well they, they call it Lincoln Park in Thomaston, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you--well, tell me, you talked about church, what church did she go to? Speaker 2: I think it was called Friendship Baptist Church [Thomaston, Georgia]. Like I said, she was like one of the ushers who, had been an usher for a long time. That's like I say, I, I mean I have memories of the, the church more so because me and my cousins and my sister [Erica Smith], we all as kids just cutting up in there and you'd just feel like somebody was watching you hard and it was my grandmother because she was always like at the door. She was the one who let people in and out of the church. So, I just have memories of her always--me looking back and she gritting her teeth at me telling--not saying a word, but just gritting her teeth and letting us know, you know, to be quiet. Speaker 1: So you, when you went there for the summer you were going from the city to the country. What were some of the things that you did where she lived in Thomaston? Speaker 2: Well, just basically we were just being kids, but it was a big adjustment for me because I think as far as I can remember, me coming from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], my, I guess my language was kind of different to them, or, or, or so they felt and I remember kids use to always say, "You talk white." And I didn't never, I didn't never knew what they meant by that, I was like, "What do you mean?" "He talks so fast. He talks proper," and I was like, "What's proper?" And I still didn't catch none of it and stuff and then me watching how the area that they were in, like, a lot of the kids didn't even wear shoes, not that they didn't have it, but during I guess the summer, their parents wouldn't allow them to wear shoes because it was meant for school. So, I always I guess, just being a kid, you want to try to fit in and I remember me trying to take off my shoes and run with them and I couldn't do it for nothing, I mean, the gravel and stuff would just hurt my feet, so I remember that and also, me and some of the kids putting together a little store of our own like my grandmother had a store and we were trying to have like, sort of like a lemonade stand, but what we were selling was Kool-Aid or fruits and stuff we'd pick from trees and stuff like that. And basically that's it and making little go-carts out of wood and old tires and stuff, but that's the only thing I can think of right now, like of my memories as kids being there. Speaker 1: Okay. You said your grandmother owned a store, what type of a store did she own? Speaker 2: Sort of like a neighborhood corner store. Her sister owned a store where they--in the area they called Potato Creek Heights [Thomaston, Georgia] and that was more of a store, but what my grandmother had a store like that before I was born, but I think it burned down and stuff, so I never saw it, but she had like a little, just a little small little, how do I say, neighborhood store, I should say. Speaker 1: All right. Did your grandmother, did she ever talk to you about her life at all? Speaker 2: No, not really. Story_ID: 485168 Speaker 1: So your mother is Geraldine Smith [Geraldine Smith Burke]. Did she, did your mother ever share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Not really, I mean, I mean when her and my uncles and my aunts get together they always talk about more the discipline they got, I mean like how they use to sneak out the window and how, when they'd come back in and my, my [maternal] grandmother [Catherine Smith (ph.)] would be waiting on them (laughter) and stuff like that, with a switch or whatever and that's so funny because that same thing they did I remember trying that with my grandmother when she came to Atlanta [Georgia] to keep us while my mother was out of town and I tried the same thing as a teen, I snuck out the window and I came back in, I mean, I, I remember looking out before I went out the window, I remember looking in the living room and saw her in the chair asleep near the fireplace, so I'm thinking that I'm getting out and I did get out and then when I came back I opened the door, I seen she was still--was in the same spot, so I'm thinking I just got away clean and I remember the next day, that morning and she asked me how many eggs I wanted and I said, "One," and she said, "You sure you don't want three so you can have enough energy to go back out that window again," and stuff like that (laughter), I mean, I think about like the stuff that my mother went through even though she says little, my grandmother was much harder on them than she was the grandkids, but I just thought that was pretty funny. Speaker 1: Well, well tell me about your mother? What did your mother do? Speaker 2: She's an accountant for AT&T [AT&T Inc.] and she's been with them for I'm thinking like, fifteen years now, I think. She lives in Lithonia, Georgia. Pretty good woman, I mean she raised two kids by herself and I, I kind of, when I think about a woman like her I always think about like the women of today like who are raising kids by themselves and, and even to this day I kind of help out with different people I know who are raising kids by themselves because I think about how as kids, like my mother, you know, came to Atlanta from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and how we use to sleep on a little mattress, you know, by ourselves and stuff and how I use to have to watch my sister [Erica Smith] while my mother was working two jobs and stuff and I mean that's basically I can say about her, she's just a good woman and to this day we weren't grown, raised in an affectionate household, but like now, I'm noticing, you know, we're trying to be more affectionate and saying I love you or, and even hugging each other and so, that's it (laughter). Story_ID: 485169 Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood when you were small, well let me ask you this, before you tell me about the neighborhood, what is your first or your, yeah, your first childhood memory? What do you think about when you think about your childhood? Speaker 2: I think most of it is when I was with my [maternal] grandmother [Catherine Smith (ph.)] because that gave me a chance to be more creative, being just this little artist in me that had more chance of me going here finding a piece of wood and nails and chisel and craving stuff into it or building what we call clubhouses back then out of bricks we found, mason bricks and stuff we found just around, about, go-carts and stuff, that's probably my fondest memories, but I also have memories of when staying in Atlanta [Georgia] or Lithonia [Georgia] at the time, and just hanging with the wrong crowd, and I, and I don't like to use it as an excuse about you know, not having a father figure around, but I think a lot of times I were, I mean I was like looking for that male role model or something, even though I had my uncles, but they weren't like in the same city at the same time, so I did--just hanging out with the wrong crowd which ended up, ironically ended me in jail and I did almost, almost two years for something I didn't even do, but just the simple fact that I was with these guys and I remember the judge saying that, he, because the guys even told him I didn't do nothing, you know, what they did. They had did armed robbery. They told him I wasn't with them but the simple fact, he said something about making an example of you and to say that, to show you that you know, you're guilty by association and at the time I still didn't get that, but then when they sent us off I remember being so angry and stuff and thinking like you know, why did this happen and stuff like, but gradually as the months were going by I started looking at it more as a blessing because I kept thinking like, what if I kept hanging with them and one day I caught a bullet or something and so I, I looked at it like that. I know a lot of the people who were there was more you know, didn't look at it that way, you know. And I think once I got out of there it opened my eyes to a lot of different things and that's what got me to the point I'm at now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This point. Story_ID: 485170 Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your, well, let me ask you about your siblings, or sibling, you have just one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just one sister. Speaker 1: And what is her name? Speaker 2: Erica, Erica Smith. Speaker 1: And what does she do? Speaker 2: Right now she's still in school. She's been like making a career out of going to school I guess (laughter). But she's a very shy person, quiet. We have different fathers. Her father is still living to this day. His name is Glenn McDonald [ph.]. He's in (unclear) South Carolina. And we, even though it's just us we still like I say, once again, that the affection thing wasn't there, so we--it's almost like we are more friends than we are you know, family. It's like we see each other we hug and kiss and stuff like that, but it's still like we don't have that relationship I think that, that, what people consider normal relationship with each other. But all I can say about her is that she is real shy and everybody that meets her they say that she is real quiet. Story_ID: 485171 Speaker 1: Well tell me about the neighborhood in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where you grew up? Speaker 2: See, I don't, I don't remember too much about Philadelphia because we left there when I was six, so the only thing I remember once is slipping in some ice, I mean (laughter) and some snow, but I don't have too many memories of Philadelphia. And I haven't even been there since really. Speaker 1: So you moved to Atlanta [Georgia] when you were getting ready to go to school? Speaker 2: Um-hm, in the first grade in Decatur, Georgia. I, I think the school's name was Utoy Springs [Utoy Springs Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], I think. Yeah, like I say that's, that's why I say I don't have too much memory of Philadelphia. Speaker 1: All right, so you went to elementary school in Decatur, Georgia? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And this was a public school, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers in elementary school? Speaker 2: I remember two teachers; one was Ms. Leslie [ph.] she was my, I think she was my fifth, or sixth grade teacher and she was the one who kept me pretty occupied as far as doing my art work and stuff. She had me doing backdrops for plays and helping other kids out with their projects and then it was another teacher named Ms. Wise [ph.] who--the reason why I remember her so well because I remember telling her I wanted to go to this particular high school which was Douglass High School [Frederick Douglass High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and I remember her telling me that they wouldn't let you come in there, and I was like, "What do you mean?" And at first I thought she meant because the area and I wasn't in that particular area to go to that school, but I think after I later found out it was more about social status at the time, at that time, which I still didn't really grasp at that time, but that's why I do remember her because I ended up going to that school, but those were probably (laughter) the two teachers I remember the most. Speaker 1: When did you first realize you had a talent to, for art? Speaker 2: I mean I always drew or like carved things, but I, I, I guess I didn't think nothing can come of it because you know, you, you hear, you talk to parents and they always say, "Get a real job," or you know, "that art is not going to take you far and it's not that many blacks doing art as a living, or, for that matter, anybody doing it for a living," and once I got out of high school I, I think I wanted to get into it, but then I still didn't think nothing could come of it so. Speaker 1: What kind of carvings were you doing? We're, we're still in elementary school now. What types of things were you doing? Speaker 2: Just like--more, like I said, backdrops for plays and just helping other kids with their projects. I didn't too much do any paintings or anything like that; it was mostly things for the school Speaker 1: What other activities were you involved in in elementary school? Speaker 2: The choir, but that was very brief. I mean, other than that I really didn't have any other activity except just being home and playing with the neighborhood kids. Speaker 1: Okay. So what junior high school did you go to? Speaker 2: I didn't go to junior high school; I went from elementary straight to high school. The elementary school was Rosalie Wright [Rosalie Wright Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I went from Rosalie Wright to Douglass High School. Speaker 1: Rosalie Wright? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Rosalie Wright was the elementary school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What is Utoy Springs then? Speaker 2: That was the first elementary school, that's when we stayed in Decatur. That's when my mother [Geraldine Smith Burke] first moved to Atlanta, I mean well I say Atlanta, but to Georgia. And then eventually we moved to downtown Atlanta, which was Rosalie Wright School. Story_ID: 485172 Speaker 1: Where did you live in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Right off of Martin Luther King Drive [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] which, a street called Wingate Street. Speaker 1: Okay, and was this in a house or an apartment? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a house that my mother [Geraldine Smith Burke] was renting. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about the neighborhood? Speaker 2: I guess it was a typical neighborhood. I mean, a lot of kids there, a lot of boys and, versus girls and all of us were into our little go-carts and little motor bikes and that's basically it, it was a far difference from down at my [maternal] grandmother's [Catherine Smith (ph.)] house where we actually had to build stuff (laughter) because they, they didn't really have the money or anything like that, so, this neighborhood here was more, more middle class people who gave a lot to their kids, which I, I didn't get a lot, you know but, because of our situation, but it was mostly middle class people. Story_ID: 485173 Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Douglass High School [Frederick Douglass High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Douglass, okay. So after elementary school you went to Douglass High School and how, how did you come to go to Douglass when--why did the teacher tell you you couldn't go there? Speaker 2: I think it was more, I believe it was more of a social thing because at the time it was a lot of somewhat privileged kids, I guess they would want to say, at the time Julian Bond's [HistoryMaker Julian Bond] son was going there and a lot of--some of the mayor's friends kids were there and stuff, so I think it was more that, but--and I managed to go there (laughter) because my mother [Geraldine Smith Burke] had a friend who lived in the neighborhood and we just used her address because she just really wanted me to go to that school versus the other school I was suppose to go to, Turner High School [Henry McNeal Turner High School, Atlanta, Georgia], which I didn't end up going to, but, which was in a, more of a rougher neighborhood than Douglass was. Speaker 1: So tell me about Douglass, how did you fair there? Speaker 2: I guess once I got there you kind of see people who I thought, thought they were better than, or something like that, and I was always the odd one in, in a sense because I kept to myself and I still hung out mostly with the people in my neighborhood versus the people who I went to school with. Even though some of the people I went to school with actually came with me from Rosalie Wright [Rosalie Wright Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], but I, as far as Douglass I really didn't feel too welcome there in a sense, you know nothing came about, no fights or nothing like that, it was just, I just didn't feel too welcomed there. Speaker 1: So while you were there did art--were you into the arts there? Speaker 2: No, like once again, I mean I took the regular arts classes but once again, I still didn't think nothing would come of it, so I never even thought twice about art. I just did my schoolwork and went on (laughter) with the rest of my day. Speaker 1: What did you think you would like to be? Speaker 2: To be honest with you I didn't know what I wanted to be. I think I, I thought at one time I wanted to be an architect, but after (laughter) I found out how much math was involved, I kind of quickly talked myself out of that, but I didn't, that's probably the only thing that I can think of that I thought I might want to be. Speaker 1: So there were no other activities, the band, did you-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --go to the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)], or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Nothing? Speaker 2: Nothing at all (laughter). Speaker 1: What type of student were you then? Speaker 2: Probably more of a B, B and C student. All, the teachers, teachers always said I talked a lot, but, I, I use to get sent out in the hallways a lot for talking, but I, which I thought was pretty funny because I didn't think I was really that, that smart of a kid, but when it came to test and stuff I was always passing them, but still and I believed the teachers were probably thinking the same thing, I mean how does he do anything when he's, he's doing more talking in here, talking to other students, you know, interrupting them, than anything else, but I, what was going on was I would get finished with my work and then I'd get bored and I'd start talking to the rest of the classroom. Speaker 1: So how long did you stay at Douglass? Speaker 2: Actually I only stayed at Douglass two years. And my mother moved; she finally bought a house so we moved to Lithonia, Georgia and I ended up going to Lithonia High School [Lithonia, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did anything change for you socially, or, in any other aspect for high school? How did you like the children or the teenagers there? Speaker 2: I think they were more down to earth, I mean they were more, I guess, my level as I would say, I mean it was still like struggling people who probably got their first homes and, and felt good about it and stuff and they, you know, felt good about themselves and I think that's why I also met a lot of more, a lot more kids who probably didn't have fathers and stuff like that, so I could kind of get more understanding from them or how they coped with it, or how they handled it, actually. And so it was a big difference versus going to Douglass where maybe, I'm not saying all of them, but maybe all the kids there had both parents in the household and so I think I liked Lithonia a little bit better, well I knew I did, I liked Lithonia High better. Story_ID: 485174 Speaker 1: So did you graduate from Lithonia High School [Lithonia, Georgia]? Speaker 2: No actually that's when--I end up (laughter) going to Southwest DeKalb [Southwest DeKalb High School, Decatur, Georgia], which was the last high school. I ended up going to Southwest DeKalb because the school started getting, Lithonia started getting a little bad reputation and stuff like that, and so my mother [Geraldine Smith Burke] put me in Southwest DeKalb, but I didn't graduate from high school because of the incident happened with me hanging with the guys who got in trouble. Speaker 1: Yeah, so at this point, tell, tell me what happened? Speaker 2: What happened was I got suspended from high school for getting in a fight which to this day I still don't understand how that happened. All I remember is I'm walking into the cafeteria, somebody called my name, I turned around and I get punched in the face and the guy, once we got into, into the principal's office he said that I hit him first and all I could think of, somebody else probably hit him, he turned around saw me first, and whatever, so I got suspended for a week and during that week the guys in my neighborhood, they went to another, another school at the time and I remember them saying, "Let's meet and let's go to McDonald's or something," just hang out. And I remember catching the bus meeting them, but like I said I didn't know they had did something prior to that, all I know is we're on this motor bus and we're riding thinking we're going to McDonald's and then the bus gets pulled over by the police officers, the DeKalb County [Georgia] police, and they made us get off and then this guy gets out of the car, a young, young boy and he just pointed at all of us and I'm still like not knowing what's going on here, you know, and then they lock us up, take us to juvenile and stuff and they tell me what went on and like I said, my friends telling them I wasn't with them, but that was the circumstance; because I had, I had done something before and I think the judge brought that up that I had done something before and he looked at it like even if I didn't do something maybe I would have done something, I don't know, I don't know how he looked at it. I remember his name to this day, it's Judge Wheeler [Edward D. Wheeler] and I remember him giving me that time, so I ended up getting a GED [General Educational Development] and, and they had me in a place called Milledgeville, Georgia [Milledgeville Intensive Treatment Unit, Milan, Georgia] and I remember getting a GED there and because I said I didn't want to go back to school because I felt like if I had went back then everybody would be like, "Where did you--where have you been?" And I didn't want to go through that, so, I just took the GED. Speaker 1: How did this affect your mother? Was a she a strict disciplinarian, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think she was as strict as she could be because she could only do so much, I mean, you know, her working a job and a half, or sometimes two, two jobs, just to you know, support us and stuff. So I know that really, you know, hurt, hurt her and you know I saw that when we were in the courtroom. And that's another reason like I say once I got in there, I couldn't be too angry, you know. All I looked at like you know, this, or either I would have been dead probably, you know. So I looked at it as a blessing. And I think at the end that she did too. And to this day she always brings that up that, you know, that's probably one of the best things that probably happened to me, you know, to, to get me to the point where I'm at now. Story_ID: 485175 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about your, your time at, in Milledgeville [Milledgeville Intensive Treatment Unit, Milan, Georgia] and you, you said that you quickly put away the anger to be able to deal within the system, so tell me a little bit more about your time spent there? Speaker 2: It was, like I said, it--I just, I try to look at it like it was almost like a boot camp or a summer camp, I guess that's how I had to put into my head to make--because my whole thing was to make this thing go by as quickly as possible and you know, and, and being angry about it and you know, I think was just wasted energy, so me being there I had my little fun time there. Even though people say, "How do you have fun in there," because it was, it really was, it was more like a little camp for boys and me being a little smart-aleck or whatever sometimes got me in a lot of trouble. Different guys in there wanted to fight me and stuff like that. I remember probably, as far as I can remember I probably got into over eighteen fights that I know of and, and it was all over small stuff, as, as something as simple as somebody walking up to you saying, "Let me have your Honey Bun," something like that and for me to think about how something that we just take for granted outside (laughter), you know in the free world, you know we take for granted, how something like that is such a precious commodity to them and I think I use to make jokes out of it like, "You want to fight me over a Honey Bun?" And all that did was just fuel the fire and stuff, so I got into a lot of little fights in there, had my wrist broken and had a rib bruised, nose broken and out of all of that a lot of times I ended up winning the fight, but you couldn't tell. I guess I'm just an easy bleeder or something, that's what people say, but that's probably the only, really the memories I had in there. And I tried to stay busy by reading books and stuff. Speaker 1: What, what did you read? Did you read a lot? Speaker 2: Well mostly biographies and I just tried to, like I say once again, not that I'm really into reading. It was just something that can keep me busy. I also use to cut hair in there. I cut hair in there. I was a cook in there. I was taking a little college course classes and stuff like that, anything that can keep me busy. Speaker 1: Did you get your GED [General Educational Development] while you were there? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I got, they offered it to us and I took the GED and they said it was like one of the highest scores in there, so they offered me a college course which I you know, I wanted to do, but then I thought the catch was that they--the first three months your, you can do it at the YDC, the youth development center, you could do it there, but then they take you off ground to, to a local college there, but the catch was you couldn't wear civilian clothes, so I'm like, well okay, you want us to go out with something saying that we're in a detention center, how, how would I even fit in? How would I, you know, so I, I turned that down. So I didn't end up doing the college courses and stuff. Speaker 1: So how long did you spend there totally? Speaker 2: In, in Milledgeville, probably fifteen months. Speaker 1: Okay, but you were sentenced to one, one year? Speaker 2: To one year, yeah. Speaker 1: And your fights got you more, more time? Speaker 2: Well, each time you get into a fight and they catch you, sometimes they give you seventy-two hours in, in a detention hole, whatever you want to call that. And which means you don't, you can't leave the room for seventy-two hours, a little cramped, small little eight by ten [foot] room, whatever and, but sometimes it depends on the type of fight it was or whatever and they add an extra thirty days. So, and what, what I found out is that a lot of time when you're about to leave a lot of guys are jealous of that so they know they if they pick a fight with you, you might get an extra thirty days. So a lot of times it was more of people messing with you so you wouldn't leave. Speaker 1: Um-hm, so you kind of fell, fell in the traps sometimes? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think eventually one of our counselors at the time, they caught on and they eventually just moved me to another section because they, they, they, I mean he even told me, he said I was probably one of the nicest kids they had you know, because I didn't give nobody trouble or anything like that and, and they really saw that you know, they just were basically trying to keep me there, so they helped out in the end. So I finally left. Story_ID: 485176 Speaker 1: What about the other boys that were there [Milledgeville Intensive Treatment Unit, Milan, Georgia]? Can you tell me about some of them? Speaker 2: Well, some of the guys, as a matter-of-fact, some of the guys who I went down there with--I felt like a lot of them were talented, I mean, we all had some sort of talent. It was a lot of people who could draw. It was a lot of people who can do sports and stuff and then there was the guys who, who could sing and I thought that was pretty funny because I'm, I'm looking at these guys who are like over two hundred [pounds] plus all muscles and they singing like Luther Vandross or something and, and I just always like, God it's, it's so much talent in here and it's like if they just had the right guidance or something maybe they wouldn't even be in here because I felt like even to this day, like how they are taking so many of the like art programs out of school and how that is affecting some of the kids. They don't even have another outlet, so all they know is to go out and possibly just get into trouble or get into the wrong, hang with the wrong crowd. So now even to this day I sometimes go to school and I talk to kids about that, you know, I let them know that you know, just because they don't have a program here that doesn't mean you can't do it at home or start up something yourself. And I also go to some of the youth development centers and talk to the kids and let them know that there is an out you know. A lot of kids don't seem to--you know, when I walk in there I usually walk in there with a suit on or kind of dressed up and first thing I know, they look at me like, "What do you know about us, what can you possibly tell us," but then when I start naming the youth development centers or talking the slang and you know, showing them the marks on the body or stuff like that, then it's more like, "Oh, okay," and now they want to listen. So I think--and they need to see you know, I never looked at me as being a role model but I see how much, how that helps even with the kids who in the privileged schools who I done went to talk to. I did a residency in Charlotte, North Carolina and part of that residency you had to pick to go up to an outreach and I picked this school and I went there and it was an all-white school and I talked to the kids there and it was an art class and I remember the teachers telling me once I left, like a lot of the kids--they were doing a painting, they told me like a famous painter of theirs and a lot of the kids were doing Picasso [Pablo Picasso] and, and like she said once I left a lot of the kids just painted over what they were doing and it was more like, because I related to them more and I was telling them why keep picking Picasso, I mean, he wasn't the only artist you know, out here. So stuff like that helps me and I really wish someone had did that to us while in school which probably would have kept me from being with the wrong crowd and probably kept me out of jail. Story_ID: 485177 Speaker 1: So when you come out of Milledgeville [Milledgeville Intensive Treatment Unit, Milan, Georgia], how old are you? Speaker 2: How--you mean now? Speaker 1: No, when you come out of Milledgeville (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I was eighteen. Speaker 1: You were eighteen? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, what was your next step? What were your, your plans? Speaker 2: Well, once again, I, I didn't know what I, what could happen for me. I mean, I took the GED [General Educational Development] and then I started thinking negative about that, like okay, what can I possibly get with a GED, that's what I started thinking. So I just went back to what I was doing in, when I was locked up which was cutting hair. And I just started cutting the kids' hair in my neighborhood. And one day a guy who opened up a--his name is Thomas Flowers, he opened up a barbershop in the neighborhood and apparently the kids in the neighborhood were telling him--he would ask them because he was trying to get some clients, so he was asking them, "Where y'all getting your haircuts from?" and they said, "This guy named [HistoryMaker] Cedric Smith," and he was like, "Who is this Cedric?" So he finally got in contact with me and asked me would I cut hair with, in his shop, but I told him I didn't have a license, so he said I could do an apprenticeship under him. So I went under the apprenticeship under him and I did that for a little over twelve years, cutting hair. So that's what I did once I left the (laughter) jail. Speaker 1: What was the name of the shop? Speaker 2: Salem Crossing Barber Shop [Lithonia, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay and that was in Lithonia [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And during these twelve years had you thought about art at all? Speaker 2: Not really. I didn't think about it really because once again, I keep, keep going back to saying that I didn't think you could make a living off of that and, and what--a strange thing happened was I was cutting this guy's hair and I heard him on--his cell phone rang and he got on the cell phone and he said, "Okay, meet me at the studio." So the first thing I thought was he was talking music studio. And I just wanted to ask him you know, "What type of music you do?" And he said, "I don't, I don't do music." He said, "I love jazz, but I don't do no music." And I'm like, well, "What kind of studio?" and he said, "I'm an artist." and I'm like, "What do you mean an artist?" And he said, "I'm a painter." And I remember, I remember saying like, "You make a living off of painting?" and he said, "Yeah." And he invited me to his studio. And I went down to his studio and it just blew me away, really. I mean, he had these marble floors, huge canvasses, oil paintings every where and I found out--his name was William Tolliver and all this time I had been cutting his hair, cutting his son's hair, I never knew what he did. But when I talked to him more I found out he was self-taught and that he came from a very poor family from Louisiana and that kind of sparked me, like God, maybe I can do this, maybe I can try at least. So what I ended up doing was doing a few paintings and hanging them up in the barbershop and once I did that I started getting feedback and stuff from people and I finally--because it, believe it or not, I really didn't like cutting hair. The only reason I did it because I didn't think nothing--I could do anything else. So finally one day I took some paintings to a gallery and you know, they sold a few of them and then I said, you know, this just, maybe this is a shot I need to do, just take that chance and just jump out there because I figured it wasn't that much of a big risk because I could always come back and cut hair. That was--it wasn't like a corporate job where I would lose rank or whatever, but I remember telling the owner Tom, that, I'm leaving, and he was like, "What do you mean you're leaving?" (Laughter) And I said, "I'm leaving." Story_ID: 485178 Speaker 1: I didn't save up any money. I, I just basically, I gave him [Thomas Flowers] a week and within two days I remember like just painting some paintings and stuff, like small paintings, but then that week came up and I was sitting and thinking like, oh man, maybe I made the biggest mistake because I, I hadn't made any money. And I said well, I'm just going to shoot for it anyway. So I remember my last day at work [at Salem Crossing Barber Shop, Lithonia, Georgia], I remember going home and doing these huge paintings. I did like five paintings that were like four by five feet and I remember putting them in the truck and taking them down to this gallery to see if they wanted to show them, but once I pulled up it was this older white woman getting out of her car and I'd seen her around there a couple of times. She use to work, she worked in one of the galleries, so she said, "What have you got there?" And I said, "Some paintings, I'm going to take them in here and see if they would want to see them or anything or like them." She said, "Let me see what you got." So I pulled them out and she looked at them, she said, "Well these are nice." And she said, "What are you going to sell them for?" And I remember saying, "I don't know," because I didn't know how to price or nothing like that and so I remember saying, I think I said something like, eight, eighteen, eighteen, I said, "Eighteen [$1,800]." And she said, "Oh no, you can do better than that." So I thought she was talking about lowering the price, which I think that's what she was talking about, lowering the price. So I said, "I don't know, fourteen?" And she was like, "Eh." And I said, "Okay twelve?" You know, I'm thinking you know, well what's the problem here (laughter), do you like it or not, and she--and I said, "Twelve," and she said, "Oh, okay." She said, "I'll tell you what, now help me put it into my truck." And I said, "What do you mean?" She said, "I'm getting them." But I'm like, "Are you kidding?" And she said, "No." She said, "I'm writing you a check now." And I remember putting them into her truck (laughter) and you know, she wrote the check and she gave it to me and I folded, I didn't even look at the check, I just folded it and I stuck it into my pocket like, like nervous like, I can't believe this, like before she change her mind or something like that. And I remember she said, "Okay now, go and cash it and have it and have a good time, you're on your way." I remember her saying that and I'm like, okay. So I got in my truck and I'm driving down Peach Street and all of a sudden I feel like I'm some rich person, like I can go eat anywhere I want to right now and I did all this driving up and down, up and down Peach Street and I say, "Why am I sitting here, I haven't even cashed the check yet?" I go to the--I, I forgot the name of the bank, I went to the bank, reached for the check, open it up and it was twelve thousand dollars and I was saying twelve hundred (laughter). So, so I being this good person, I was suppose to be or whatever, I went back to her and I said, "No, I wasn't saying twelve hundred," I said I was--I mean I was saying, "I was saying twelve hundred." She said, "No, that's what I want to pay you, so go cash the check." And my career just went from there. It just, all of a sudden I was doing more paintings and they were you know, galleries were picking them up and they were selling them and it just went from there. Speaker 2: Wow. That's a fascinating story. Did you, do you know who this woman was? Speaker 1: Oh my God, it's like as soon as you ask me I couldn't (laughter). Oh my God. I can't think of her name right now. I, oh she would kill me too because I (laughter), I can't think of her name right now. Speaker 2: And, and the gallery that she owned was on Peach Street. Speaker 1: No, she didn't own it, she was just actually working there. What I found out, her husband owned a CPA [certified public accountant] firm in Atlanta [Georgia] so she didn't have to work, so she was just basically there just to get out of the house and I, I know her first name is Jean [ph.]. I can't think of her last name now, but her first name was Jean. And it's so funny like she bought those five paintings and then I had a show like maybe a year later and she came to the show and bought two more paintings and she brought some friends, they bought some paintings you know, so, I, that was like I say, like and once again, I always think like things happen for a reason. I thought you know, that was meant to happen. Speaker 2: Did you have any more contact with William Tolliver? Speaker 1: Actually he lived right down the street from where we were staying, so I use to go to his studio late at night, sit with him while he'd paint, ask him questions or just hang out with him. And once again, I, I was still continually cutting their hair. I was cutting his hair and cutting his two sons' hair. Story_ID: 485179 Speaker 1: So do you remember your first showing? Speaker 2: My first showing was with a gallery called Archer Locke Gallery [Barbara Archer Gallery, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was funny how I came across that because I was going in to show him some paintings and the guy's name was, I think his name is Charles Locke and he said, "I like them, could you show me, could you bring ten paintings," he said, "because we're having a celebration at the gallery celebrating Elvis Presley's birthday?" So I'm saying like, "Well, who's going to buy some painting from me from an Elvis Presley celebration?" And he said, "Well no, I just want to see how people respond to them." So I brought the ten down there and the night of the event, eight sold. And he was like, "You've got to paint some more, you've got to paint some more." And I'm like, oh my God. So, I'm hyped about it, he's hyped about it. And then what, what happened later on was, he was in a car accident and he wasn't like completely damaged or nothing like that, but he didn't want to do the art world anymore. I guess something happened at that time and he just wanted to give it up. So his partner at the time, Barbara Archer, she took over and she turned the gallery into Barbara Archer Gallery and she was the first one to give me a show. It was a two-man show and I don't remember how many paintings I had in the show, but the show was a success. They probably--I know she sold over 75 percent of the work I had in there. And that's when the word started getting around to other people and other galleries soon picked me up. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I want to say it was like '91 [1991], like between '90 [1990] and '91 [1991]. I can't really remember what, exactly what day. Story_ID: 485180 Speaker 1: What are you painting and what mediums are you using? Speaker 2: It's what they call mixed medium. I'm taking old photographs of--and incorporating them in paintings to make them look like old vintage signs of something. And that's going, once again, going back to the memory of my [maternal] grandmother [Catherine Smith (ph.)] with the stores and us as kids going through the wooded area around the house and finding old Coca-Cola signs and seeing the weathered look on them and me trying to mimic that. And I also was trying to put, show a more positive images of blacks versus the negative images that I use to see and also thinking like if, if there were more positive imagery out there that maybe we would feel more your know, or better about ourselves to the point where you wouldn't have as many of them in, in the jails or anything like that. I really think it's lack of self-worth with, with blacks and that's why I think we tend to get--well, I'm speaking for the, the kids really, tend to get more into trouble ourselves. So, that's it (laughter). Speaker 1: So tell me where do you, originally, where did you get your--was there other ways that you got inspired to do your paintings? Speaker 2: No, mostly like I said, just me wanted to mimic old signs, which was a love of mine, vintage things and the inspiration of more, just showing more positive imagery. Speaker 1: What about music, did that influence you at all? Speaker 2: The music came, I was, like I guess a lot of kids were, into rap and, and the one group in particular that I really was fond of was the group called Public Enemy and which is more of--they would, would say radical or political rap group. And the lead rapper, Chuck D, I, I remember him saying once that most of our heroes don't appear on no stamps. And that sparked with me a series of paintings which I was putting black images on, me mimicking postage stamps. But I wasn't picking like, celebrities. I was picking like the common person, like the mailman, the milkman, the teacher, the preacher. And what I was doing was putting these images on these paintings and on paper and they looked like postage stamps, so it went from there to me putting them on magazine covers, like instead of saying People magazine, I would put, Our People magazine, or Better, instead of Better Homes and Gardens, I was thinking about my grandmother, Better Shacks and Gardens. And I actually did like images showing women like in the garden and stuff, you know, picking flowers or picking collard greens and stuff. Speaker 1: Who were, who, who was, who were the people who were buying your artwork? Speaker 2: Really, even to this day, I probably still would say over 70 percent of them are whites who buy my work. And I, I tend to believe the reason of that is because once again, with blacks I tend to find that we're not so much into our history. I don't know why we're not. It's, I don't know if it's being ashamed of it or whatever, but I tend to think that other cultures are, are more into their history, or others histories versus blacks and I think that's why my work is being more purchased by whites than blacks. And now it's starting to grow a little bit more maybe it's more the education is, is coming in now. Because once again, by them taking art programs out of schools, these kids don't, you know, think nothing of art. They just think it's decoration, I guess. Speaker 1: And you actually take the photographs that you use yourself? Speaker 2: No, I mostly use old photographs I collect. I collect photographs from flea markets; people pass them down to me, eBay [eBay Inc.], and doing like that. I--whatever the photograph is, you know, wherever I pick up a photograph, if I look at it long enough I can--if it's a girl holding a flower I might make it seem like she's in a garden, or paint it, like she's actually on a porch holding flowers, or holding a bag, a real bag of potatoes or something. Whatever I want to, to incorporate, I'll, I'll go off of the photograph itself. Story_ID: 485181 Speaker 1: Besides William Tolliver, what other artists do you admire, or, or like, or try to learn something from? Speaker 2: Well, one, one artist in particular is a guy named Zachariah Anderson [Zachariah A. Anderson]. I really liked his work, but when I, when I look at other artists, I don't, it's not so much about their style that I'm, I'm inspired by. I'm mostly inspired by the fact that they are actually being an artist. So people like him, people like Benny Andrews, Jacob Lawrence, people like that, I'm, I'm mostly influenced by them being an artist, so that's what drives me. As far as my style, I think it's like a combination of all, kind of like a gumbo, like a combination of all these people who I like, I pick up something that I like about what they do and kind of put it into my work. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay, branding and pop art, I mean, does that have a room, is there any room for any of those things. I mean, I know that you have this kind of no boundaries, no rules type thing in, in your artwork, do you want to talk about that? Speaker 2: Well, I just believe there shouldn't be what they would call style. I just think they throw that word style I guess so there's like a limitation on you. With me I feel like--and it's still a fight to this day because I, I go through this with some of the galleries that represents me, it's like I truly believe that art should be appreciated or being able to be bought by anyone, not, you know what I mean, not anyone, but not just people who can afford it. And I really wish that I can do pieces that's you know, like posters or something that maybe the person who can't afford a thousand dollar piece can afford a thirty dollar piece, you know, or image, at least. So when I go to talk to schools, a lot of times I give away posters of my work. And a lot of times I've even gotten sales from that, even though that wasn't the case, I wasn't doing it for that, I was doing it more so that the kids could take something home and see an image, or their image in something and also to show them, or just to have some form of art on their wall instead of a poster of a rapper, or a ball player or something, that you know, try to throw in a little mix of, of what's the art itself, because that's, it's really lacking in, in the household I feel. So, that's sort of my, as far as my no rules and stuff, I apply it to my art also, like I, remember someone telling me at one of my art shows, like, "Your composition is all wrong in this, in these paintings," and I'm like I didn't even know what composition was (laughter). So, I was like, "What do you mean?" He said, "The balance," he said, "you know, it's not balanced correctly." And I said, "I'm still not getting what you mean." He said, "Okay, your trees, you've got all these trees here and, an there's nothing on this side," and I'm like, "Well, when you look out of a window, I don't see the exact same trees on one side that I see on the other side." I said, you know, I, "If art is an imitation of life, how I look at it, I'm imitating what I see and I don't see what's, where the rules come in." Who's to tell me that I can't put purple with red, you know, and that's just stuff I do because I'm, I'm trying to approach my art like a kid would do, just, just free, free with it, just paint whatever they want to paint, just from a feeling, not someone telling them not to use this color or don't go outside this line. So that's mainly what I mean by there's no rules or boundaries for me. Speaker 1: So when someone says, naive art, would, would that be something you would call your work? Speaker 2: No, I just think I'm just, I just think it's just art. I think, like I said, it's amazing to me, like, I hear a lot of people say my work is folk art, you know, and I don't look at that as an insult, because I don't think, I don't think a lot of people understand what really folk art means. But you, a lot of people also think folk art is more of less, less educated as versus an artist who's trained so, and to me, I always thought the best artists were the ones who weren't trained because once again, like one of my friends who's an artist also, [HistoryMaker] Kevin Cole, I mean he always tells me when he looks at my work, he says, "I wish I sometimes I didn't go to school because," he says, "it's a lot of times when I want to do something but in my head I, I'm saying to myself, 'Oh, you can't do that because that's not right, you can't do that.'" But with me, I just go at it like, you know, gung-ho about it, I don't know the rules, a lot of times I don't, I don't even know a lot of the rules, so I think that's what makes me to me, a good artist. Story_ID: 485182 Speaker 1: So we were talking, you were saying that [HistoryMaker] Kevin Cole was telling you that he wished that he had not gone to school so that he can have that freedom that you have. What about the, the different titles of your work? I notice a lot of artists might say, they might give it a name and it's 'One,' 'Two,' and 'Three' or 'Untitled,' how do you title (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With my work, with the paintings it's easier because a lot of times I'm just basically going off of, like if I do something on, and making a product, I mean, in a label saying red velvet I know the name red velvet because it's just easier to remember, but I'm doing my photography now and with the photography it's like I'm taking so many pictures so I can't possibly keep up with these titles (laughter), so I just, sometimes just go with the 'Untitled' and just you know, 'Number One' and 'Number Two,' but I keep it in a series so I know what they're talking about, but I just don't know exactly which picture they are talking about and it's just easier and I think a lot of artists tend to like to put 'Untitled' because they want also the observer to want to name one themselves or get a you know, feeling what they thought the artist was you know, thinking of when he did it. Story_ID: 485183 Speaker 1: You do photography and painting, do you like them equally? Speaker 2: I mean, I, I think my first love actually was photography it's just that once again, I didn't think nothing (laughter) would come of it and I didn't have any training with it so I thought, and I thought it was all of these things you needed to know before you could pick up a camera or anything like that. And once I started using old photographs in my work, because that came from that love of the photographs and me, my family not having as many photographs of family members so that was that, that yearning for me to want to collect photographs and use them in my paintings, but then it went from that to me actually wanting to document stuff myself, so it started off as me documenting, but then it ended up, that, that love for that photography just really kicked in, so now I think I like the photography, well, I know I love the photography more than I love the paintings because it gets me out. It, it gets me out of the, the studio and me seeing new things and witnessing different cultural things and stuff. So yes, I definitely love photography more than (laughter) I love painting. Story_ID: 485184 Speaker 1: Let's step away from your painting just a little bit. What other things do you like to do? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I like cooking (laughter) and I, I don't know where that came from, but I, I love cooking. In, in Atlanta [Georgia] I had this studio and I use, I use to do a lot of cooking and invite all the people in the hall--I use to just keep my door open and people would just come in there and I'm always experimenting with different foods, mostly seafood even though I'm not a big seafood eater, but I use to like cooking just to see other people eating it. And I, I use to love, and I still do, love watching Emeril [Emeril Lagasse], or the Cooking Channel and stuff like that, the 'Iron Chef' and besides that, collecting antiques. I like antique collecting, mostly photographs, but old signs, old--I, I've collected a few slave tags, actual tags that they had on, on slaves, I collect the manuscripts, receipts and stuff like that, comic books, anything, I just like collecting stuff, even quilts. I, I started collecting quilts and stuff, so I'll say collecting antiques, cooking and also photography. Speaker 1: Any, well, you talked about your [maternal] grandfather [George Smith (ph.)] playing golf, it was--you, do you like to play golf? Speaker 2: Not as much as I know they want me to play (laughter), but I mean, I'll probably go to the driving range mostly just to, for more like a relaxation type thing, but never really get out there on the green as they would say, or on the course, but no, I'm not really that big on golf. I mean, I think it takes a little bit more concentration and once again, and you stay in one space over a certain amount of time, I just don't like that. I like to move around. Speaker 1: But you had a story about your, your grandfather? Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandfather, he, he was, he once, if I'm, I'm, if I'm getting the story correct, he once ran a golf course and then his sons, my uncles, they were caddies and stuff. And my grandfather's brother was a grand champion of black golfers and, which I found out later, because his sister who's a grand champion for the women-- Speaker 1: Who, who, what was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Huggie Smith [ph.]. And I think it was based out of Chicago [Illinois], I think they were in Chicago. And I think they actually wrote a book on it. I can't think of the name of the book. They wrote a book on--a little, small little book his sister put together; but they were pretty good, of course back then they weren't allowed to play with whites so they formed their own little circuit and I, and I once even heard they--well it's in the book that it's documented that he challenged this--the golfer at the time, Ben Hogan, and that he turned him down and with that Joe Louis, a boxer, sponsored like a little tour with my grandfather's brother and sister. So, I would say that was pretty strong. Even to this day my uncles, they go out and play golf every now and then, but it didn't sink in with me not just yet (laughter). Speaker 1: What was your aunt's name? Speaker 2: My aunt? Speaker 1: Well, you said, Huggie's sister (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't think of his sister's name. I, I can't think of her name right now, but she's the one who actually wrote the book, but I can't think of her name. Story_ID: 485185 Speaker 1: As far as other artists, I know that you have had shows with some, some other major artists like Faith Ringgold and Kara Walker, what do think about some of those artists? Speaker 2: I, I, I love all of their work. I think it's a place for--I know people like Kara Walker get a lot of negative things you know, said about her, but I understand what she's doing. I think it's a place for everyone's art out here. I just wish that there were more shows. That they did get their, get the artists who are really known versus, with the artists who are lesser known to help, you know, kind of level things off, you know, shows like that I really appreciate, but I did a show with a photographer who I really like, a guy named Jack Spencer and he's out of Nashville [Tennessee]. And his photographs of all, not all, but the ones I really love, the rural Mississippi and stuff like that and I did a show with him in I think it was Oxford, Mississippi and that was like a highlight for me because I, all this time I followed his work. I even bought one of his photographs. I remember saving up the money to get it. I spent like, like $750 for this photograph and I didn't know that he was even in the show. They didn't even let me know and when I got--when I saw his work hanging next to mine, I was like, you got to be kidding, you know. And then when I met him, he's like this, this, this tall older white gentleman and we talked for a long time. He was telling me how he just--because I asked him did he fly there, he said, "Oh no," he said, "I don't fly," he said, "I just jump in that car." He said, "Where ever that car takes me I go and if I see something, you know, that, that I want to shoot I shoot." And I take that to what I do now; like just get in the car and drive and, and coming across things to take photographs of. Story_ID: 485186 Speaker 1: Does it matter to you that not many blacks are able to, to purchase your work? Speaker 2: You know, I use to, I use, that use to bother me but I'm going to tell you what I'm, I'm starting to feel. I'm, I'm starting to feel a little, way different about that now because I'm starting to think that it's not that a lot of them can't afford it, it's like that's not a priority to them. And, and I'm, I'm seeing that more and more now. I mean, I remember a woman coming to my show and she saying, "Oh, I just can't see spending," you know, I think it was like $1,500, "I can't see myself spending $1,500 on this." She said, "How long did it take you to, to paint this?" And, you know, a lot of artists don't tell people because they say you're not suppose to, but I, sometimes, I, I was just, being honest once again, and I told her I said, "I think it took me like three hours to do." And she was like, "So I'm paying you $1,500 for something, you, you know, that you did in three hours." And once again, that, this smart Cedric [HistoryMaker Cedric Smith] come out, the smart-mouthed Cedric comes out and I was like, "Well how long you think it take them to build that Benz [Mercedes-Benz] you're driving?" And then she was like, "What do you mean?" I said, "I don't think it took them three hours to even make that car, but you have probably spent over $50,000 on that." And I said, "The same with your son's shoes." Her son had on these Jordans. I'm like, "The same with his shoes; you're spending over, you know, close to $200 on something. It took less, probably less than thirty minutes to make, you know." And (laughter) I think she got the point. The point is like I told her, it's not the, you know, how much time was put into it, it's the finished product, you know, and, and if, if it moves you, if it doesn't move you, you don't have to buy it. I mean, so, I'm, I'm starting to believe that more and more because I done done shows over people's homes when I first started, very affluent blacks and I remember people coming in looking and keep walking, you know, and no one offered to buy nothing. And the one thing that struck me was I went, I did a show at this lady's house and it was probably over forty blacks in there and one was an interracial couple and her husband was a white guy, he bought three paintings. Now out of all those people, he was the only one who bought something. And that, that, that kind of just struck a chord with me like, okay. Sometimes I use to look at it like it was an educational thing, and stuff like that, but I'm like come on, these people who are here, now I, I give them more credit because of them going to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. A lot of them went to Spelman and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and stuff; so I would give them more credit. It's not like they don't have the art programs there, which they do. So from--that just showed me then, right there about the priority I think. Speaker 1: Well, when it comes to education I think a lot of people buy art for investment reasons. And as far as education, people have to be educated about buying art as an investment because there is, there is a difference in going to a fine arts studio and you know, buying a piece of art that goes with the decor, you know, the colors blend, or whatever versus buying a piece of artwork that's an investment. The lady that you just described, I don't know whether she is the norm, I don't, I don't think so. People, you know, would question how much (laughter) how much time you spent on a piece. That's, that's really to me, is irrelevant. Speaker 2: No, they--I get a lot of questions and it's mostly from the blacks about, about the pricing of the paintings. And, you know, once again like I say, I think it's more about what they, you know, what's their priority. I mean, yes, it's true that a lot of people buy art for investment, but then I just think it's a lot of them also who buy because they just love it. And you know, or they, they understand or they, they see the importance of having a piece in their home, you know, whether it goes up in value or not, you know. I, I, I use to do that when I first started, I use to ask people, once they buy the painting I always, I always ask them, "Why did you buy the painting?" And I say, "Are you thinking it's going to be an investment?" And they would be like, "No, I just like it." And that's what I use to hear a lot, you know, "I just love it." They said, "Now if it happens to go up in price, that's just a bonus, but I love it, I want it in my house," you know, versus, you know, it doesn't match (laughter) the sofa or something like that, you know, but I still think it's, it's, you know, that's just, from my experience, I still think it's more of the education and stuff, and now, also that some people just don't care, you know. Like I always tease people, I'll say, but if I can do a painting and put it on a necklace or a charm, I'd probably sell out, you know, I mean like sell a lot of them. But if it's nothing that can be seen outside of the house where, I don't think they care too much about it. Speaker 1: Well I, I guess it depends. I, I know that in talking with another artist, once somebody famous bought a piece of their artwork, then their friends bought a piece, and then everybody had to have it, you know. Then they kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's more of a following. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, I think it's also, I mean, I think that can go for any culture or any race for that matter, but I really believe, like even with my pieces now, when I asked for a certain price back in the days, people use to question it, when I say people, I mean blacks, they use to question it. Now, that I'm in prominent, you know, white galleries and stuff, like it's that stamp, that seal on it now, all of a sudden now, it is worth that, you know. And now that they're, now they're still trying, it's so funny, now they're trying to get it for the price I was trying to give it to them back then (laughter). So, that's the funny thing now so, you know. I still think it's like a little educational thing too (laughter). Story_ID: 485187 Speaker 1: What are you working on now? Speaker 2: I'm working on two shows now, one here in Savannah [Georgia]. It's basically on my paintings and it's in February, Black History Month, so I'm, I'm, I'm doing little images that you know, trying to show a little positive imagery, especially here in Savannah, because since I've been here, I'm, I'm seeing the crime rate and, how blacks are looked upon here, you know, and I, I, I think I talked to someone and you don't, please don't quote me on this, but I think they said it's 6 percent of owned businesses, I mean, blacks own 6 percent of the businesses here and it's--because a lot of them are moving out. They are moving to the bigger cities and stuff like that and we live, you know, like right across from the projects. The projects is right across the street and, well, one of them at least. And it's like I, I watch these kids, they walk past, they're loud, you know, they do whatever and stuff like that, but I, I remember asking some of the people here, I'm like, I don't even see any, too many blacks works, you know, like works of art around here. So, what do these kids, what kind of things do they have to look up, you know, look up to, besides of course you know, sports and the rapping and stuff like that. So, hopefully in this show here in Savannah I'm be able to present, you know, a quality show and also I'm going to talk to some of the schools and see if they can try to get the kids to come through. And if they can't, lead me going to them, at least going to some of the schools and you know, maybe doing like a one day show at the school and being able to talk to the kids. And my other show that I'm working on is in New York [New York], that's in April, that's more on my photography. A gallery called Dillon Gallery [New York, New York], that's mostly on my photography and those are mostly images of blacks once again from the old photographs I'm, I'm holding them up, like if I'm seeing an old house, I'm holding a picture of, of, of a couple maybe, a black couple and I'm saying, what I am saying is, what if this was their house, you know, like how would they be to this day. How would their, you know, descendants be if they were able to purchase this house back then, you know, so, or, this car, or anything for that matter. That's what I'm trying to portray in that particular show and I'm calling that series 'Playing God' [Cedric Smith] because what I'm saying is that okay, if I was God this is what I would do. I would put this person in this place. I would put this person in this place and I'm not only, I'm, I'm moving away from only concentrating on blacks because the more I'm out here, the more I'm being exposed to, I see that, I mean I already knew this, but I see that there are more in the world than just blacks, you know. So now I'm incorporating whites and Latins [sic. Latinos], and Asians, and me myself, I'm in a mixed relationship, myself. My girlfriend's white and a lot of people are like, you know, they always question like, "Okay, how can you all this pro-black stuff and this and that, but you're with you know, a white woman?" I'm like, "Well, when I look at the whole pro-black aspect, it's, it's a self-love. It's more like me being proud of my heritage, that doesn't mean that I can't accept, you know, anyone else. That's just me saying I'm proud to be black, you know, and I'm not ashamed of it." So hopefully you know, with the two different shows and stuff I can get, you know, some accomplishment from it. I hope it gets across what, the meaning I'm trying to do. Story_ID: 485188 Speaker 1: So what galleries are you in now? Speaker 2: I'm with a gallery called Guichard, Gallery Guichard in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: How do you spell Guichard, do you know? Speaker 2: I think G-U-I-C-H-A-R-D. Speaker 1: In Chicago? Speaker 2: Um-hm and a gallery in Atlanta [Georgia] called Twinhouse. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: In New York [New York] it's a gallery called Dillon [Dillon Gallery, New York, New York], D-I-L-L-O-N. And the gallery here is called Chroma [Chroma Gallery, Savannah, Georgia], I think it's C-H-O-R-M-A [sic.], I think that's right. I hope I'm spelling that right. C-H-R-O-M-A. Speaker 1: So your work is in a lot of galleries. How many? Speaker 2: Well, at one time I was in, a couple of years, I was in thirteen galleries at one time, but I just started narrowing down because what, what, it was almost like a strategy with me. I felt like being in a lot of galleries to help get your name, and different regions and stuff, but now I'm doing, I'm seeing the quality of just narrowing it down so the lesser your, your work is, is out there, the more demand is brought upon and that's what happening now, especially since my prices are raising, every year they raise my prices and stuff, so you just don't want to flood the market, but I still, like I say, once a year, and every now and then I might put out a poster, you know, just to hand out so people can at least you know, have it on their walls or something like that. Speaker 1: How do you determine the prices? Speaker 2: I don't even have no strategy right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's basically, I go by the size of the painting. And it's funny how I come up with mine, sometimes I just throw out a price and like okay, this is what it's going to be for now and then once it sells, you know, two or three of them sell at that price, then I consider that the price of it. Speaker 1: So after that first lady gave you the twelve thousand dollars you realize, was it then that you realized that your art was more valuable than you thought it would be? Speaker 2: No, I just thought, for some reason, I just thought, that was, I guess God's way of saying (laughter) you know, this is the choice, you know, go this route and here's your you know, foundation, go with it, you know. I didn't, I still didn't look at it like that's what they were valued at, you know, because I still believe it still takes you know, two or three people to buy it for that price before its valued at that, that's what I believe, it may not be, may not be correct, but that's just what I believe. Speaker 1: So, I mean, have you ever had a, a, a time when the piece didn't sell at that price and you lowered the price? Speaker 2: No, never, I've never done that and I actually, it's shocking to me every time I raise my--because I don't know if every artist do this, but I raise my price every year, once a year and I haven't had any problems because I do so many different sizes. So if someone says, "I can't spend," I don't know, "five thousand dollars on this," I say, "Well I got something for sixteen hundred here." You know, I would never drop that five thousand dollar price because I wouldn't, I wouldn't think that would be fair to the people who bought it for that price, you know, for me to be lowering the price. Speaker 1: But all of your work is original artwork, so there aren't, I mean it's, it's just that one piece. You don't do limited editions do you? Speaker 2: I, only time I did one limited edition, in this thing they call a giclee, which is an inkjet printer. I did one image and I did like ninety-nine copies of it and sold out of that in three months. And, and I should have--I said I was going to do once a year, but it just, I didn't get back to it, so that's something on my agenda. I said I'm going to do this year is start back doing one limited edition print and one additional poster every year, but that's just my way of once again, trying to stay connected to the ones who can't afford, you know, like I always tease people, I can't afford my own work, so how would I expect everybody else to you know. So I tend to try to do things that are some kind of medium for them to be able to afford or, like I say, give away. Story_ID: 485189 Speaker 1: What are your say, three favorite pieces? I'm not going to tell you to just say one. Speaker 2: Favorite pieces, one I would say the one, one of the ones that lady bought, well actually, two of them that she bought, the lady Jean [ph.], earlier that I spoke of. One was showing these two little boys and they had flowers, they were at a grave site and you see the church in the background and you see the graves and, and them holding the flowers in their hands and I called it 'Visiting Granddaddy' [ph.] and what I was thinking about was like how I did, not as a kid, but as I went out to the graves, you know, because I don't have that many memories of him [Smith's maternal grandfather, George Smith (ph.)] because I was so young. But that was like my way of saying visiting granddaddy; so I did a painting on that, so that kind--I really liked that painting and another one was showing a girl in the yard and you see these quilts on a clothesline behind her blowing in the wind and that was just more of me, you know, witnessing my [maternal] grandmother [Catherine Smith (ph.)] out, you know, hanging stuff on the line and you're seeing the wind blowing, or it's about to rain and she's telling us to run out there and get all the stuff off the line before it gets wet. So those were probably my first, you know, my first two and then the other is a photograph I had took of a little kid when I was about to cut his hair. His mother brought him in and she wanted his hair all cut off. He had it braided up. So when she took the braids loose he had this huge afro and I remember I said, "No, I've got to take a picture of this, I've got to take a picture of this." So, I took him in the back of the barbershop [Salem Crossing Barber Shop, Lithonia, Georgia] and I went to my car because I use to have all these little props and stuff in my, in my car and I had this American flag in there. So, what I did, I brought the flag and I wrapped it around him and I picked his hair out and just about when I was about to take the picture, he, he yawned and I caught this picture that when you look at it, it looks like, he's like, like yawning, I mean it looks like he's yawning, but it also looks like he's about to yell something and that's probably one of my favorite photographs I took. And I look at that because to this day--I happen to be in Target (laughter) a couple of years ago and ran into his mother and he was standing right behind me. He had--I mean he was a kid then, but he was like, he was taller than me now. And I showed him the picture later on. I, I, I emailed it to him. And they were, they had, they cracked up laughing about it, but that's probably my favorite three out of all the things I've done so far. Story_ID: 485190 Speaker 1: Some of your work is in a couple of the museums in, in Georgia, is that right? Speaker 2: One is in the Tubman Museum [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum], which is in Macon, Georgia. The Telfair Museum [Telfair Museums, Savannah, Georgia] here, they're getting a piece and Savannah, they're getting a piece and then one in Charlotte [North Carolina] called The Mint Museum. Right now the Brooklyn museum of art [Brooklyn Museum, New York, New York] and--I forgot the other one, Chicago Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], they're looking at some of my photographs to possibly put in their collection; hopefully that--I, I really want that to go through because that would be the first time of my photography being in a museum collection. It's always--the paintings are doing well, but I really want to get the acceptance of the photography too. Speaker 1: How did it come about for the Tubman Museum? Speaker 2: They came to an art fair, I think it was called the folk fest, that's when Barbara Archer had my work and--because she was representing mostly folk artists, self-taught artists and she was in this show called folk fest and they came to the show, they--the director, he saw the painting and he liked it and they purchased it right then. So that's how that came about. Speaker 1: Okay, and the Brooklyn Museum? Speaker 2: Brooklyn Museum, they came to an art fair in Miami [Florida] that my New York gallery [Dillon Gallery, New York, New York] was a part of. It was called Bridge Art Fair at the Miami Art Basil [sic.], Basel [Art Basel in Miami Beach], I keep saying Basil, Basel. And I'm thinking about food I guess (laughter) Basel, and they saw the portfolio, portfolios, really it was just like twelve to fourteen photographs in that series, so they're looking to buy the whole series and that's why I said that would be a very big stepping stone if they were to purchase that, especially in New York, Brooklyn, museum of art. That's pretty, pretty real nice gal- I mean, museum up there, so, I'm really hoping that goes through. Story_ID: 485191 Speaker 1: I see you have art on your arms. Speaker 2: Um-h. Speaker 1: Did you design any of it yourself? Speaker 2: No, actually it goes back to that southern base thing. I'm doing what they call a sleeve on this arm. It's still, it's still in, in the works, but like here it's more of like a catfish going up my arm and stuff. And what eventually what I'm going to do is--this is a sun and then over here we're going to put like cotton fields and an old wicker, old wooden church and then I got the rooster here (laughter), and then up here I got the actual like a, like a, oak tree (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tree. Speaker 2: --like a tree and stuff, so all of this is going to be--even around here, it's going to be all southern themes, well eventually it will cover the whole arm, so, that's the thing with the tattoos and stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 485192 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about? Speaker 2: We can talk about my big debit card, my daughter (laughter), I mean, being a father that's, that's, I guess it's a new thing especially for me not having a father figure to even have like a blueprint to go off of so, that's been kind of fun I mean, now she's sixteen so it's--a teenage daughter that's even crazier because she, she loves to dance and stuff, so she's into the arts her, herself and I, I think I'm just seeing a part of me in someone else and stuff that I think it's being--bringing some kind of joy too, you know. I'm trying to get her to, not force anything about the art, but just from the educational thing like just exposing her to what I do and I think one of the highlights I can think with her is, we were walking in the mall, she was like seven years old and we happened to see, well, they had a poster, one of my posters in this, in this storefront and she said, "Daddy that's your work right there." And it shocked me because I didn't think she paid no attention to what I did or anything like that, so, that, that really like just struck a little chord with me and stuff. It was a good thing to have, so you know, me still, like I say once again, not having a blueprint, I'm still, even, even though she's sixteen, I'm still trying to feel things out. I had a conversation with my mother [Geraldine Smith Burke] about that, it was like you know, she was like, "Well, that comes, you know, that comes when it comes. You, you know, can't expect to know what to do and stuff when, you know, even have anything to go off of." Speaker 1: What's your daughter's name? Speaker 2: Her name is Shanique [Shanique Brewer], S-H-A-N-I-Q-U-E. Speaker 1: Okay, and now, what does your mother think about your artwork? Speaker 2: It's so funny, when I first started doing it, I mean she knew I use to like painting and stuff like that, but like once again, it's coming from that background about you know, getting a real job and stuff like that and I remember her, you know, still kind of saying that, but one of the most touching things that, that has happened, I think it was like last year my mother one--she came to one of my shows and she pulled me to the side and said, "You know what, I'm, I'm glad you didn't listen to me," you know. She said, "This is one time I'm glad you didn't listen to me," (laughter) and stuff, she said, "because I'm really proud of you," and stuff like that. And even to this day she probably still ask me have I paid my rent, have I did this, you know, because she, you know, even though she see it in papers and read about it and stuff like that, it's still, I guess in the back of her mind is, you know, just making sure you're still doing okay, so, so it's a joy to see her like, when I send her an invitation she's taking it to her job and passing the invitation to people and stuff like that, or I once was on 'Good Day Atlanta' and her having all her friends tune in and you know, even on her job everybody was looking at it and stuff, so, she, she thinks totally different now. She's very proud. Story_ID: 485193 Speaker 1: I just wanted to touch back on the fact that you talked about Public Enemy being an inspiration. Will or has any political influence shown up in your work? Speaker 2: Somewhat, I, I, I once did--well I do all these paintings like I said about the positive images and stuff and then I felt like a lot of people weren't understanding why I was doing the positive stuff, so I remember at one time I started doing, showing the negative portrayals just to show them why I was doing the positive things, so what I did, did was, I started picking--since I'm heavily into advertising, old advertisements, I started picking like, slave advertisements, like how they're advertised in the papers and stuff and I started duplicating or mimicking more so what it would look like in the papers or what a wanted poster would look like, or, or a sales receipt or something like that and then it went from that to, I'm heavily into the, the minstrel thing, how the black face and stuff like that. So now I've started doing these images of, showing like the posters how, you know, they would have, you know, presented it to the public to showing the guy in the black face and stuff, so, it's, or doing something showing, "Colored seated in the rear." I might do a--I did a painting, I had a, a Greyhound [The Greyhound Corporation; Greyhound Lines, Inc.] symbol up there and then I showed this, this old, this older couple sitting like in a waiting room and then beneath them I had like a weathered looking thick sign saying, "Colored seated in the rear." So that's probably as far as political I will get, but I still--the only reason I'm going that route, like I say once again, is to show them why I'm doing the positive imagery. Story_ID: 485194 Speaker 1: I can't really say, look back over your life, (laughter) but is there, I, I mean, you can look back over your life because you have had a life. Have you had any regrets and, and I, I know that you probably regretted being with those boys, but besides that, are you happy with how you've lived your life since that time I should say (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Only regret I think, well, not my only, but one of the biggest regrets I have is not following your heart, you know I always, you know, tell people that and the reason why I tell people that a lot is to, to say, to, I mean, remind myself to do it because it was, things that I could have done like with my art, like whether it's approaching a gallery owner or, or setting this certain price, or painting this certain subject and I'm listening to everyone else and they're saying you shouldn't do that, you shouldn't do that, you shouldn't do that and I did it and then now the stuff that I wanted to do, I see all these other artists are doing now and they're very successful with it. When I thought of doing it, really not too many people were even doing it and that's probably the biggest regret, like for instance, when I say like the posters, or the giclee, when I wanted to do the prints because I was getting so much, so many people were telling me not to do that because it will cheapen your work and stuff like that and even though I didn't believe it back then, I listened to them and now I see a lot of these, what they would consider big time artists doing giclee prints of their work and I'm like, you've got to be kidding, (laughter) so that's probably my biggest, yeah, probably one of my biggest regrets really and not traveling more also. When I had more time to do it I didn't travel as much and, and now that I'm traveling now I see a lot of stuff I missed out on because I--some of the people who I hang around, they're well-traveled and just to hear their stories and then here I am the artist, who got more capability of traveling more so than they do and not traveling as much, you know, so that's another regret, but now I am trying to play catch up with that now, so. Story_ID: 485195 Speaker 1: This is going to be used for students to learn, or people you know, to share. What would you say to someone who wants to break into the art field? Speaker 2: You know people ask me that and I really don't know what to tell people because the way I got in was just so, I don't know (laughter), so like a, a blessing in a sense, but I don't, I don't know if it's one formula about doing it. All I can say is just definitely be true to yourself about it and just do what you feel instead of doing what other people want you to do because that's what's going to make you stand out, that's what I think, because what I'm seeing even to this day is so many artwork that look, looks just like the next one, you know, and it's kind of, because people are just mimicking and they think it's going to sell, "Okay he's doing this and it's selling." But even to this day I've got--I know for a fact there are nine artists who are doing exactly what I'm doing, I mean copying my work and putting their names on it and stuff like that, so I would tell a student, you know, basically just you know, it's okay to look at an artist and see what they're doing and probably, you know, mimicking them just to get the feel of it, but once you get that feel of it, you know, be yourself, you know, do what you know, that you feel or something that you can relate to more so. That's when the work is really going to you know, to me just going to take off when you're doing something that you can, you know, feel in your heart and also, and if it's no school programs or no art programs in your school, don't just rely on you know, rely on that. What--do stuff like I use to do, just get comic books and tracing stuff out of there, or looking at magazines and you know, trying to draw or mimic what I saw in there and or try to look--because sometimes they do have free programs out of school for art and just, I guess check, you know, get your parents or someone to check into that or something if they can't afford to do that. That's, and like I always tell people, never grow up, and what I mean by that is, you know, approach things like a child would do, like I say, with no rules and no boundaries and that's when I think your best work will come out. Story_ID: 485196 Speaker 1: You're working on a legacy because you've got a long; you've got a way to go. What would you like your legacy to be when it's all said and done? Speaker 2: I just hope really, to just open our eyes, take the, or I'll say, take the scales off the eyes of people who were like me when I was from twelve and up to eighteen or anything like, just to show them that it's an out and hopefully that's what I'm, what I want my story to go down, or the history of me or whatever, to go down to say that, to show that it's an out, you know, and that we all, just because we grew up in poor families and stuff like that, that doesn't mean we're supposed to stay there, you know. It kills me when I see how they glorify the ghetto, like it's just a, a heaven or something, or it's so--a blessing to be there, instead of saying that it's just a pit stop and you getting away from there. It's like, now it's cool to stay in there. And I really just want to show that you know, it's okay to get out of there, you know and do more. I remember like in my--the place in Atlanta [Georgia], I mean, and my friends, they tease my about this today. You go there you have to have fresh flowers in there. I, I always have like pastries, or something there. I always--from magazines, from Homes And Gardens [Better Homes and Gardens], Martha Stewart, all kinds of stuff and but, and artwork and stuff like that, so when people come over it's a conversation piece in itself and I don't know where it came from, no one told me to do that or showed me anything like that and considering my background no one would think I would come to that point so, and that's the thing, I want to show people just because you come from that, it don't mean you've got to end up like that you know, because I done had friends who I've lost to drugs or guns or anything like that and, or alcohol. I don't drink. I never have drinked. I don't--well, I shouldn't say I don't smoke, every now and then I'll probably smoke a cigar, but I never smoked anything else, so I'm completely drug free and all that stuff and just to show them, you know, basically that you can, you know, be a positive influence on your community without being a basketball player or, or a rapper, or anything like that. You can be an artist, you can be a dancer, you can be a poet or whatever, just to show them it's an out basically. I keep coming back to this, it's just an out, you know, so hopefully that's what anybody who hears my story or sees, you know, my accomplishment, that they can, you know, use that as a blueprint, you know, hopefully, because I didn't have any. I feel like if I did, maybe where I'm at now I probably would have been when I was in my twenties, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, if there's nothing else you'd like to talk about I would like to thank you for taking the time to do this interview. Speaker 2: Thanks. Speaker 1: And maybe in twenty years we'll be back to get the second half (laughter) because you are a HistoryMaker as it is, as it stands now-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I hope so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But to hear more about your accomplishments-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to come. So thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 485197 Speaker 1: This is me the day I was born actually, I guess, I guess this is the first picture recorded of me. I was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. I don't remember the hospital, all I know is that it burned down so, this is me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, okay, next. All right, tell us about this image. Speaker 1: This is an image where, once again, I'm, I'm painting to make like an old advertisement and this is called 'Pecan Pie' [Cedric Smith] and it's, it's showing like maybe if it was a sign back then and if it was found today then maybe this is what it would look like, all weathered look and that's basically it. I put symbols in my pieces. This piece is still in the works, but--and you might notice circles, little, three little circles on there and a circle represents like an old film footage like you see the, the air bubbles that's in there, old films, like the projector or something. (Background noise) That's (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I got it, next. Okay, give a description for this. Speaker 1: This is called 'My Buddy' [Cedric Smith]. It's supposed to be like showing a, a kid and his horse and him on his way to the store to buy him some penny cookies, so I made it seem like it was a brand itself, My Buddy Penny Cookies. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This particular image is like my tribute to baseball. This is Sandy Koufax, played for the L.A. Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] and basically the P on the side stands for pitcher. I'm trying to make it seem like it was sort of a representation of a, a baseball card...