 Story_ID: 475485 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, an interviewer with The HistoryMakers, Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Ozell, O-Z-E-L-L, Sutton, S-U-T-T-O-N [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton]. Speaker 1: Okay and your date of birth? Speaker 2: Twelfth month, thirteenth day of '25 [1925]. I always say on the twenty-fifth day of December--thirteenth day of December (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) December. Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-five [1925] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twenty-five [1925]. Speaker 2: The world was blessed with a boy child, and they call him Ozell Sutton (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right, and tell me your place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in a little town in south Arkansas, southeast Arkansas called Gould [Arkansas], G-O-U-L-D, Arkansas (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Arkansas, and would you tell me your former occupation? Speaker 2: I had a lot of 'em, do you want the last one? Speaker 1: Okay that'll be fine. Speaker 2: The last one I was regional director of the Community Relations Service United States Department of Justice for the Southeast Region. Speaker 1: All right and tell me the location of this interview? Speaker 2: The address? Speaker 1: No, you can just say the city and state. Speaker 2: This interview is in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay and today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date I believe is January 19 [2007] isn't it? Speaker 1: Yes sir. Story_ID: 475486 Speaker 1: We're gonna start with what I call five People magazine-ish type questions, okay? Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I really don't, it's either black or blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] said if you can't have but one suit get it black (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No, I really don't, I love steak. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I love seafood, so either one of 'em will satisfy me. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, really I don't, I go a lot of places and, and I enjoy them for what they are and I like to go different places for different experiences. Speaker 1: Okay. What time of the year do you really enjoy? Speaker 2: I enjoy all four of the seasons. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I enjoy spring for its beauty of bursting out, I enjoy summer for what it is; I, I enjoy fall for the change of fall weather and I enjoy winter for its beauty and all that it presents. Speaker 1: Is one of them your favorite? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: All right, now tell me do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is Micah 6 and 8 [Micah 6:8], "What is required of thee, old man, but to do justly, but to love mercy and but to walk humbly." Story_ID: 475487 Speaker 1: We're gonna start your history by talking about your parents and your grandparents. From what I understand you know your mother's mother, your grandmother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Eraline [Eraline Dowthard (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eraline Dowthard, D-O-W-T-H-A-R-D. Speaker 1: And can you tell me anything about her? Speaker 2: You know I didn't know a lot about my mama's mama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All I know is that when I grew up our grandmother was pretty old by that time, and that she suffered some illnesses that I was familiar with but other than that, she didn't--mother didn't live close to her mother, or we didn't live close to her mother and I didn't know grandmother that well. Speaker 1: Okay, all right well then let's go on and talk about your mother, tell me her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Lula Belle, L-U-L-A B-E-L-L-E, Lula Belle Sutton [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton]. Speaker 1: And did she share any stories with you about her growing up? Speaker 2: Mother didn't talk a great deal about her growing up, she talked a great deal about her struggle. She was widowed when I was three, and she was left with eight children, six boy and two girls, she had to--we were sharecroppers so she had to struggle with rearing those six boys and two girls and most of her conversation was how to do that and what we had to do and what kind of children we had to be and she talked about that a lot. Speaker 1: What did she, what did she tell you? What type of children did you have to be to help her through this time? Speaker 2: I had to be good, not only a good boy but a good person and she--mother talked about blacks before us and how they had struggled to make it through and what we had to do to make it through. Mother believed so strongly in education as our way out of, of poverty and our way out of the cotton field and--but mother was always very, very decisive about what we needed to do. She believed in education. She would tell me all of the time that our way out of the poverty and out of struggle was the education and she wanted me to have a good education and insisted that I be a good student and, she talked about it all of the time. Speaker 1: How much education did your mother have? Speaker 2: Not much, sixth grade. Story_ID: 475488 Speaker 1: Now tell me more about being sharecroppers. Speaker 2: Well I don't know if you know what a sharecropper is. Speaker 1: Yes? Speaker 2: A sharecropper is a person who works another man's or another person's land and you get one half off what you produce, share, that's what it means and that's what we did. We got one half of what was produced, and the man's whose land we lived on got the other half. It's a struggle because you didn't get much because by the time you gathered the crops the man got the majority of what you had earned, not only get a majority of crop, you would do what you call draw during the spring. I learned after I got in college [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas] what draw meant--draw on an account (laughter), so you had an account at the, at the store the, the big grocery store and you would draw and get food and, and seed and things of which to make a crop, and then in the fall when you start to, to move and gather the crop, you would pay back what you owed. Well, one of the things that made it difficult was the food and tools and everything at the store was very expensive. He had you on that part, then he had you on a word I'll use, usury and you know what that is, so between what you had owed and what he charged you to owe that, you didn't have much left when at the end of the, of the gathering of the crop. Speaker 1: Crops, yeah. Story_ID: 475489 Speaker 1: All right let's, let's talk about your, your dad and then we'll go back to talking about more about how you lived as you were growing up (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My daddy died when I was three. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Charlie, Charlie Howard Sutton [Charlie Sutton, Sr.]. I didn't know him, didn't get to know him because he died so early. Speaker 1: Okay and was your mother from, from Gould [Arkansas]? Speaker 2: No, she was from a little town in south Arkansas also called Monticello [Arkansas] and if you notice there's a Monticello in every state (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) there is? Speaker 2: One in Georgia. Speaker 1: And where was your father from? Speaker 2: I really don't know. Speaker 1: Don't know, okay. Speaker 2: I know very little about my father. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 475490 Speaker 1: So life as a sharecropper, as the children became older I'm sure you worked with your mother [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] in the fields (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We left the plantation because mother had some difficulty with the plantation owner. Speaker 1: Do you know the name of the owners, do you remember 'em? Speaker 2: Oh yes, ooh oh yes! (Laughter) His name was Holthoff. Speaker 1: How do you spell that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) H-O-L-T-H-O-F-F, Holthoff; it was a German name. I learned that after I got in college [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas] (laughter), the name was German, Holthoff, and that's the way he pronounced it quickly like Holthoff. Germans seemed to speak that way and, and pronounce and things, so his name was Holthoff, Claude Holthoff. Speaker 1: So you were on his plantation until how old were you? Speaker 2: I was on his plantation until I was, oh I guess about twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were, as I said sharecroppers. Story_ID: 475491 Speaker 1: So you left there and where'd you go (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We left there because mother [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] had the--kept good records of what owed and she had and the man differed on what she owed at the end of the year and mother sent my older brother [Charlie Sutton, Jr.] to town, we lived three miles outside of Gould [Arkansas], sent him to town to sell the last bale of cotton because it was the income from that bale of cotton she planned to buy our school clothes, but Mr. Holthoff [Claude Holthoff] said she was not out of debt. Mother said she was and he said she wasn't, but when she sent him my brother, my brother went to town and, and came back and told mother Mr. Holthoff wouldn't let him sell the cotton because she owed some more money. Mother struck out for town going to correct this. My mother was tall for a woman, 5'9". She had long hair, came way down her back. She was very fair as we used the term in those days and extremely good looking my mama was. She took off for town and as it was typical the whole brood was strung out for a block behind everywhere mother went (laughter). The brood was somewhere behind her strung out for a block. We went, we went into town and she walked into the store and she said to Mr. Holthoff, she said, "What's this business about my owing you some more money?" He said, "You're not out of debt." She said, "I am out of debt." He said, "You not out of debt." And then the discussion started, the first time in my life, and maybe even the last that I ever heard my mother curse. My mother was a good sister in the amen corner (laughter), and so and he said "You're--." Mother said, "I'm out of debt and I want my cotton," and she said something to the extent of, "You damn right I'm out of debt, and I don't plan to pay you another nickel." When that discussion started it was on a Saturday, that's when blacks went into town on Saturday (laughter), they went into town on Saturday evening and socialized and did whatever they had to do at the same time, but anyway the blacks--the store was full and the blacks in the store said, "Come on out of here Lula Belle [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton], you gonna get in trouble." My mother said, "I'm not going anywhere until I get my cotton." So after mother wouldn't leave the store, the Suttons wouldn't leave the store, 'cause if mother stayed there we were staying there, and so mother would not leave the store the blacks left the store. They got out of there and they were standing outside peeping inside to see what was going to happen, and mother told my older brothers to: "Go up the street and tell my brother--," she used the term--, "to send me his wagon. Now, don't tell Gus [Augustus Dowthard]," his name was Augustus, and we called--they called 'em Gus. I didn't know his name was Augustus until many years later (laughter), you know they just said Gus. "Don't tell Gus what's going on. I don't want him in this discussion and in this problem." Also I was pretty well grown before I knew what she was doing. She didn't want Uncle Gus involved because a black man would've gotten hung for doing what mama was doing, and I think you can understand that. And so my brother went down and got the wagon, came back, and came to gin, and mother said, "Throw that bale of cotton on the wagon," and Mr. Holthoff told my brother, "Don't you bother that cotton," but what he didn't know was that if mother told her boys to throw that cotton on the wagon it was going on the wagon, that's the way it was in our family, and they threw that bale of cotton on the wagon and we drove off. So we had to leave the plantation I'm trying to say. We left the plantation and moved into the little town of Gould and became sort of itinerant workers on other plantations and so much a day. I heard remember a dollar day, ten hours a day, dollar a day, ten cent an hour and that's the way it was and that's how I worked-- Story_ID: 475492 Speaker 1: I worked until I finished the eighth grade, at the school in Gould [Arkansas]. There was not a high school for blacks in Gould at that time and when I finished the eighth grade that was as high as I could go and that's when I left Gould and went to Little Rock [Arkansas] to go to the great Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas] after I finished the eighth grade in Gould. Speaker 2: Tell me a little bit about the school in, in Gould? Speaker 1: It was a typical school, Gould Colored School [Gould, Arkansas]. It had what was left over from the white schools and it--there was no science department, there was no library, there was none of all of that, but it was a typical black school in Gould, Arkansas. Speaker 2: Who were your teachers? Speaker 1: My professor, my principal was Professor W.M. O. Fields, William Oliver Fields [ph.], who was an excellent man and very bright. I don't know he got to Gould in the first place or why he was relegated to Gould because--two things I learned at Gould, mathematics and English construction, two basics, right--mathematics. Story_ID: 475493 Speaker 1: I remember after I got to Little Rock [Arkansas], and to go to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas] there was a discussion of where Professor Fields' [William Oliver Fields (ph.)] name came up and the teacher of mathematics put some math, put some math on the board, some cube root and nobody in the room could do cube root but me, and he said, "Nobody can do cube root?" Boy sitting back there beside me said, "Yes sir, Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton] can do cube root." Now he knew I could because as the professor put it on the board I sort of mumbled what the answers were, and he said, "Ozell can," and Professor Massey [ph.] said, "Ozell, can you do cube roots?" I said, "Yes sir." He said, "Come up here boy." I went up there, he put some cube root on the board and I did the cube root. Speaker 2: How were you able to do that? Who taught you? Speaker 1: I learned that at Gould [Gould Colored School, Gould, Arkansas]. Speaker 2: Oh you had learned it at Gould (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Professor Fields, that's what I'm trying to say. Speaker 2: Okay, I got you. Speaker 1: And when--he said, "Can you do algebra?" I said, "Yes sir, I can do algebra." So he put some algebra on the board. He said, "Now don't tell me you can do geometry?" I said, "Sir I can do trigonometry" (laughter), and it shocked him, my knowledge of mathematics. Well I learned that under Professor Fields. Professor Fields when the other kids were out on the yard playing during recess, we'd be in there on the board working mathematics, and I learned from this particular guy that Professor Fields, even in those days, had come from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], had a master's [degree] in mathematics (laughter), and now how he got in that little country town I don't know, but he was just that good and that's where I learned my mathematics. I also learned English construction, I could take a compound, complex sentence and stretch it out across the board and tell you every part of speech in it and put it on them stilts. What I'm trying to say is, there are some things that I had not been exposed to, as I said I have never been in a science lab, we didn't have any science, and I had never done a lot of things but two things I knew was math and English construction that came--and Professor Fields also taught me a lot of literature. He was very literatory and every day at noon he'd go around to every room and he' put a poem on the board, and that poem both taught you how to write and you had to learn how to--he wrote beautifully and all over that town they could recognize Professor Fields' students even down at the post office because his students wrote beautifully, and he'd put those poems on the board and we'd have to learn those poems and we'd have to write 'em for our, for our instruction in writing. So that was my--part of my experience at Gould (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gould okay. Speaker 1: In the Gould Colored School (laughter). Story_ID: 475494 Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings; name your brothers and your sister (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had five brothers, they up there on the wall. My older brother was named after my father [Charlie Sutton, Sr.], his name was Charlie Howard [Charlie Sutton, Jr.]. One of the blessings I had as I grew up, I didn't have any father, I didn't have any grandparents around, didn't have nothing but my mother [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton], but one of the blessings I had was my older brothers, and the oldest one we called C.H., Charlie Howard, who thought so much of his younger brother that he was the closest thing to a father I had. Actually his daughter once called me from California about six months ago and she said, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton]?" I said, "Yeah?" She said, "I got no business calling you Ozell, Uncle Ozell." I said, "You call me what you want to baby." She says, "Remember when you use to stay with us?" I said, "Yes, when I came to Little Rock [Arkansas] to go to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas], I stayed with you." She said, "Yeah, my daddy thought so much of you and he was so concerned that you have a good educational opportunity." I said, "He must of have because he lived in a four-room house and he had two daughters. Two daughters occupied one bedroom, he and his wife occupied the other bedroom and then there was a living room and a kitchen." Said, "But when I went there not only was those bedrooms filled up by he and his children, two of his wife's brothers were there. They lived--occupied a let-out couch in the living room, and his wife went and got me a roll-out bed so the three of us lived in the living room," said, "Y'all didn't have much room but," said, "but that's the way it was with blacks in those days." And so I stayed with my brother to go to the Dunbar High School. Speaker 1: And what's the next brother's name? Speaker 2: The next brother was Samuel [Samuel Sutton], we called Sam. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The third brother was Willie David [David Sutton] we called W.D. The next brother is the only one of 'em still alive, his name was Henry [Henry Sutton], name is Henry, he lives in St. Louis [Missouri]. He's eighty-seven now and never lets me forget it. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what's your sisters' name. Speaker 2: But the oldest one of us was a girl, her name was Lettie [Lettie Sutton], L-E-T-T-I-E Lettie Mae, and the youngest one was a girl name Delma [Delma Sutton], D-E-L-M-A, Delma Loyce [ph.] so that's the siblings of the Sutton family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Two girls, six boys (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Six boys. Speaker 2: Oh, the boy next to me was Olee [Olee Sutton] after Henry is Olee, O-L-E-E. Olee died a couple of years ago, he was minister, a preacher and pastored in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Story_ID: 475495 Speaker 1: So we were talking about your siblings and now you are in the eighth grade and-- Speaker 2: Well before we left the sharecropper-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --the six boys worked the fields; my two sisters didn't work in the fields. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mama [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] didn't work in the fields, didn't need to she had six boys (laughter), and we would do the work in the fields, and being the youngest boy I was sort of the runner. I brought the water to the fields. I'd go across the fields, my brothers to borrow a cigarette from somebody, somebody (laughter). That guy--I was sort the runner, as their little brother in that sense and when we left the plantation and moved into town [Gould, Arkansas] my brothers started to leave and go north, one by one and they went right straight up the Missouri Pacific [Missouri Pacific Railroad] to St. Louis [Missouri]. My oldest sister [Lettie Sutton] went to St. Louis. I had an aunt that lived in St. Louis and my older sister went to St. Louis to go to high school, and she stayed with Aunt Bessie [ph.] and went to high school and then as my brothers started to leave the country town they went to St. Louis. My brother David [David Sutton], Willie David, went to St. Louis, then my brother Samuel [Samuel Sutton] went to St. Louis and my brother Henry [Henry Sutton] went to St. Louis, and then my brother Olee [Olee Sutton] went to St. Louis and my older brother [Charlie Sutton, Jr.] went to Little Rock [Arkansas]. My older brother was a barber. He went to Little Rock and opened a barbershop, and that's how I went to Little Rock to stay with him and go to high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas]. Story_ID: 475496 Speaker 1: You did very well, and tell me about graduation from Gould [Gould Colored School, Gould, Arkansas] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the valedictorian of the eighth grade, I did a lot of reciting when I was growing up, "Out of the night that colors be black as the pit from pole to pole, I thank whatever gods may be for my unconquerable soul. In the fell clutch of circumstance I neither winced nor cried aloud, under the bludgeonings of chance my head is bloody but unbowed. Beyond this place of wrath and tears looms but the horror of the shaded, and yet the menace of the years finds and shall find me unafraid, it matters not how strait the gate, how charged with punishments the scroll, I am the master of my fate: I'm the captain of my soul" ['Invictus,' William Ernest Henley], and I did a lot of reciting when I was growing up, a lot of Paul Laurence Dunbar's stuff. Jump back honey, jump back and a lot of Langston Hughes' stuff 'Mama to Son,' [sic. 'Mother to Son,' Langston Hughes] so I was always reciting all of the time, mama [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] would sit and listen to me recite and I, I found that I could get away with a lot of things 'cause she'd assign the other kids' certain work but as long as I reciting mama didn't assign me (laughter). Story_ID: 475497 Speaker 1: Mother [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] believed in me so strongly and urged me and pushed me so hard to, to achieve, and she taught me that I was as good as anybody. I could--I can never forget that. "Let nobody convince you that you're inferior, you're not inferior to anybody," but then she went a little further. She said, "You are as good as any and better than none." Speaker 2: Better than (unclear). Speaker 1: And I've never forgotten that even until this day. You're as good as any, but better than none. You look every man straight in the eye as a brother and as an equal and you treat them that way, but don't you accept any inferior treatment. I remember asking that when we would be walking to school and the bus would come right by with the white children, I asked my mother, "Why is it that the white children got on the bus and we didn't get on the bus?" She said, "It's wrong and one of these days it's going to have to stop." And I remember saying to her that I know it's wrong--cold out there. They're riding and I'm walking, said, "Well, when my children grow up, the bus not gonna pass them by." She said, "What you gonna do boy?" That's the way my momma use to talk to me. I said, "I don't know, if I don't do anything but throw a rock at it, it's not gonna pass by my children." So that was a part of my growing up. She taught me that I was as good as anybody, and I still believe that (crying). Speaker 2: And she was right. Speaker 1: I'm as good anybody, nobody's better than me, but at the same time I'm better than nobody. I accept everybody as being equal and, and at my level. I treat everybody just like they at my level, even when they don't act that way. I will treat them that way and that became a part of my momma's teaching, and she was the person who taught me, mama- 'Mother to Son' [Langston Hughes], still one of my favorite poems, 'Mother to Son.' "Don't you sit down there boy," yeah. My mother was quite a person, poor, but never let you act like you were poor. "Hold your head up boy, walk upright and act like you're somebody because you are somebody." 'Cause it's followed me all my life. I had a strong mother, no father, no grandparents anywhere around, no man in sight in my growing up, but that mother of mine was a strong lady, she made me strong. Story_ID: 475498 Speaker 1: So she was the one who found a way for you to go to high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas], is that right? Speaker 2: Oh yes, along with my older brother [Charlie Sutton, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: She called my older brother and wanted to know if I could come and stay with him and go to high school, and he readily agreed. It didn't last long though 'cause my mother [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] finally moved from Gould [Arkansas] 'cause my sister, [Delma Sutton] the youngest one of us finished the eighth grade also [at Gould Colored School, Gould, Arkansas]. She finished the eighth grade when I finished the eighth grade. She caught up with me when I was growing up because I was--got hurt, I got burned and I missed a year in school. Speaker 1: What happened when--how did you get burned? Speaker 2: We were killing hogs and I don't know if you know anything about killing hogs. Speaker 1: No I don't, you can tell me though. Speaker 2: Well, you, you kill a hog--my uncle or brother would come down and he would kill a hog for us each year during the season. He would take that sledgehammer and hit the hog right between the eye with that sledgehammer and the hog would fall to the ground. He jumped out on a hog with his knife and cut his throat, and then they would hang up the hog and let the blood drain and you would get the hair off the hog just like a man shaving. You would put some, some sacks, we called 'em croker sacks on the hog and you'd pour on the hog hot water and then you would scrape the hair off the hog. My brother, my brother David [David Sutton] had gotten a--he had a big old wash pot, a big old black pot that you heated the water in, he got a bucket of water and outta that go to pour it on the hog, I was right in the way, a little boy, and the bale came out of the bucket and that hot water fell on this leg from my waist down across my knee. I still got that scar down across my knee, and we didn't go to any doctor in those days. Didn't have any money to go to a doctor, didn't have no doctor to go to and so I missed school a whole year 'cause mother attended that, that scalding that, that had happened on my leg. Story_ID: 475499 Speaker 1: So I missed a year and my sister [Delma Sutton] caught up with me during that year. So she finished the eighth grade [at Gould Colored School, Gould, Arkansas] soon the same time I did, and when I went to Little Rock [Arkansas] right after school was out in eighth grade, but mother [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] came to Little Rock, time enough for her to go to school in September, moved into a little place in Little Rock I'll never forget. We moved into this big old rooming house, had a bunch of roomers in it and a bunch of different kinds of folks. We had two rooms, by this time my older brothers had gone to St. Louis [Missouri] wasn't but the three of us there, my momma and my sister and me and momma would go to the kitchen, wasn't but one kitchen in that big old house. She'd go in there at night and she'd cook our food and take it back to our two rooms. We had two rooms and in a big old rental house. As far as to eat, that way we didn't have to get all mixed up with the kinds of people that was (laughter), that was, that was staying there in the house and that's the way we got to Little Rock. Story_ID: 475500 Speaker 1: Were you involved in any activities in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas]? Speaker 2: I tried to play basketball but didn't do much of that because I really didn't have time. When I got out school at 3:30 in the afternoon, I went to work at 4:00 washing dishes downtown. So I washed dishes in a restaurant downtown from four in the evening until twelve at night from the time that I was--I went to Little Rock [Arkansas] until I started cooking downtown when I was in eleventh grade so, but the point is I worked from four in the evening 'til twelve night, seven days a week so I didn't get involved in many activities at school. Speaker 1: How much was your salary? Speaker 2: When I was washing dishes was fifteen dollars a week, (laughter) fifteen dollars a week. Speaker 1: And did your mother [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] work outside the home once she came go Little Rock (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah she was a domestic, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: Actually she worked at a, at a hospital as a maid at a hospital in, in Little Rock. Story_ID: 475501 Speaker 1: And so what year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question because I got drafted in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] when I became eighteen. I had not finished high school because when I came to Little Rock [Arkansas] from Gould [Arkansas], because I had come from that little old one-horse town this great graduate and valedictorian of the eighth grade at Gould [Gould Colored School, Gould, Arkansas] had to repeat the eighth grade. At Little Rock, the great Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas] put me back because I had come from that little, that little one-horse town so I had to repeat the eighth grade so when I became eighteen when they were drafting and in World War II [WWII], I was drafted in the United States Marines. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I stayed in the Marines two and a half years during World War II, and came back and had to go to high school after I came out of the Marines. Now, I was drafted in 1944, came out of the Marines in 1946 and went back to high school in 1946, finished high school in 1947 and then started to college [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas]. Story_ID: 475502 Speaker 1: Tell me about the draft and you going into the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]? Speaker 2: It was awesome; the services were segregated at that time, all of the services were segregated. You had for the most part, a black unit with white officers and that's what I had in the Marines. Having come the way that momma [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] had taught me, I resented that bitterly. Most of the youngsters accepted it very well, but I never accepted it very well, that the segregation in the Marines, nothing I could do about it but I--as I said even when I came out--when we came out of the services in the sixties--1946, '47 [1947], '48 [1948], black youngsters were determined--that's when it really the Civil Rights Movement got started. Not with Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], as much as I loved him, and as great as he was, we were hard after long before Martin came along (laughter). Oh, that was when blacks started--tried to go to, to young black, what's his name that went to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]--street named after him? Speaker 1: Hamilton Homes? Speaker 2: Hamilton Homes and the girl went to the University of Georgia, and the guy. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault? Speaker 2: Yeah, and a guy name of Shropshire [Jackie Shropshire] went to the University of Arkansas [University of Arkansas School of Law, Fayetteville, Arkansas] and that kind of thing. We started because we were determined that we were going to enjoy the freedoms for which we had just fought. You could no longer convince me to sit in the back, you may make me sit in the back, but at the same time I'll never accepted segregation any more when I came out of the Marines, so I joined Daisy Bates in the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Well, before we go there let's talk more about your tour of duty while you were in the Marines? Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: Where did you go? Where were you stationed, where did you fight (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to the Solomon Islands. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the first stop and I was in my work outfit,--I was a depot company that was getting supplies from the docks up to the front for the white Marines and I was in the Solomon Islands and I went from the Solomon Islands to Tarawa [Republic of Kiribati], that's another little island in the South Pacific, and from Tarawa up to Saipan [Northern Mariana Islands] and from Saipan up to Guam, and from Guam up to Iwo Jima [Japan]. So that was my route in the South Pacific during those days from 1944 to 1946. Speaker 1: Well tell me how were you treated, obviously it made a change in your life? Speaker 2: Well, we were segregated; I resented that. Speaker 1: Right, was there a specific incident that happened or? Speaker 2: No, there was not a specific incident that occurred; it's just the whole climate that was bestowed upon us. I wanted to apply as an officer candidate in the Marines and they wouldn't let me do that. They laughed at me when I made an application to be--to go to officer's training school [Officer Candidates School]. It was funny to them that I even (laughter) aspired to do that and, and but I did and so everything that, that I could do to lift myself was, was denied and after all we were supposed to be fighting for freedom and justice and I kept saying to myself, where is it for me? And all that came from way back to my momma. Story_ID: 475503 Speaker 1: So when I came out of the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and went back to high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas], got to go back to high school remember? And I went back to high school, finished high school and started at college. Speaker 2: And what school did you go to? Speaker 1: Up there (unclear) college, I became president of the college chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and. Speaker 2: What college did you go to? Speaker 1: I went to Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas], P-H-I-L-A-N-D-E-R, Philander, Smith, that's in Little Rock [Arkansas] and I was Youth Council [NAACP Youth Council] president under Daisy Bates. Speaker 2: And tell me about the Daisy Bates? Speaker 1: Oh, Daisy Bates was some lady. Tall, good looking, fiery and she'd shake her head and say, "We ain't gonna take it no more." And that was all right with me, I didn't want to take it anymore. Story_ID: 475504 Speaker 1: So the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in so many cases got involved in the civil rights struggle and of course I was with them when the kids entered Central High School [Central High School] in Little Rock [Arkansas]. Speaker 2: In Central High School. Speaker 1: Yeah, in Little Rock. Speaker 2: In Little Rock, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Tell me about that. Speaker 1: Well, when they went to Central High School--first place we had to recruit the kids and convince 'em to try to go to Central High School. Me and a young, a young white professor, named Dr. Georg Iggers [Georg G. Iggers], that's German. Georg was a German Jew and during World War II [WWII] a lot of the German Jews escaping Hitler [Adolf Hitler] came to this country and quite a few of 'em started to teach at black colleges [HBCUs]. Georg and his wife Wilma [Wilhelmina Iggers] started teaching at Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas]. Wilma taught German, I had German under Wilma (laughter). I learned never have a foreign language on a native (laughter), they're rough. That Wilma was rough, I tell you. You had to get that German right (laughter), but anyway. Speaker 2: You were recruiting the kids to go to-- Speaker 1: We went house to house, family to family to try to talk the parents and the kids out of--most especially those youngsters who lived in the Central High School district. After all, Central High School was such close proximity to the black community. A whole lot of blacks walked right by Central High School to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas] to go to, to go to high school, so Central High School was not something out of sight, it was right, right adjacent to the black community and at first we had thirty-five or forty students primed to go, but as time went by (laughter) they dropped off, and when the time came we had nine, nine to enroll in Central High School. Speaker 2: So tell me about that? Speaker 1: And when they enrolled two of us was posted upon the steps of Central High School as decoys. The mob assumed that the kids were gonna come that way 'cause we standing up there on top of the steps, but instead the kids went in the side door and when the mob found out that they were in school and we were decoys they took off after us and I started running. At first I, I was running but they caught my buddy and they knocked him down and they had him down on the ground and I went back to help him get up and that's the way the beat the hell out of both of us, but we finally escaped. You ever seen anybody run a belt line? Do you know what a belt line is? Speaker 2: No I don't. Speaker 1: Do you know what a belt line is sir? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I've heard of it but I need to have you explain it. Speaker 1: Well, when I was started at college, freshman had to go through it and the seniors would like up with them belts and you'd have to run through that line as they whale you, that was part of your induction into the school, but this was not a belt line this was a stick and brick (laughter)--we were running through that crowd and they were whaling on us but we finally got away and that's how I was involved, but not only that, Georg, the young white professor and I organized at Philander Smith classes to help the young people with their grades, 'cause there was certain teachers at Central High School who were not teaching the young people, they were just there right, and so we had classes, evening classes and Saturday classes over at Philander Smith to help them with their biology and to help them with their math and to help them with those subjects with which they were having difficulty, so I helped organize behind that at Central--at Philander Smith College and that's how we assisted the young people in getting through high school. Story_ID: 475505 Speaker 1: So what other organizations or what else did you do at Philander Smith [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas] before graduating? I mean that was a lot, but was there anything else? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh I was president of the Social Science Club. I was president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I was president of a lot of things, but again though remember now I was cooking downtown at night from four to twelve (laughter). Yeah, so I didn't have time for a lot of extracurricular activities. Story_ID: 475506 Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Philander Smith [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas]? Speaker 2: Fifty [1950]. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty [1950]. Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950]. Speaker 1: Okay now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I graduated from Philander Smith I became a staff writer for the Arkansas Democrat [Arkansas Democrat-Gazette]. I was the first black in all of the South to be a staff writer for a major white daily paper and when I went to the Democrat in 1950. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Stayed there seven years until 1957. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my first professional job was a writer, a staff writer for the Arkansas Democrat. Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the things, can you remember any articles of any importance that you wrote? Speaker 2: Well yes, at first, the Democrat didn't--on a newspaper you usually assign certain coverage, you're either the staff writer at the, at the state capitol or you're the staff writer at city hall or you're the staff writer at the county courthouse or the, or the--that kind of assignments were. They didn't give me that kind of assignment; I was sort of a reporter who found his own stories. So I pretty well covered the black community and its activities and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League and, and organizations that was in the black community, and that's what I did at first in 1954 when the decision was, was rendered. Speaker 1: Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Brown v. the Board of Education? Speaker 2: Brown vs. the Board of Education. It became evident to them that I was the most knowledgeable person (laughter) on the staff about the matters of desegregation and the schools and integration because I was vice president of the Little Rock [Arkansas] chapter of the NAACP at that time. Every day I expected them to fire me (laughter), but they didn't and so they said, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton], what's the NAACP gonna do now?" I said, "They gonna sue the hell out of you, that's what they gonna do," (laughter). "What's Daisy Bates gonna do now?" I said, "Daisy gonna sue you," (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: So you wrote articles about the decision? Speaker 2: Oh, yes I was--became pretty well the most knowledgeable person on staff about--because I had been in the NAACP and we were fighting for our (unclear), we were fighting for that decision and I was very knowledgeable about all that the NAACP had done to leading up to that (unclear). See at first we were not fighting for integration, we were fighting for equal education and we found out you couldn't have equal education so we switched from fighting for equal education to we found out that if you're going to have equality, you had to be in the same school as the white kids were 'cause you could win a case for a black school and that still didn't change anything so you had to be in the same school that the white kid was in if you gonna have equal educational opportunities (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So that's when we switched from fighting for equal opportunity to integrated opportunity. Story_ID: 475507 Speaker 1: What happens after you leave the newspaper [Arkansas Democrat-Gazete], what makes you leave the newspaper? Speaker 2: I wasn't getting anywhere, I was married and had a wife. Speaker 1: When did you get married? Speaker 2: I got married in 1947. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I was a freshman so that, that lady's been married to me since 1947, and when I was a freshman in college [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas] and she a junior in high school when we met. Speaker 1: And what's your wife's name? Speaker 2: Joanna [Joanna Freeman Sutton], J-O-A-N-N-A. Story_ID: 475508 Speaker 1: And since you weren't getting anywhere you decided to leave the paper [Arkansas Democrat-Gazette] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I decided--see the paper as I say wasn't about to give me the prime assignments at all, and I--so I, I was not about to be head of the staff at the state capitol, heading up the staff at city hall. They wasn't about to give me those kind of assignments and it's those kind of assignments you have to have in a newspaper if you're a newspaper to, to progress. So I decided that since I wasn't going, that's all right--since I wasn't going anywhere I was gonna leave and I left. Speaker 1: And what did you do then, what type of position? Speaker 2: I went to work, I went to work for Win Rockefeller [Winthrop Rockefeller]. Speaker 1: Say it again? Speaker 2: I went to work for Winthrop Rockefeller, one of the Rockefeller brothers and believe it or not I went to work as a butler, and I became Winthrop Rockefeller's butler. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Now I know that sounds like a step down but it was a real big step up moneywise (laughter), so I became Winthrop Rockefeller's butler where I worked for three years as a butler. I have no regrets about it, it was a quite an experience for me. Speaker 1: Have any stories to share about that, has to be something fascinating there? Speaker 2: Well, you know as I tell folk, a butler doesn't do much talking, and he sees a lot and he knows a lot, but he says nothing (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But--and this kind of thing on Winthrop Rockefeller that I was participating with him in, he was dead by then but they said, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton], you know Mr. Rockefeller real well?" I said, "Beside his family, nobody knew Mr. Rockefeller better than I did. I knew his habits, I knew what he did and didn't do and said, but I don't talk about that at all." Mr. Rockefeller was a good man, he was so superior to other whites in Arkansas it wasn't even funny. Story_ID: 475509 Speaker 1: So I stayed with him [Winthrop Rockefeller] two years then I left there and became relocation supervisor for the Little Rock Housing Authority and urban renewal. I've done a lot of things and I headed up their urban renewal part of, of the Little Rock Housing Authority. Speaker 2: Let me see, what year would this be 1957? Speaker 1: From 1959. Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 475510 Speaker 1: And I stayed at the Housing Authority [Little Rock Housing Authority] two years and I left there and went back to work for Win Rockefeller [Winthrop Rockefeller], not as butler this time but in charge of the personal staff. See folk with all that money got all kind of personal staff. He had three cooks and (laughter), and three butlers and a bunch of house boys and a whole bunch of maids you know, so I was in charge of managing of--and Mr. Rockefeller had a lot of events, big events that occurred in there so I had to manage those events and I stayed up there three years and then I came back to Little Rock [Arkansas]. I moved up there, the family stayed up there. Speaker 2: Where was this now? Speaker 1: Well Winthrop Rockefeller was-- Speaker 2: He lived where? Speaker 1: He had a grand thing up top of a mountain, Petit Jean Mountain. Speaker 2: Petit Jean? Speaker 1: Called Winrock Farm where he reared not beef cattle, but bred cattle, had them great big Santa Gertrudis cows. So we moved up there, my family moved up there and my wife [Joanna Freeman Sutton] taught school down under the mountain. We lived up on top of the mountain. Well that's where Winthrop's farm was and she taught school in a little town called Morrilton [Arkansas], M-O-R-R-I-L-T-O-N during those three years. Story_ID: 475511 Speaker 1: But then I decided that I needed to move from just volunteering in the Civil Rights Movement because I was way up on that mountain [Petit Jean Mountain] and removed from the struggle, and I started to get involved directly in the struggle so I became the associate director of the Arkansas Council on Human Relations. At that time every state had a council on human relations. There was a Georgia council, an Arkansas council, Mississippi council, all of 'em and I became the associate director of the Arkansas Council on Human Relations, and it was during that time when I got really involved in the civil rights struggle. I led the city in Little Rock [Arkansas]. I directed voter registration campaigns and in Little Rock in school desegregation efforts in Little Rock and then I went onto become director of the Arkansas Council on Human Relations while I was doing all that. So everything that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was doing, if he got it done anywhere, I sought to get it done in Arkansas and did. So when they led the, when they had sit-ins started down in North Carolina, Greensboro, I organized the students at Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas] and started the sit-ins in the (laughter) (unclear), and then moved down to Pine Bluff [Arkansas] and led the sit-ins in Pine Bluff with the students from what was then AM&N College [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College], is now the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. So I led the sit-ins in Arkansas and so I spent--I don't know, five years I believe doing that. Then I left that job and became field representative for the Community Relations Service, U.S Department of Justice, and that way I started to travel all over the country doing, working in conflict--racial and ethnic conflict resolution. That's what CRS does, so I was--that's how I was in Memphis [Tennessee] when Martin was killed. I was CRS' field rep in Memphis when Dr. King was killed. Story_ID: 475512 Speaker 1: Before we get to, to that let's talk about--well let's talk about the March on Washington, let's see in 1963? Speaker 2: Well when the March on Washington occurred I was with the Arkansas Council on Human Relations, and I went to Washington [D.C.] to participate in the march. Didn't have any money. I caught the bus and went to Washington and stayed with a friend of mine, that same guy that was on them steps at Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas] with me. He lived in Washington by this time. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Earl Davy, D-A-V-Y and so I stayed with Earl 'cause I didn't have any money to stay in a hotel and so I stayed with Earl and participated in the March on Washington so I heard Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when he did I Have a Dream. We all stood there and cried that day, and I've cried a lot in my time as we face many of these problems, so when Martin was speaking, tears was coming down from many of our eyes and when he did I Have a Dream and I was present in Memphis [Tennessee] when he went to the mountaintop, so I heard both of his greatest speeches, I've Been to the Mountaintop. Speaker 1: What do you remember most about the March on Washington? Speaker 2: That throng of people, we were so happy. You know it was so hard to get--organize people and get what we call black folks to stand up and, and fight back. When we say fight back we mean the demonstrations and I remember standing there looking at the three hundred thousand people so overjoyed that we had finally come to the place for which our fathers died and that we were willing to demonstrate and show that we wasn't gonna take it no more. There--it was a great day as I looked out over that crowd and to have come to that place. Story_ID: 475513 Speaker 1: But so many other things happened that year. Medgar Everns [sic. Medgar Evers] is killed, the 16th Street Baptist Church bombings, what were some of your thoughts on, on what was going on? Speaker 2: We cried again, but it didn't do anything but, but make us more dedicated to what we were doing. I remember when Medgar was killed and I remember when the--and the three civil rights young people [Michael Schwerner, James Chaney, and Andrew Goodman] were killed and all of the incidents that were occurring one right after the other at that time and we became more resolved. Ain't gonna take it no more. So I was running around leading the voter registration campaigns trying to get blacks. I remember when we marched from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama] and-- Speaker 1: So that, that was in '65 [1965] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-five [1965], um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you--before we go there do you remember where you were when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated? Speaker 2: When Jack was assassinated I was at the airport in Little Rock [Arkansas] on my way to Houston [Texas] to speak at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] for the Human Relations Institute [ph.]. I was at the airport in Little Rock and then I was on the plane between Little Rock and Houston when it was announced that he was dead. So I was at the airport in Little Rock on my way to Houston to speak. Story_ID: 475514 Speaker 1: Do you remember when the Civil Rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed in '64 [1964] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course I do; do I remember? We were working trying to get the bill passed a couple of years before it was passed, and when we finally got it passed we were so glad about it. When it was passed I remember one of the incidents that I experienced after the Civil Rights Act was passed in '64 [1964] and Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] signed the bill into law I believe on the 2nd of July just before (laughter) the 4th of July. I was directing a statewide campaign, voter registration campaign. I was head of the Arkansas Council on Human Relations. I went to the state capitol to get the maps I needed to design my campaign, the district maps and all of this, and I decided that I was done at the state capitol, I was hungry and I was gonna have a bite to eat. So I went downstairs, the cafeteria was in the state capitol. It was down in the basement and I didn't call myself protesting at all. I, I was so happy the act had been passed and I thought it was all right. I picked up a tray, picked up some silver--it was a cafeteria and got to the salad and this little old lady that running the place came up and she said, "I'm sorry but we don't feed Negroes," and that's the word she used here, and I was always a person who took things lightly. I said, I said, "That's all right ma'am, I don't eat them either. I want some roast beef" (laughter). That's the kind of crazy attitude I took about most things. She said, "What I mean is you can't eat in here." So I started my lecture, "Did you know that Lyndon Johnson the other day signed the Civil Rights Act into law and that it's now lawful--it's unlawful for you to deny me the right to eat." I'm lecturing now, right? Two big old state police officers in plainclothes walked up and told me, "The lady said you couldn't eat in here, so why don't you leave?" I said, "Who are you?" That's the way I treated things. They said, 'That's unconsequential, just leave." And after I wouldn't leave they picked me up, one on one side, one on the other leg and arm and carried me to the door and pitched me out on the ground. I had on--I didn't have but two suits, pitched me out and tore up the pants on one of my suits that day, but that day was the beginning of one of the most dramatic civil rights sit-ins that occurred in Arkansas. Three bishops and a host of ministers came down there to sit-in. A Catholic bishop, an Episcopalian bishop and the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] bishop led the sit-ins in that place because they threw me out. Oh, I've, I've been the instrument of a lot of things occurred because of me and those bishops sat in and the U.S. attorney went into court, secured an injunction against the place and thus it was open, but what I was so proud of was to see three bishops, two of 'em white--no, there were four bishops, there was an Episcopalian bishop, there was the Catholic bishop, there was the United Methodist bishop and the A.M.E. bishop (laughter). I'm standing back now just looking (laughter) and that was what I remember about the passage of Civil Rights Act of 1964. Story_ID: 475515 Speaker 1: You said we were working on the bill you know before it was passed, when you say we, specify--I need to clarify who we were? Speaker 2: Well those of us in the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Okay, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All across the board, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League [National Urban League], the Arkansas Council on Human Relations, black and whites who were trying to get a bill passed. See, it took--see we never would have gotten that bill passed under Jack Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. Jack was worried about election, and he would come up to the trough but he wouldn't drink (laughter), but when Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] became president (laughter) we got the bill passed. Lyndon Johnson went, went to war. Speaker 1: Was there a lot of change to the bill the way you proposed it to how it actually came through? Speaker 2: Yeah, see the Arkansas Council was one of the original units of the bill. We wanted cease and desist (laughter) and we wanted penalty attached to those who violated any part of civil rights, but what CRS [Community Relations Service] got was mediation, conciliation (laughter), you know what it got, so that was one of the changes. We wanted a stronger EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] than we got. We wanted cease and desist with EEOC you know, those were the two agencies that came out of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Community Relations Service to do conciliation and mediation of racial conflict and EEOC and equal employment opportunities. Neither one came out exactly like we wanted it you know, but we were proud of what we had. Story_ID: 475516 Speaker 1: So what year did the Community Relations Service [CRS] begin (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It came out of the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964]. Speaker 1: So that was in sixty--? Speaker 2: In '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: So it did come in '64 [1964], it wasn't in '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, 1964. All right so now in--and you, like it--so it's in '64 [1964] that you be--you become involved with the CRS right? Speaker 2: No now when I started to work for it. Speaker 1: You didn't? Speaker 2: No I didn't start work for it then. Speaker 1: And not from--okay. Speaker 2: I started to work for it later. Speaker 1: Later? Speaker 2: When they were going around--the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Started a series of hearings among officials, superintendents of schools, and mayors and all of that to make them aware of what the Civil Rights Act said and what had to be done. They came to Little Rock [Arkansas] to hold a hearing and they had all of the big superintendents of schools and, and those kinds of persons. Story_ID: 475517 Speaker 1: So we were talking about the different organizations that were a part of, of proposing the Civil Rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964]. Where did the funding come from for the different organizations? Speaker 2: Well you know we didn't have a lot of funding, we-I traveled on my own catching the bus, staying at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and (laughter) and or staying with friends wherever the situation was. I keep reminding us now that we had no money. Now there were organizations that had little money, the Urban League [National Urban League] and of course you know what the source of funds were for the Urban League, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and, and such organizations that's nationally established organizations, and of course and then coming into the picture with was, was SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and you know where they got their money from, but at first we didn't have any money, we were just out there spending our own personal money going to various meetings. I remember I was on the subcommittee on, on two of the organizations, CRS [Community Relations Service] and SCLC, this was before the , the--this is when we were conceptualizing what we wanted in the Civil Rights Movement (laughter), in the civil rights--passage of civil rights--um-hm. Story_ID: 475518 Speaker 1: Now, you worked for, for Rockefeller [Winthrop Rockefeller] and he was actually someone that was ahead of his time you were telling me. So tell me, tell me what you were saying about him? Speaker 2: Well he was ahead of his time, he--as much as he could. He tried to stay clear 'cause he was on the run for governor right? And knowing Arkansas as it was--but I do remember a situation. Arkansas passed legislation that anybody who worked for the state could not belong to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and that meant my wife 'cause she was a teacher and teachers, we don't look at it that way, but teachers are state employees, and--so Mr. Rockefeller said to me, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton], you know that the state has passed this law that anybody who work for the state cannot belong to the NAACP?" And I said, "Yes sir." He said "I tell you what." Joanna [Joanna Freeman Sutton] was, I was living up on top of the mountain [Jean Petit Mountain] at that time and Joanna was teaching down under the mountain [in Morrilton, Arkansas] and he said, "Well, it may be that if they start to try to enforce that, that I may have to send Joanna and the children on sabbatical for her to study and of course they'd go to school wherever she's studying. How would that sound to you?" I said, "Mr. Rockefeller she's not going anywhere." He said, "What do you mean?" I said, "If they try to enforce that we gonna fight." Mr. Rockefeller said to him, "I told you so, I could've told you what Ozell's attitude gonna be," (laughter). Now, this was a great offer he's making, right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what about--go ahead I'm sorry. Speaker 2: But I said, "No, that's not acceptable. If they try to mess with her job because she belongs to the NAACP--yes, she belongs to the NAACP, she's a life member (laughter) of the NAACP but we--if they try to enforce that we gonna fight." And I never will forget came back to me later, said, "Well Ozell, if we have to I will finance your fight. I will hire the attorneys and for your fight." I said, "I thank you, sir". Now that's the kind of man he was. Speaker 1: Did he ever give any funds towards the Civil Rights Movement, or any of the organizations? Speaker 2: To the Urban League [National Urban League]. Speaker 1: Was he--he just gave funds to the Urban League? Speaker 2: And, and to the Arkansas Council on Human Relations. When I went with the council, then the council started to get money from Rockefeller. Before the council with the Urban League it got primarily its money from the Rockefellers Brothers Fund [Rockefeller Brothers Fund, New York, New York], 'cause he, he being one of the Rockefeller Brothers and--but when I started to for the Arkansas Council we started to get money not only the Rockefeller Funds but from Winthrop Rockefeller personally. I went to Winthrop Rockefeller for some money and he said, "I'll tell you what, I will match any funds you can raise, so if you raise ten thousand dollars I'll give you ten thousand dollars and if you raise twenty thousand dollars, I'll give you twenty thousand." It put the Arkansas in, in good funding status because, because Rockefeller was matching everything I could've raised (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was good. Speaker 2: So that's the kind of guy he was. Story_ID: 475519 Speaker 1: So now we move on to the march in Selma [Alabama] which you were gonna tell us about, this is 1965 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which one of the marches? Speaker 1: The Selma. Speaker 2: Oh, the, the Selma march? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I was not there when they got beat up on the bridge [Edmund Pettus Bridge, Selma, Alabama], I was there when we decided again to go across the bridge after the first encounter that drew a lot of folk, and I was there then and then when we planned to march to--from Selma to Montgomery [Alabama], I was in that march from Selma to Montgomery. Speaker 1: Do you remember, can you give us or tell us any stories about that day? Speaker 2: Well, it was that march, that's the two marches, the March on Washington in '63 [1963], prompted the Civil Rights Act, passage of the Civil Rights Act of '64 [1964]. Well the march in '65 [1965] from Selma to Montgomery prompted the, the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], passage of the Voting Rights Act. I have to tell these young people that it didn't just occur, it, it came after great, great struggle and I was in that struggle from Selma to Montgomery. I was in Montgomery when we concluded the march. Story_ID: 475520 Speaker 1: So this is also the time that--is this the time that you joined the CRS [Community Relations Service]? Speaker 2: Oh, I had joined the CRS--I was with CRS then. Speaker 1: Okay in '65 [1965]--well, okay it started in '64 [1964] and you, you started working in '65 [1965] for them? What year was it? Speaker 2: I started work for CRS in '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: They offered me a job in '65 [1965] during the time that the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights was sponsoring those hearings and when they came to Arkansas and a guy named Sam Simmons who was a deputy of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights was heading up these, these various seminars called me the night before the one was to take place in Little Rock [Arkansas] at the hotel. I said, "Yeah Sam, you know we have the big conference in Little Rock starting in the morning." He said, "Yes." I said, "Well when I look at the program, I notice that there's not a single black on the plenary session in the morning. We can't have that," I said "Well I would think that there would be a black on plenary session." He said, "Well you'll have to speak in the morning." I said, "Sam, Congressman Brooks Hays is on the program, the superintendent of schools is on the program, the state superintendent of schools is on the program and all of them have had their assignment for weeks, now you gonna throw me up against them just for tomorrow." I said, "That's unfair." And he said this" "Oh, hell, Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton], you know you can do it, I'm not worried about (laughter) anybody surpassing you, there's no better speaker around than you are. I just want you to speak in the morning," and I said, "What do you want me to talk about?" "Anything, whatever you want to talk about." So I spoke for fifteen minutes and it got great acclaim for a speaker and that's when CRS offered me a job. At first I didn't accept the job--excuse me--because they wouldn't give me the grade I had to have. Okay, I said to them, you want me to come aboard, I would require a GS-13 [General Schedule]. "Ozell, we don't have a 13, we can give you a 12 [GS-12]." "No, I can't come to work or a 12," so I turned it down, and then when they had the White House Conference on Civil Rights, CRS called me, George Culberson who was the associate director of CRS called, said, "Ozell Sutton, this is George Culberson." I said, "I've never met you George, but I know who you are." He said, "Same here I never met you but I know who are. I notice also that at one time CRS was trying to bring you aboard." I said, "Yeah and you wouldn't pay any money, are you ready to pay some money?" (Laughter) And he said, "Ozell we really don't have a GS-13, we can give you but I got a proposition for you." And I said, "What's that?" "I will open an office in Little Rock, down in the post office federal building and you won't, you won't have to move, you become a field rep." Said, "Now you'll have to travel a lot but--." I said, "Well if you are going to open an office in Little Rock--," excuse me--, "then I'll come for 12." So that's how I got aboard CRS, my first assignment was New Orleans, Louisiana, and I flew into New Orleans every Monday morning so when all of this happened in New Orleans, I knew all about what it was--where it was and what was going on in New Orleans. I worked there for a year and a half in New Orleans. New Orleans, Louisiana and Shreveport, Louisiana. Story_ID: 475521 Speaker 1: What exactly was your, your duties? Speaker 2: Well the Community Relations Service [CRS] was charged under the law with the responsibility of assisting communities in resolving racial and ethnic conflict, so we were working in conflict prevention and conflict resolution. So I was coming up with plans of preventing and plans for a resolution. Actually I was responsibility--I was responsible for the desegregation of the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana]. When I went to New Orleans [Louisiana] and blacks started complaining about discrimination in the French Quarter. Well that's the most, most best known part of New Orleans right, the French Quarters? So my, head of my agents, Sam George [ph.] told me to check it out and to see if there was actually discrimination at the level that the complaints were coming, that are occurring in the French Quarter. I said all right. Excuse me. So they gave me the money with which to do that. Every night I carried a party, five or six people, black and white, to the French Quarter to personally--not what I heard, but to personally go to all of the places in the French Quarter to see if they were discriminating. And they were. We'd walk up to the door, most especially at the places where the women were doing their dances (laughter). We'd walk up to the door and the man would swear that the place was full and we couldn't come in and then they started barking again as soon as we left. "Come on in," (laughter), so I checked 'em out one-by-one, at least fifteen of 'em to see if that was taking place, and it was. Story_ID: 475522 Speaker 1: Then when I reported to my bosses that it was actually happening because every day I reported what happened at the night before. He told me to take my report down to the mayor and tell the mayor what I had found and to see what he was willing to do about it. Well the City of New Orleans [Louisiana] had made an application to HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] for a grant, restore for the French Quarters [French Quarter, New Orleans, Louisiana] (laughter), you get what I mean? So when I went to see the mayor, the first thing the mayor said, "Mr. Sutton [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton]?" I said, "Yes sir?" "What grade are you?" I said, by that time I was a 13 [GS-13], I said, "I'm a GS-13." He said, "Do you know how well I know Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]?" I said, "Mr. Mayor, being a mayor a big city like New Orleans, and Lyndon Johnson having him come from the South, there's no question in my mind that you knew him very well." He said, "I could have your job before you get out that door." That made me mad, it didn't anger me, it made me mad, threatening me, right? I said, "Mr. Mayor, let us assume that you can have my job before I can get out of that door and you may have that." I said, "But let me tell one thing." He said, "What's that?" "As long as I have my job, you're not gonna get a nickel from HUD (laughter), might not last that long, but as long as I have it you won't get a nickel." I got up and walked out. He called my agency [Community Relations Service] a little later for me to come back and I went back and that's when he decided to take the lead in desegregating the French Quarter, but I wanted to know--but before I left there I said, "Yes, sir you can have my job, and I'm sure you will." I said, "But you won't be doing anything but throwing the rabbit in the briar patch. I came from the Civil Rights Movement and I feel a little guilty working for government in the first place" (laughter). Said, "And the moment you throw me out of here I will start a campaign down in the French Quarter." He said, "That won't do nothing but get you put in jail." I said, "I want you to put me in jail; we work better from jail" (laughter). That's when that, that's when all of the civil rights folks gonna get excited across the country when you put me in jail and I'm gonna do be like Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I'm gonna be Ozell from the, from the French Quarter jail (laughter). "You go ahead and throw me out sir, that's all right," (laughter). Speaker 2: Who is the, who is, who was the mayor at this time of? Speaker 1: Schiro [Victor H. Schiro]. Speaker 2: Schiro. Speaker 1: I don't remember his first name, but his last name was Schiro. Very, very--dressed well, he was Italian, wore thousand dollar cuff links and that kind of thing, always sharp, but old Schiro that was his name. Speaker 2: And where you (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was before Dutch [Ernest Morial], and that was before blacks came into being in New Orleans, (laughter) oh yeah. Story_ID: 475523 Speaker 1: When you joined the CRS [Community Relations Service] who was the director of, at that time? Speaker 2: The director at that time was [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins, Roy Wilkins' nephew. He was director of CRS. Speaker 1: All right, now 1968 and you're in Memphis [Tennessee]. Why did you go to Memphis? Speaker 2: After the--we were always where there were racial difficulty. Memphis was in the throes of the Sanitation Workers Strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike], racial, great racial difficulty. So I was assigned to Memphis, taken out of New Orleans [Louisiana] and assigned to Memphis by CRS as a field rep. So that's why I was in Memphis as a field representative for the Community Relations Service, U.S. Department of Justice. Speaker 1: So did you work with the sanitation workers? Speaker 2: No, this is the way we worked. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were three of us and we divided the work. I was assigned to the Memphis police. My job was to know exactly what the police was gonna do and how it was going to react or whatever the blacks were doing. Another guy was assigned to SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] because he had done some work, although he was white, he had done some work with Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and, and several others in voter registration. So he was assigned believe it or not, the black man was assigned to the police and the white man was assigned to SCLC (laughter), but I was assigned to the police and I knew all of the time what the police reaction was gonna be to everything that was coming up, so that's what I was doing in Memphis, Tennessee. Story_ID: 475524 Speaker 1: So tell me what happens with King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Well, King was first s- living in the Holiday Inn in the Rivermont [Holiday Inn Rivermont, Memphis, Tennessee], that's down on the river and that was the, the headquarters of Holiday Inn at that time. The Holiday Inn was born in Memphis [Tennessee] and King was staying down there but when the young blacks, the invaders, protested King staying in the white hotel, he moved from the River Mart to the Lorraine [Lorraine Motel, Memphis, Tennessee] (laughter). Well when he moved from the River Mart to the Lorraine, I moved from the River Mart to the Lorraine hotel and so that's how I happened to be in the Lorraine hotel when he was killed because when he moved you know we keeping up with the movement, we moved our operations to the Lorraine hotel and King was in 306 of the Lorraine hotel when he was killed and I was in 308 right next door. When King was--led the last march and he had come back to Memphis after the last march was broken up in disarray he had come back to Memphis to lead another march. That's the way things went and so he had been meeting all day with various components including the black militants who didn't want a nonviolent march to take place in the first place. They believed in matching violence with violence and they had no, no reservation about telling Dr. King that and so well when King was shot I was in my room. I heard the shot. I was at first not disturbed by the shot because there'd been shootings between the invaders and the police all of the time, and so I--we had been meeting all day and we were getting ready for the big mass demonstration that night. King was going to dinner with a young black minister named Kyles [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles], well I know his name I can't call it all of a sudden. He's still pastor in that same church in Memphis. King was going out to dinner with him. That's how King happened to be on that balcony, he came out to go to dinner and that's when he was shot. Well I heard the shot ring out but it didn't bother me because I had no, no placement of the relationship but then I heard people running down in the courtyard. The courtyard at that time was gravel so you could hear the tramping of feet. I said, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton], you better go out here and see what's going on." I came out and I looked down on the ground and I saw the people running so I thought they were--what had happened when it happened down there on the ground but so I started to go down so to go down the steps and by the time I started to go to go down the steps they started coming up the steps so I concluded then that no, whatever happened was up there were I was and I looked around I guess about ten feet away, maybe twenty, King's body was back against the wall and they took his body and took it to the hospital. I got in my car and went to the hospital. I could get in because I was with the [U.S.] Department of Justice, I had my little old identification and I went in and I went to see the hospital manager and told him what my concerns were and I needed to report to Washington [D.C.] on how Dr. King was but by that time it's gone all over that he'd been shot. It had not gone all over that he was dead, and so he carried me down to the emergency room called up one of the doctors out and the doctor came to the door and he told the doctor what I needed to know. The doctor looked me straight in the eye and said, "He's dead, Mr. Sutton." Story_ID: 475525 Speaker 1: Joe [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] was a pastor in Birmingham [Alabama] at that time. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: That's when I first Joe when we were in Birmingham and I tease everybody, I said, "There would have been no letter from the Birmingham jail ['Letter From Birmingham Jail'] if it had not been for me." Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at first was not in the Birmingham jail he was in the Bessemer [Alabama] jail. You never heard of Bessemer? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It's a little town outside of Birmingham sort of like College Park [Maryland] is outside of--and there was--it was known to be racially mean, Bessemer and we were afraid for Martin's life in the Bessemer jail. They had a little old jail that twenty-five men could put their shoulders together and push it over and certainly had that kind of climate in Bessemer where they do that, so I went to Bessemer jail to see what the condition of Martin were, and along with a friend who was working with me, she's dead now, a white woman, and when we called our office in Washington [D.C.] to tell 'em that we were going to the Bessemer jail to see about Martin, they said, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton] a black man and white man, a black man and a white woman going over to the Bessemer jail, you got to be crazy, you can't do that. We order you not to do that." I just hushed 'cause I knew I was going to the Bessemer jail. I said, "Well I'll go to the Bessemer jail by myself." I been that crazy all of my life, said, "'Naw you can't go over there by yourself either." So I just hushed and as soon as we got through talking to him I said to Marge, "Let's go." Her name was Marge, Marge Garette [ph.]. I said, "Let's go Marge." So we jumped in the car and we had a rental car and went over to Bessemer jail and we found the kind of conditions that we were afraid we'd find. So I came back and I called back to my boss in Washington, who at that time was [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins, said, "We got to get Martin out of the Bessemer jail. You got to get the attorney general to act to get Martin out of the Bessemer jail," and I told him of the kind of condition, the kind of atmosphere I found over there. So he got the attorney general who was Ramsey Clark, you don't know nothing about Ramsey (laughter), we got Ramsey to intervene to get Martin out of the Bessemer jail into the Birmingham jail so that's how we got the letter from the Birmingham jail. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 475526 Speaker 1: So there were more, there were more than one time that you got somebody out of jail or got protection for them during the riot, riots (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah. I have to sit down and write down that number of times. The guys who worked for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], big Orange? Speaker 1: James Or- Reverend James Orange? Speaker 2: James Orange, James Orange and all of 'em I tell you there were many times that they would've gotten our head beat if it had been for me, that Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton] was present, and Ozell was--didn't have any power but he was with the [U.S.] Department of Justice and they didn't want (unclear) (laughter), they will tell you right quickly that if it had not been for Ozell they would've been in big trouble, a lot of times because Ozell was always there. Speaker 1: How were you able to get them protection? Speaker 2: You know, I talk about this. I didn't have any power but the powerful didn't know that. The power of justice (laughter) and I didn't tell them that the only power I had was that of mediation reconciliation. When I went somewhere depending on where I was if I was with blacks I said I was with the Community Relations Service because they didn't have much respect for the justice department at that time, but if I was with officials I was with Justice, I didn't even mention Community Relations Service (laughter): "I'm from the Department of Justice," and, and I'd leave it right there and since they didn't know what my authority was, I'd get away with a lot of things and by just simply declaring that I was with Justice and I was there to see that justice was done (laughter). Story_ID: 475527 Speaker 1: Right before we ended the last tape you were telling us that you were--went to the hospital where Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was and the doctor had just told you that he was dead. Tell us what follows that, what happens next? Speaker 2: I jumped on the phone--didn't have any cell phones in those days and I knew that the lines were gonna get tied up. I jumped on the phone right quickly and I called [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins and I said, "Roger," he said, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton], Ozell we know that Dr. King has been shot how's he doing?" I said, "He's dead Martin--I mean Roger." And so he jumped on the phone and got with the attorney general who was Ramsey [Ramsey Clark] and to let the attorney general know that Dr. King was dead. So that's how the scenario went. Speaker 1: And so tell me what happens after that? Speaker 2: After then as you know the riots broke out all over the country, but believe it or not no riot broke out in Memphis [Tennessee] and I'm vain enough to declare that's because I was there (laughter). There was no riot in Memphis but when Ramsey and Roger and a guy named Cliff Alexander [Clifford Alexander, Jr.]--Cliff Alexander was head of the Department of Army [U.S. Department of the Army] and he was one black at that level. Cliff Alexander, Roger Wilkins and Ramsey Clark came to Memphis and Ramsey didn't go anywhere without me in Memphis because I was the only person that had the total picture. The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] knew about investigation and the Marshals [U.S. Marshals Service] knew about what it was that they did but the only person--and the U.S. attorney knew about prosecution, but the one person who knew the whole picture was Ozell because he was the only person who had been active, the only person who could get down into the housing project and meet with the, the guys who were militants 'cause the FBI didn't know about that and the U.S. Marshals didn't know about that. Ozell could get down there and so the attorney general didn't go anywhere and didn't talk to anybody without my presence because I had the greatest presence. Now this angered the U.S. attorneys, this angered the FBI, that here was Ozell, whose position certainly was not as high as theirs was the person that the attorney general depended on for the total picture of what was going on and having Roger with him and Roger would walk up and put his arms around my shoulder and say, "Ozell, we need to know this." And thus that's the way things went in Memphis during, immediately after Martin was killed. Story_ID: 475528 Speaker 1: Then Bayard Rustin--now you don't know who Bayard was? Speaker 2: Beard? Speaker 1: Bayard, B-A-Y-A-R-D Rustin, came to Memphis [Tennessee] to organize a nonviolent demonstration, the one that Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was there to put on. This was about five, six or seven days later. I noticed that they were talking about that and talking about Coretta King [Coretta Scott King] 'cause she came and led that march, and Bayard when he came to Memphis and Bayard was a particular guy. As he walked the route that they, that the demonstrators were scheduled to walk, he decided that that was impossible. Two things he said was impossible. That they could not be restricted to one half of the street, that's what the police had gotten a judge to order. They've got to march on one half of the street. He took the attitude that it would take twice as long, actually it would, one half of the street and since the judge had said in his order that they had from ten to two [o'clock]. He said we can't do it from ten to two and he said furthermore, this is Bayard now, said if we could use only one half of the street, that'll give the haters the other half who we don't know what kind of attacks they might do, put on our marchers. We don't want that kind of situation. He said somebody's got to get the judge to change his order. So when they got through discussing they said since the march is tomorrow we don't have time to litigate this and go through the courts and try to get something done. Said somebody need to appeal to the judge that was Bayard's position. So when they said all right who can we get to appeal to the judge? They said [HistoryMaker] Ozell Sutton. Well everybody in there didn't know me but Bayard did. He said, "The best person to go and see the judge is somebody from CRS, the Community Relations Service and that's Ozell Sutton." So they asked me if I'd go and see the judge and I agreed. Story_ID: 475529 Speaker 1: In a meeting later that evening with other justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] officials, the U.S. attorney [Ramsey Clark] and the Civil Rights Division and, and all of that they took the attitude that nobody from the Department of Justice could be in the position of trying to get a judge to change his order. Sound good, but you see the difference between them and me was that they're officers of the court; I was not an officer of the court (laughter). An attorney is an officer of the court right, and the U.S. attorney and there's some Civil Rights Division and all of that had some restrictions, so they told me, well the other justice department officials told me that I couldn't go. Well they didn't know who they was talking to. This was Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton] they was talking to and couldn't was not in the way CRS [Community Relations Service] operated. I said, "I promised them I'd go and I will go," and I, I, I'm like this, I started to quote the Bible, I said, "Like Esther--." Now I know you don't know what I'm talking about what Esther did in the Bible. Esther was told by Jeremiah to go to the king and make him--Esther was the wife of the king, the queen (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was the queen. Speaker 1: And making a plea for the people. Now back in those days even the wife of the king could not do that without his invitation. Well he had, she had not been--so Jeremiah kept telling Esther, "You must go and make an appeal for the people," and finally Esther said, "I will go and see the king. If I perish, I perish." Speaker 2: So that's the same stance you took? Speaker 1: That's the stance I took. So I went despite what they said. They says we gonna call the attorney general. I said to myself by the time you get the attorney general I would've been, and maybe I will be disciplined, maybe but I went to the judge and I explained to the judge with only one half of the street [in Memphis, Tennessee] the kind of scenario you set up with that and also judge you can't march, we're gonna have ten thousand people. You can't march ten thousand people and break up the march and the rally between ten and two [o'clock] (laughter), can't do that judge it takes more time than that, and the judge changed his order and gave them the whole street, but not only that we changed streets because Bayard [Bayard Rustin] said that the way they were routed to go they had to pass by two businesses under demolition and one under construction and he didn't want the young people tempted to pick up debris and throw it and you know and he was concerned about that and I told the judge that and the judge changed his whole order making it possible to march from ten to four giving them the whole street and to assigning to another street that didn't include those encumbrances, and I felt pretty good about that in that sense and that's the kind of thing that CRS did and the kind of thing that I've done all of my life. Story_ID: 475530 Speaker 1: After King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is killed Rockefeller [Winthrop Rockefeller] becomes governor, is that right? Speaker 2: Rockefeller was already governor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the blacks in Arkansas marched on him and they had him down there on the steps of the capitol singing 'We Shall Overcome.' You know it's the governor (laughter) (unclear) governor (laughter). They had Rockefeller standing in the middle of the black leaders singing 'We Shall Overcome' and they demanded that Winthrop Rockefeller put some blacks in high positions. There were hardly any blacks in state government in Arkansas with any positions of any consequences and, and Winthrop agrees and when they ask--when he asked them where they wanted to start they said we wanna--we want a special assistant in your office and we don't want you to hire some young person, we want you to hire somebody that's equal to the rest of the staff in there and he said, "Well who you want?" The black leaders said, "[HistoryMaker] Ozell Sutton." I was in Memphis [Tennessee] and so he agreed, Rockefeller called me in Memphis at the hotel, "Ozell," I said, "Yes?" He said, "Winthrop Rockefeller," I said, "Oh, hey Win, how in the world are you?" And he said, "I--how are you?" And I said, "Well." "We're having a situation over here," and we talked about it a little bit. He said, "I met with the black leaders and I agreed to bring on a black special assistant in my office, and they recommended that it be you, so I'm inviting you to come and work with me in that position." I said, "No, I'm in a peculiar position in Memphis and I don't feel free to leave. The position is especially tailored for me by me (laughter) and, and I don't know." He said, "I tell you what, when are you coming home?" I said, "I'll be home the weekend." I was still living in Little Rock [Arkansas]. He said, "Why don't you to come to the mansion and let's have a talk." And I went to the mansion and we had a talk and he invited to become a part of his staff. I finally agreed under two circumstances. I said, "I will come on leave, not leave my job but on leave from my job, but you have to go and talk with Ramsey [Ramsey Clark] and, and get secured that leave for me." I said, "I can't do it; you'll have to do it." So sure enough he got in his plane and he flew to Washington [D.C.] and he got the attorney general to agree to give me leave to come to work for him. I said, "The next thing I have to have, and that's direct access to you." I'm something out there I'll tell you (laughter) you know. "I don't wanna go through your executive director and have to go to two or three people to see you. If I'm going to take this job I have to have direct access to you. I know you can't do everything I shall ask you to do, but I got to have the privilege to ask you," (laughter). So he brought me aboard as special assistant that's how I went to work for Winthrop Rockefeller the third time. Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two years, and since your job was secure, you went back to CRS [Community Relations Service] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I come on back to CRS. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Story_ID: 475531 Speaker 1: When we'd have staff meetings every Monday morning, the governor's staff, I had the privilege and the responsibility to tell the rest of the staff I could go back home (laughter) because their position on everything was different from mine, theirs was political right? And they wanted to discuss everything as to how it would impact Winthrop Rockefeller politically. I didn't see that as my role, to protect him politically. My job was to get things done for the black community and I set out to do that. I asked Mr. Rockefeller for the first five appointments to boards and commissions, the next five appointments I want 'em black. Didn't have nobody on boards and commissions then. And he granted it. The first one was the State Board of Education [Arkansas State Board of Education] (laughter) but the funniest thing, the first three people I recommended and Rockefeller nominated the state legislature [Arkansas General Assembly] turned down (laughter). Speaker 2: Who were some of the people you nominated or recommended (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The first one was John, John Walker. John Walker is a black attorney and John Walker was head of, was the attorney for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. So they, they had a good one to, to oppose (laughter). So the, the state legislature turned him down and the next--John's still alive, he's still in Little Rock [Arkansas], my good friend, and the second one was a guy named Dr. William Townsend. William died last year and William was chair of the Board of the Southern Regio- of the Arkansas Council on Human Relations all the time that I was there. So the legislature turned him down. I got smart, I went and got me a real bright, young black man who was more militant than either one of those, but not as well known (laughter). He was a young, black Catholic priest down in a little town in Arkansas that hardly anybody knew, and he was nominated and named to the board of the--then I, I went from there to the, to the welfare board and from there I went to five boards and got the first five blacks appointed to boards and commissions in Arkansas. Speaker 2: Okay. So you truly did a wondrous work in--while working in the governor's office (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well you see I could that my, my base was the [U.S.] Department of Justice right? And if Winthrop Rockefeller fired me, if I got fired I'd go back to Justice. That's, that was a part of the plan when I set it up that way. Speaker 2: That was very smart. Speaker 1: Well you have to be smart in the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 475532 Speaker 1: So you go back to your position at CRS [Community Relations Service] and now do you ha- do you have--do you get a promotion, or are you in the same position (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes I did, when I went back I went back as a 14 [GS-14], (laughter) went back as a 14 and I came down here I was supposed to get a 15 [GS-15] when I came down here. I didn't get a 15 because the agency ran into funding problems and our budget was cut and CRS no longer, regional directors were no longer 15s, they were cut back to 14s. That means that I came down here as a 14 with a promise to become a 15 that I never became. Speaker 1: So you were in the governor's office [of Winthrop Rockefeller] from '68 [1968] to '70 [1970]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay and then in '72 [1972] you go back to CRS and come--this is when you went to Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. In '70 [1970]-- Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972]? Speaker 2: --I went back to CRS (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you went back. Speaker 2: As state supervisor for Arkansas. Speaker 1: Until '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: And then in '72 [1972] I transferred here? Speaker 1: Okay and how long did you work for CRS in the Atlanta region? Speaker 2: I was regional director from 1972 until '02 [2002], what's that thirty years? Speaker 1: Um-hm, so all right, let's talk about some of the things in Atlanta that you had to deal with when you got here? Speaker 2: Well let me tell you, you are going to have to do another session. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I was in, I was in Miami [Florida] for three riots in Miami; I was in, in Decatur, Alabama for that great conflict there. I was in Forsyth [Georgia] for the conflict here, I was--I could name you a dozen of 'em and by the time I got through talking about those you'd be tired and I'd be tired. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Story_ID: 475533 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Scott Sterns is the videographer and Michael Reed [ph.] is observing. This is a continuation of a previous interview. Would you state your name again for us and tell me today's date? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Ozell Sutton and the date is September 9. Speaker 1: Tenth. Speaker 2: September 10th. Speaker 1: Two thousand and seven [2007] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty o'seven [2007]. Story_ID: 475534 Speaker 1: Where we ended the last time we were going into 1972, you had finished giving us a scenario about the Civil Rights Movement and about King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death. If you would can you speak to some of the incidences that you had or run-ins with, with the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. I don't think we talked much about that, but this was a big part of what you did was to resolve conflicts and so you had some dealings with the Klan. So, let's, let's talk about some of those dealings. One of them I see was in Clarksdale, Mississippi, you wanna tell me about that time? Speaker 2: Well the one in Clarksdale, Mississippi was before 1972. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I was a field representative for the Community Relations Services, U.S. Department of Justice and we were down in Clarksdale, Mississippi, three of us and that was the first time that blacks had stayed in a Holiday Inn in Clarksdale, Mississippi and because blacks was in the hotel, there were two blacks and a white the Klan surrounded the Holiday Inn and they were disturbed that blacks were in the Holiday Inn so they surrounded it. One of the gentlemen said, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton], what we gonna do now?" I said, "I don't know." He said, "Well, we'd better call the police." I said, "The police is already out there (laughter). The police are among those people out there call themselves the Klan so we can't call the police, they are already out there." And I said, "Furthermore wherever we call we have to go through the switchboard." That was prior to cell phones and all of that, and now when go through the switchboard they will know everything that we're faced with. So I came up with an idea. I called the office of the attorney general and when I got the secretary I said, "Would you please get for me a middle-aged black, not a young black, a middle-aged black. I don't care whether he's a janitor or a runner or what have you, but a middle-aged black." She says, "What's the meaning of that?" I said, "I don't have time to tell you that, but just get me a middle-aged black." She went out and she found a janitor. He came in and got on the phone. I said, "Oday ouyay peaksay Igpay Atinlay--. Do you speak Pig Latin," and he said he did. Then I went on to tell him what our condition was and who he needed to contact. He needed to contact [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins who was the director of the Community Relations Service and tell Roger that he has to go to the attorney general and find some way to get us out of here. So that, all of that I communicated in Pig Latin and he understood it, and he got in touch with Roger like I had said about thirty minutes, five U.S. Marshals [U.S. Marshals Service] came to escort us out of the Holiday Inn. Speaker 1: When did you learn to speak Pig Latin? Speaker 2: Oh, blacks my age learned it before you learn you're ABCs. You'd learn that, all of us spoke Pig Latin, blacks that is very, very early. Speaker 1: So that was something that you learned back on the plantation days? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Story_ID: 475535 Speaker 1: So what was another incidence--incident? Speaker 2: Another incident was Decatur, Alabama, a young man, black man was being tried for murder and rape. The court had ruled that he was incapable of either rape or murder due to mental condition, but that didn't satisfy the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] so SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] was marching each Saturday demanding that the boy be freed, and each Saturday the Klan would block their march and the police wouldn't do anything about it, but on one Saturday, some of the blacks decided to arm themselves. So they came with their little pistols and there was shoot-out between the black demonstrators and the Klan. Several Klan members were shot and several of the demonstrators were shot. Story_ID: 475536 Speaker 1: This caused a big Civil Rights Movement march in Montgomery [Alabama], I mean in Decatur [Alabama]. Well, that presented a real problem because with all those folk coming in and the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] saying they was going to be armed and blacks were arming themselves, I knew we were in for a terrible, terrible problem. So I sat down with the state police and told them what needed to be done and what we call contingency planning, and according to their records they said that they were going assign two hundred officers to it and that should be enough. I said that won't even start to do it and, but they insisted on it. So I called a friend of mine, actually an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] friend of mine in Montgomery, Alabama and I asked one of them who in the fraternity can get me in to see the governor, who was Wallace [George Wallace] at that time, and they told me the Alpha man that knew the Wallace people and they gave me his name and I called him and I said, "Brother--." That's what we called each other. "This is Brother Ozell Sutton [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton]." Said, "I know who you are Brother Sutton you are our, our immediate past and national president." I said, "Yes, sir," said, "I need to see Mr. Wallace and I need to see him right away and I don't have time for exchange of letters. Could you get me into see the governor?" He said, "How soon?" I said, "Like, yesterday." And he called me back and said, "How can you--can you make a ten o'clock appointment tomorrow morning?" I said, "I'll be there." So I got up early that morning and drove from Atlanta [Georgia] to Montgomery and went in to see the governor and I told the governor what the situation was and he again said, "According to the intelligence of the state police you're talking about four or five hundred people." I said, "No I'm talking about four or five thousand people." He said, "According to my state police that's not what's on the cards." I said, "But according to my work in the field of conflict resolution and according to my knowledge of the civil rights people and their reaction, they will be here in large numbers and if we don't have enough police to protect them, we're going to be in bad shape in this," and I finally talked him into--I asked for three hundred state police officers and four companies of the National Guard. He reluctantly agreed and so we had, and I did a couple of other things. I went and I met with the city council 'cause the blacks were talking about marching, and the Klan was going to march the same day, the same route. So the city council didn't have any way of preventing that so they needed an ordinance that they could assign a time for each to march. I didn't try to keep anybody from marching, but they couldn't march at the same time or the same route, and so I wrote an ordinance that gave the city council the authority to assign a time for each one to march and assign a place where each could march and also I put into that ordinance a directive that nobody could be within five hundred yards of that march who were armed and that came--was passed by the, the city council and then they assigned--see now they have the power to assign when you can march and so they assigned that the Klan would march at ten a.m. and that the SCL [sic. Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)] people would march at two [p.m.] and none of 'em, SCLC or the Klan could have weapons and so the governor assigned four companies of the National Guard and three hundred police and that's what it took. Story_ID: 475537 Speaker 1: But in the meantime, the day before I was going up the stairs of the capitol, the s- not the capitol but the county courthouse and the head of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] was coming down. I walked over where he was and offered my hand, of course he didn't take it, and said I needed to see him. He said, "You need to see me?" I said, "Yes sir I need to see you." I said, "I'm Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton]." "I know who you are," and I said, "I know who you are. So when could we sit down?" He said, "You can come down to our headquarters that's the only way you're going to see me." He wasn't gonna talk to me before all that public and to his surprise he said six o'clock that evening he would see me down at his headquarters. He was surprised that I went and my staff said, "You're going down there Dr. Sutton?" I said, "Yes sir." They said, "Well we will go with you." "No, no, nobody will go with me, I'll go alone." So I went to the headquarters and knocked on the door and two big men came to the door and asked me what I wanted and I told 'em I had an appointment with Mr. Wilkins--Wilkerson [sic. Bill Wilkinson] that was his name and they was reluctant. I said, "Go back and ask Mr. Wilkerson if he has an appointment with me." So they went back, came back to the door and ushered me in where he was sitting in the back watching TV, and again I offered my hand and he didn't take it. He didn't offer me the opportunity to sit down, he said, "Now what do you want?" So I told him what the situation was, and I said, "I would advise that your men not be armed." "Oh, we'll be prepared to take care of ourselves." I said, "Are you prepared to get hurt because if anybody shows up out there with a weapon they might be reduced to a grease spot in the middle of the street," and said, "Now remember, you been getting away with a lot of things because they all were police officers who were in your camp." Said, "But out those three hundred state police officers, roughly a hundred of 'em will be black and you know of the, those from the National Guard, it's very integrated. So you are dealing with black officers and they're not going to be sympathetic to you like you have experienced before now and if you come out there with a weapon, they're going to be on top of buildings, behind buildings and there you'll get yourself hurt." "We'll be prepared to take care of ourselves." I said, "Well let the records show that I told you," and I left there and I went around to the church where SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] was and I told Dr. Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] the same story and I said, "If you are wise, Brother Joe," I always call Dr. Lowery Brother Joe, "Now, Brother Joe, if you're wise you'll take up all these little Saturday night specials and put 'em in the pastor's study and lock 'em up, or you won't go with weapons at all." And he did and that's how we got through that terrible day. There were at least ten thousand people present and we got through that day without great conflict because we were prepared. Speaker 2: Do you know what year this was? Speaker 1: This was in 1965. Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965] okay, and what about Clarksdale [Mississippi], what year was that, was it the same year? Speaker 1: Clarksdale? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Clarksdale was in '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Also okay, all right now the result of the march, no one got hurt and the idea--the march was because this young black boy who was, I guess considered mentally ill was on trial? Was he ever let off, do you know what happened with the trial? Speaker 1: Yes he was, he was, he was--they finally concluded that he could not have committed murder due to his own mental condition and he was--I don't remember exactly what happened to him (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: But he was not convicted of murder. Story_ID: 475538 Speaker 1: The work that you did because you had to be fair as far as civil rights for all people, was there a time where you had to actually protect the rights of the Klu Klux Klan [sic. Ku Klux Klan, KKK]? Speaker 2: There was. Speaker 1: That was, that was the time you were talking about? Speaker 2: No, no, I said there was a time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I had to protect the Klan. The Klan decided to march here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Blacks and many whites were determined that the Klan wouldn't gonna march in Atlanta, Georgia and they prepared to, to confront the Klan. I had to go, and this time I was working, believe it or not with Shirley [Shirley Franklin]. Speaker 1: Franklin? Speaker 2: The present mayor, she was special assistant to Maynard [Maynard Jackson]. See Shirley was special assistant to Maynard, then special assistant to Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]. That's why she knows so much about the decision. And I said, "Shirley, we cannot prevent the Klan from marching as much as I personally may would like to do that. They have a right to march and we have to extend them their right to march. So what we have to concentrate on, not letting blacks and whites--prevent them from marching." So the police geared up, to prevent those who would prevent the Klan from marching to prevent from preventing the Klan and that was the time that I was--had to extend or argue for the rights of the Klan to march. That was right here in Atlanta, Georgia. They were going to march from, from the-- Speaker 1: From the stadium [Atlanta Stadium; Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: From the stadium to the, to the capitol [Georgia State Capitol, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Capitol? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so what happened during that march? Speaker 2: They marched, there was some conflict because blacks and whites broke down barriers, they jumped over walls and they, they were determined that the Klan wasn't gonna spoil the image of this city by Klan marching, but they did march and I had five of my staff's presence out there looking and everybody was protected but us. The police naturally had their shield and all of that and, and the Klan had whatever they wanted to have and we were out there without anything, and bricks and rocks and things that was thrown at the Klan, but see we were out there now and they were hitting us and all of that, but that's typically what you get into in conflict resolution. Story_ID: 475539 Speaker 1: Now what about in Jackson, Mississippi after Medgar Evens [sic. Medgar Evers] was killed, was there a situation there with some black militants? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'd forgotten about that. The blacks were marching on the state capitol every day. They'd march and they'd have their little program and they'd leave. And this group of young blacks were passing out literature about a meeting over somewhere and invited people to come. Me and a young black who was with the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights at that time, Jack Wilmore got in our car that night and we went to the meeting, and they were revealing some of their top secrets in the meeting what they were gonna do and all of a sudden it occurred to them there were a couple of people in there that were not one of them. There was me and Jack Wilmore and one guy jumped up and said, "Wait a minute y'all, there are two spies in our group," and they said, "Where, where?" And they said, "Those two guys over there" so Jack stood up and said he was not a spy and that he was not, that he was with the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Well I was with the [U.S.] Department of Justice and blacks have always thought very ill of the Department of Justice at least in those days, didn't have any faith in them and I told them who I was, that I was with the Community Relations Service, but I reviewed my entire history of involvement in the Civil Rights Movement, I was with the nine [Little Rock Nine] when they entered Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas] I was here and I was there so I'm not a spy, you invited me here. Here's the piece of paper you handed me, invited me so if you just let me out of here I'll get out of your meeting, and so they decided to let me out of--but they did, they really didn't because when we started out the door they came tearing out after us and we made a beeline for our car and we jumped in our car and took off. Now that's when we were running from blacks in Jackson, Mississippi (laughter). Speaker 1: So you had to run from the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and then from some black militants also. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: So you were always caught in the middle trying to do the right thing? Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that--we had to do what was right and what was best for the situation whether we were dealing with blacks or whites. Even when we might be a--in agreement with what the blacks were doing, I mean inwardly, but we knew that the Klan had its rights to march just like blacks had their rights to march. Speaker 1: And what year was the Jackson, Mississippi incident? Speaker 2: You know I'm not exactly sure (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When it was? All right. Speaker 2: --what year it was, but it was in the early '60s [1960s], about mid-'60s [1960s] somewhere in there. It was during the time after Medgar had been killed and blacks were marching in Jackson, Mississippi. I'd have to go back and see exactly when Medgar was killed (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's okay. Story_ID: 475540 Speaker 1: There was something also about Wrightsville, Georgia? Speaker 2: Oh, Wrightsville, Georgia--blacks were demonstrating over some school desegregation issues and they would march up to the courthouse, the county courthouse and they would be blocked from coming on the ground by the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], another one of those situations. And they'd march up here and the Klan would block their view and they'd get on the street and march around that side and the Klan would run around that side, and everywhere they would go the Klan would be around there to block 'em. My staff was there and when I arrived I walked right through the middle of the Klan. The head of the Georgia State Police [sic. Georgia State Patrol] asked a staff member of mine, "Who is that black man walking among the, through the gathering of the Klan?" And one of my staff said, "Oh, that's the boss," that's what they called me, "that's the boss, he's not afraid of 'em" and he said, "But I'm afraid for him." So I walked right on through the Klan and went on where my staff was and where the state police was and he said to me--actually now he is head of security at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], got--he was head of the state police of Georgia at that time. Speaker 1: What is, who is this? Speaker 2: I was trying to think of his name. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: But he's now head of security at Georgia Tech and greets me very warmly now when I see him. "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton]," I said, "Yeah." He said, "You remember?" I said, "Don't tell me about it I wanna forget it," (laughter). Then he said, "I've never seen anybody with that kind of nerve." Story_ID: 475541 Speaker 1: And then with the blacks when the--I mediated settlement of dispute. I--with the police here in Atlanta [Georgia] when, before Maynard [Maynard Jackson] was mayor blacks had filed suit charging discrimination in hiring and assignment and promotion, the whole bag and when Maynard became mayor he started to try to correct this perception of discrimination, so the white police officers, the FOP [Fraternal Order of Police] filed a suit charging reverse discrimination. So for three or four years they couldn't hire anybody and, and couldn't promote anybody, it was a mess. So the judge, federal judge called me and said, "Dr. Sutton [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton]," I said, "Yes." "This is Judge--," and I can't think of the judge's name now. Said, "I have," he said, "I have the, the suit, the discrimination suit, discrimination reverse suit." I said, "Yes I know." He said, "I'm assigning that to you for mediation," and he said, "Now I'm not asking you to take it, I'm assigning it to you." Said, "Yes Judge." So I was assigned that case for a mediation, it went on continuously every day for about two weeks, and I had the police officers, the whites and the blacks in my office one night. Now you had the white police officers, you've got the black police officers and you've got the city, you've got three components you're dealing with and you've got--so in my office we went into a break, breakout and I had the black police officers in my office and a staff member of mine had the white police officer in the conference room and the black police officers decided they were gonna walk out. I got up and blocked the door and said, "Nobody's going out of this door." I ran into one of 'em at the other day--he's retired now and he said, "You were about the craziest thing I've ever seen." Talking me, I said, "What was that?" He said, "You were the only man in the room who had no arms and you're telling all them police officers who had guns on their side that they wasn't going out that door." I said, "Anybody that go out this door have to go over me," and I said, "You know one thing. I didn't believe that you were ready to go over me and you weren't and that was the end of that." Story_ID: 475542 Speaker 1: So how was the police situation resolved, what, what happened in the, the resolution of the police department? Speaker 2: I mediated that case and in the mediation we resolved that Atlanta [Georgia] had to hire more blacks in police and they had to promote more blacks to higher offices and then they had to assign blacks in positions in which they had never been before. Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown] was the head of the state police--I mean the head of-- Speaker 1: Atlanta Police [Atlanta Police Department]. Speaker 2: --Atlanta Police at that time. Speaker 1: And who was the mayor at that time? Speaker 2: Maynard [Maynard Jackson]. Speaker 1: Maynard was the mayor. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So this was what year, it's in the '70s [1970s] right? Speaker 2: It was '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s] or something. I would say like '73 [1973] or '74 [1974]. I don't remember exactly I'd have to go back and look at the records to see-- Speaker 1: That's fine, that's fine (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when it was. Story_ID: 475543 Speaker 1: We were talking about di- different encounters that you've had with the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and later on there would be a confrontation in Forsyth, Georgia and to me that--I don't know whether this is true so I guess my question to you is, did that march remind you of Bloody Sunday? Speaker 2: Yes it did, and it reminded me a lot of other things that I'd gone through, but when this young white man decided he was going to walk through Forsyth and protest what had happened to blacks many years earlier when all blacks were driven out of Forsyth County [Georgia]. You may not have known that and they were run out of Forsyth County and they were run out without giving them anything for their land, or their houses, they were just driven out and this young man was going to march through Forsyth County to do, to call attention to that horrible time. Well the Klan got to him and threatened him and frightened him that he would not march and did not. So Hosea [Hosea Williams] took up the task and he announced that he was going to Forsyth County and going to Cummings [sic. Cumming, Georgia], that's the head of Forsyth County and--so he got his group and he went into headed from the main highway up that street or that road that went to Cummings, and the Klan was there to keep him from marching like I'd been in many other times and they were throwing sticks and bricks and the police were doing nothing to prevent the Klan from attacking the marchers. I persuaded Hosea to let's get out there. Hosea first took the attitude he came to march and he was gonna march. I said, "You can march at another time if you get out of here now." Said, "You better get out of because you have no protection and you have no way of keeping these marchers from getting injured." So he finally agreed, and I had the bus driver keep the bus between him, the marchers and, and the Klan until they could load up on the bus and they loaded on the bus as the Klan threw objects at the bus and came out of there. Story_ID: 475544 Speaker 1: Well Hosea [Hosea Williams] announced that the next week he was going back and by this time the civil righters all across the country became alarmed so they were coming. Again I had the same thing with the governor of Georgia that I'd had with Wallace [George Wallace], and I had to, I went to the state police and said that something has to be done. What kind of assignment do you have and what's the contingency planning? That's the word we used a lot in those days and he told me that he would assign two hundred state police to--I said, "That won't be enough." He said, "Well according to my intelligence," I said, "I don't know what your intelligence says, but my experience--," and I went into the Decatur [Alabama] situation and that, there're, there're going to be large numbers of civil righters coming all the way from California and New York and all of that. He said, "Well I don't have that." I said, "Well I don't know what you have but I'm telling you what my experience is." So I left the state police and went to see the governor and when I went to see the governor I told him the same story I told Wallace and he asked me what did I--we need? I said, "You need three hundred state police and four companies of the National Guard," and he disagreed he said, "But based upon what we know about you, Mr. Sutton [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton], we're going to assign. We don't agree, but we're going to assign." And so he did. I said, "That whole highway that runs from the main highway to Cummins [sic. Cumming, Georgia] has got to be covered, and they got the coverage shoulder-to-shoulder, they can't have a police here and a police there, they got to be shoulder-to-shoulder because those people are angry and we're going to face that kind of thing." And I said, "And the streets gotta be swept for weapons and explosions all the way down and you've got to have policeman up in those wooded areas where they will be no doubt be ready to do whatever they can to interrupt." So we got enough police and enough National Guard to do that, and sure enough we had at least ten thousand folk. They came from everywhere, I know the civil rights folk and they came from everywhere and even when the session was over in Cumming they were still coming from the King center [in Atlanta, Georgia]. They came to the King center, get on the bus, come, they were still coming in at even when the march was over, and that was what happened at Forsyth County [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Do you remember what year that might of been? Speaker 1: My memory is terrible and I usually have to go into my notes for all of that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) All right, that's, that's fine. Speaker 1: But it was in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: The, the march with Hosea? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 475545 Speaker 1: So now back to your job here in Atlanta [Georgia]. You come to Atlanta in 1972 and tell me about your position and what you do here in Atlanta. Speaker 2: Well I was a field representative for the Community Relations Service in Arkansas and then I was state supervisor out of the Community Relations Service for Arkansas and in 1972 they assigned me to come here as regional director of the Southeast Region. That's the States of Kentucky, Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, North and South Carolina and Florida. So I was head of the whole region in that sense and went through every major conflict that occurred. We had three riots in, in Miami [Florida] and one in St. Pete [St. Petersburg, Florida] and we just had--that terrible, terrible desegregation crisis in Louisville, Kentucky. I had to be at all of those places during those times. Speaker 1: And so you were the director and what were some of the, some of the situations that had to be diffused to your--well in any of the? Speaker 2: Well the whole thing is, when the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed in 1964, the president [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and the [U.S.] Congress with all due concern knew that there needed to be an agency that would work in time to resolve the conflicts 'cause they knew there were going to be conflicts coming out of the decision and so two agencies came out of that act. That was the Community Relations Service and the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] was named specifically and the Community Relation Service job was to assist communities in resolving racial and ethnic conflict and that was our responsibility and that's where were assigned. We, those of us who worked to get the act passed wanted cease and desist powers for the Community Relations Service but the Congress and president chose not to do that, that we had but one weapon and that was mediation and conciliation, no arms, no nothing and that's what the Community Relations Service did from the time that the Civil Rights Act was passed and that's what it still does. Story_ID: 475546 Speaker 1: Well specific to Atlanta [Georgia], can you think of, of some, something that had to be done here that was very important to Atlanta? Speaker 2: Well I think I just about named those things that, that-- Speaker 1: Just do--the police department [Atlanta Police Department] was one right? Speaker 2: The police department was one and most of our work was outside of Atlanta. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: In the other states. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: We, we--one of the reasons is that if you can get the people in charge to do what needs to be done, then the crisis is not as bad. I could deal with Maynard [Maynard Jackson], I could deal with Shirley [Shirley Franklin] and I could deal with the people in charge in Atlanta for the most part, pointing out to them what needed to be done and they were pretty good at listening to me and I remember doing the Rodney King crisis in California. I was assigned to the Rodney King crisis in California and then we had the problem to come up here. The students over at Atlanta U complex [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] started demonstrating and so Maynard calls me in, in Los Angeles [California] and says, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton] you out there in California, we need you here in Atlanta." So I came to Atlanta because the students were uptight. When they--the police was trying to keep them over on the side of Northside Drive where Atlanta U is and trying to keep them from going any further toward the city. I don't know how much you know about Atlanta, trying to keep them from going into the city and keep them over, and in trying to do that the police was using tear gas and that--so they drove the young people into the dormitories insisting that they go into the dormitories. So Dr., Dr. Cole [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole] was head of Clark Atlanta U [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] at that time persuaded the students to go into the dorm and that's--well from the dorm they were throwing objects down at the police. And Bell, Eldrin Bell, was the chief of police at that time and Bell was up in his plane directing traffic and so the police was shooting gas. Now you have run the kids into the dormitory, now you're shooting gas into the dormitory which was a terrible thing. I came into the picture and I got Bell on the phone, he was up in the air in a helicopter. I said, "Eldrin have you gone crazy?" Say, "Said you wanted 'em to go in to the dorm, now they're in the dorm and you're shooting gas in the dorm." He said, "Well they're throwing objects at the police downstairs." I said, "Well have the police to move across the street, they can't throw that far," (laughter). "Oh, we're not going to, we're not going to back off." I said, "Eldrin, this is Ozell you're talking to, use good judgment. Ask the police to move from right here, under the dorm, across the street. They still got 'em contained and, and then there's nobody in that dorm can throw that far," (laughter). So he did and resolved that part of the problem, because it was terrible that he had driven 'em into the dorm and asked the officers of the university to put 'em in the dorm and they're shooting gas in the dorm. I thought that was crazy and I told Eldrin so we're good friends, and I said, "Eldrin, no, no, no, no you can't do that." He said, "Ozell we've got to do something." I said, "Just pull the police back over across the street and I doubt if anybody over there can--got an arm good enough to throw all the way across the street. It's not like dropping something right down the--out of their windows," and he did that, and that resolved that terrible crisis that was shaping up in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Now you--what year was this? Can't remember the years in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: You always gotta ask me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I'm trying to keep it, I'm trying to see where the order is (unclear). Speaker 2: I'll tell you like I tell my--the person who helped me with my books--you have to look up the year. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), this was in the '70s [1970s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I don't remember, yeah it was in the '70s [sic.]. Speaker 1: Now because Rodney King was around that time so we can kind of get an idea of when it was. Speaker 2: Well that's when it was during the Rodney King crisis. Speaker 1: The Rodney King time. Story_ID: 475547 Speaker 1: Now tell me about Rodney King, what did you do out there in California? Speaker 2: Same thing. Speaker 1: Oh, same thing. Speaker 2: I was called in to--sent there by the director of the CRS [Community Relations Service] and I said, "Well why are you sending me out there we have a regional director for the Western Region and he's right in San Francisco [California]. Why are you sending me into his territory?" He said, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton] nobody knows as much about--in CRS--knows as much about street conflict as you do." I said, "You're calling me a street one, right," (laughter) and we laughed about that. He said, "No but you've more experience in dealing with street conflict than any regional director we have,"--we have ten regions--"and we want you to go." I went out to California, one young man was--two young men--they're two of us and the second night and two of us and we were looking for somewhere we could eat 'cause they'd burned up most of the places down in the area and then we came to this place and that other guy who was with me went on in to the restaurant and I was trying to find a newspaper and I was out. So two young men came up to me and, and I turned around real quickly and they said, "Did we scare you old man?" Well, you know I'm no baby so that doesn't insult me--they called me an old man. I said, "You scared me, not hardly." You know you--one of the things about dealing with conflict you can't show fear. Showing fear is like dealing with a dog, you can't show fear so I said, "You scared me? No, not hardly." He said, "Well you turned around so fast." I said, "I turned around to the ready." He said, "Ready for what?" I said, "Whatever you got on your mind," (laughter) you know, "Scared to death, right? Don't even have a pencil." He said, "Well suppose we decide to take what you have?" I said, "Well if you think I'm gonna stand here and let you do that, well you do that," and so one of the kids said, "Listen at the old man." I said, "Let me tell you young people something." I go on the offense, that's my style. "Last night you was running around burning stuff and running into places and running with TVs on your shoulder and all that, and boy you embarrassed the police. You made them look so bad, but don't think you're gonna get away with that tonight. They are ready for you, they gonna blow you away. I want you to know that. If you've got any sense at all get off these streets." And he said, "Listen at the old man." I said, "You get off these streets 'cause they're ready for you tonight and they gonna blow you away," and one of 'em had a little old Saturday night special. "We can take care of ourselves." I said, "You fool," said, "they got tanks over in the next street over there. You see that helicopter up there." I said, "What scares me, not you but they got both of us in their sight, and in their effort to contain you they might hit me." I said, "And you're here talking to me. So what I'm afraid of is up there, not you." And I said, "Let me tell you one thing, yeah though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I will fear no evil 'cause I'm the baddest SOB in the valley," (laughter), and they had to laugh (laughter), and that way I got rid of them. Story_ID: 475548 Speaker 1: And you stayed with the government until nine- until 2002. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When you retired. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And of course you've got plenty of awards for your service. Now, when you retired in 2002, as we know you're not really retired, you just stopped doing government work per se, but you're involved in so many other things. Your fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], you've written a book; tell me about what you have done, some of the things that you did after you retired? Speaker 2: I do a lot of public speaking, always did. I laugh about this, I said when I went to college [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas] I went out for basketball and the boys were so good I didn't know where the ball was half the time, so I had sense enough to know I didn't belong there. I went out for track and we had some boys from Africa and you talking about could run, they could run so I didn't have to go out but twice and know that I, I couldn't run. Said I turned from running track to running my mouth. I turned to argumentation and debating, public speaking and dramatic presentation. That's that play you see over there, said so I turned to using my mouth because use what you got and that became my career, using my mouth. So now I travel across the country. I have had more civil rights experiences than just about anybody around including Joe Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery]. I remember when Joe came on the scene in Birmingham, Alabama doing, down there marching in Birmingham, Alabama and I went to Birmingham during that time. So I have a greater body of experience in the conflicts of conflict resolution and crisis that anybody that I know, so I go and I talk about these things, that's what I've been talking to you about. Story_ID: 475549 Speaker 1: You have met a lot people also during, during your journey through the civil rights era. Personally you have made a lot of friends, now tell me--I'm gonna ask you I guess about some people and you can tell me what you know about them or if you're friends them and you know whether you worked together. Of course Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth]. Did you meet Fred Shuttlesworth and work with Fred (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes I know Fred very well, met Shuttlesworth in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Were you around when the church [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] was bombed in the 16th Street bombings? Speaker 2: I wasn't there that particular night. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was going into Birmingham all of the time. I was the person when Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got in jail he at first was in the Bessemer [Alabama] jail. Speaker 1: Right, you told us that story. Speaker 2: And I was the person who got him, got the [U.S.] Department of Justice to get him out of the Bessemer jail into the Birmingham jail, so I laugh with everybody I said then there wouldn't have been a letter from the Birmingham jail had it been for me getting Martin out of the Bessemer jail into the Birmingham jail, and I, I have been so many places. I don't know what gave me the courage to do some of the things I've done but I always say that courage is not the lack of fear; it's to move despite a fear. I was scared all of the time but what was before me needed to be done, so I did it and I've been so blessed, so blessed. Story_ID: 475550 Speaker 1: Well you were talking about how you use your mouth now, how you speak out in groups. You were part of--you were the president of, of your fraternity, tell me about that. That was in 1981? Speaker 2: You see what most people don't understand I've been active in so many things. I was a youth counselor president of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I was a collegiate chapter president of NAACP, I was vice president of the NAACP when the children marched, not marched but when the children went to, to Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas]. I helped recruit and sit down and talk with people and help recruit the kids who went to Central High School, so I was involved in--anytime you were raising the issue of the black struggle you could count on me. I was committed to that and that was my mission. And in the great fraternity they call Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], it was another opportunity to get a body of people to commit themselves to the struggle, and I kept Alpha and I had a theme, "Alpha belongs in the forefront of leadership," and I kept them in the forefront of leadership all the time I was general president. Actually when we decided to build a monument to Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.] that was during my administration and it took us ten years to get to [U.S.] Congress to pass that legislation that will permit us to do that. Well every year we would have it presented and every year it'd be turned down. After Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] became president, I come from Arkansas and he had most of his black assistants came out of Arkansas and I knew them. I went to Washington [D.C.] and I pulled together four of five of his top black assistants including the young man who was head of [U.S.] Department of Transportation, secretary of the Department of Transportation and I said I need your help. We need to pass this legislation and we need the president to make it part of his program for Congress to act upon and they went to work and they got that done and we got it passed. Story_ID: 475551 Speaker 1: You were talking about getting the bill passed for King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] monument to be built. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Were you involved at with helping to get the fund for the King papers to come to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: No, I was not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was not-- Speaker 1: All right, let's just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I was on the sidelines-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter)-- Speaker 2: --watching. Speaker 1: --of one--one of the things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You (laughter) were on the sidelines. Speaker 2: I was so pleased that they were able to do that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do that. But okay now back to this, the '70s [1970s] and we're working our way you know up, but one thing that you're proud of is working with the police and missing and murdered children [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases; Atlanta Child Murders]. Talk to me about that. Speaker 2: Well, I was in Louisville, Kentucky it was a terrible school desegregation crisis. I met a young man there I call Ernie Allen, and he was with the head of the county government which is Jefferson County [Kentucky] and we were talking about the crisis in Atlanta [Georgia]. I invited him to come into Atlanta because he had had some experience that addressing what the problem was, and we decided that we needed and we would try to get the president of the United States to convene people who were working in the field of child experts and to come up with what could be done on a national level because Atlanta was just but an example of what was occurring across the country. And we contacted the president's officials and we couldn't get the president to move, then we tried to get the attorney general to call a conference and we couldn't get that done, and me with my bodacious-ness decided I would convene a conference on children. I was terribly concerned because when a car is stolen, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] can get involved immediately, but when a child is stolen they could not. There were a time period before they could come intervene and I said now this is ridiculous. If a car is stolen they can get involved immediately and if a child is stolen or something happens to a child by the time they move the trail is cold so we decided that I would convene a conference in Louisville, Kentucky. The case was where the money's gonna come from? I took thirty thousand dollars of Alpha's [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] money. I was national president of Alpha at the time. I got ten or twelve thousand dollars from NCCJ, National Conference of Christian and Jews [National Conference for Community and Justice]. And, and Ernie got some money from the office out of which he was working in Louisville. So we came up with about--finally about fifty thousand dollars and convened that conference in Louisville, Kentucky. Story_ID: 475552 Speaker 1: And as we thought, as I had said the issue is so present that it doesn't make too much difference who call the conference. If somebody call a conference there are those people interested in the welfare of children will come and they did. They came to Louisville, Kentucky, about 150 of 'em. There were three congressmen, two member--two U.S. senators, there were mayors and school superintendents and all came by to that conference. I spoke three times (laughter), I spoke for the opening session, then later on for the second day I spoke for the luncheon 'cause the speaker couldn't get there and I spoke, then I did the closing address and we left there with a notion that we were going to establish something to address the welfare of children and we came up with National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, and I'm listed as one of its founders. Now the center is more than a million dollar operation with all kinds of money and I went off the board just recently when I was ill because everybody on the board was rich beside me, they got Xerox [Xerox Corporation] and IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and people of that level on there and the lady who sat right beside me was from the great city out of--from the great place out of Arkansas. Speaker 2: Right. Do you, did you believe, or do you believe that Wayne Williams was the sole person involved the missing and murdered children [in Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 1: I hate to get into that but no, I don't believe that--I believe he did his part, but I don't believe he did it all. That's just a personal. Speaker 2: A personal note, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, it had nothing to do with profession. Story_ID: 475553 Speaker 1: So now as president of the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] you work with the Urban League. You were telling me that you raised money for all of the different organizations. Which organizations did you work with? Speaker 2: The National Urban League, $300,000, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], $300,000 and UNCF, United Negro College Fund, $300,000. We set out to raise $1 million for those three organizations. Just about raised with the exception they got it, it was an exception about that which it took to raise the money, so that's where the $300,000 per agency came. Story_ID: 475554 Speaker 1: Are you a part of the 100 Black Men of Atlanta [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.]? Speaker 2: I'm a part of the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men, Inc.; 100 Black Men of America, Inc.] now. When I was president of Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] I went to New York [New York] to speak to Alpha and the gentleman that met me at the airport--I arrived about ten o'clock in the morning, I was speaking that night. He said, "Ozell [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton] I want you go to a meeting of the 100 Black Men." I said, "What's that?" He said, "We have an organization called the 100 Black Men in New York and I want you to go to the luncheon." I said, "Okay let's go to the hotel and drop off what I have and then I'll go to the luncheon." I went to the luncheon and all of the major black leaders in New York were there including the mayor [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] and my namesake Percy Sutton and what have you, and they had quite a group, and they made me promise that I'd come back to Atlanta [Georgia] and I'd organize a chapter in Atlanta. Well when I came back to Atlanta I was so busy with other things in Alpha that I was kind of slow about doing it. When I decided to move on that I called a few Alphas, a few men, not Alphas. They happened to be Alphas and with the idea and one 'em said now, now Nate said, "Ozell we're ahead of you, we had a meeting last month and you were the list of a person who ought to belong so we want you at the next meeting." So I was at the next meeting of the 100 in Atlanta and as bodacious as Atlanta is--bodacious mean bold and audacious, that's my creation, (laughter) and shortly after we got organized we decided to call a national convention because there were chapters, some eight chapters across the country by that time. So we convened the first national convention here in Atlanta with me as the convention chair and New York wouldn't come because they, they were insulted that the concept of 100 was born in New York and very audacious of Atlanta to think it could convene a national convention. So they refused to come, but we had a national convention then and all of the chapters showed up but New York and after a couple of years they came on in. There with my experience in us getting the 100 started here. Speaker 1: All right and some of the gentleman that you worked with, you mentioned Nate--that was Nate Goldston [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston III]? Speaker 2: Nate Goldston was our first chair. Speaker 1: And who, who else was you on the beginning of that with you? Speaker 2: Well Willie Clemons, Nate Goldsby [sic. Goldston], oh golly. Speaker 1: Was Tommy Dortch [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Dortch, Jr.] a part of the first? Speaker 2: He was not the first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was there earlier. Speaker 1: Earlier, okay. Speaker 2: He was not among the first 'cause the first was only ten or twelve guys. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Tommy was--and Sonny Walker [HistoryMaker William "Sonny" Walker]. I don't know if you know that name, Sonny--well both Tommy and Sonny was finally president of this chapter, Sonny Walker. Story_ID: 475555 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your book, the first book. 'Cause I know you're writing a second one, what's the name of the first book that you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first book is your (unclear) there, it's simply just a sort of a recording of incidents in which I participated in, sort of vignette-type book and we record many of the major events in which I've been involved. Speaker 1: It's called 'Civil Rights Legend: An Eyewitness to History' [Ozell Sutton]? Speaker 2: Yeah, now that, that means that every one of those things mentioned in that book I was an eyewitness, I was involved in it. Now the new book of course is different, it's gonna be much bigger than that and-- Speaker 1: Is it gonna be your autobiography? Speaker 2: It's my autobiography 'From Yonder to Here' ['From Yonder to Here: The Life and Work of Dr. Ozell Sutton,' Ozell Sutton and Vic Carter]. Speaker 1: 'From Yonder to Here.' Speaker 2: From the cotton fields of Arkansas until now and where this boy has been to get from yonder to here. Story_ID: 475556 Speaker 1: You've been married to your wife for? Speaker 2: Sixty years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty years, and tell me her name again? Speaker 2: Joanna. Speaker 1: Joanna. Speaker 2: Joanna Velderose [ph.] Freeman Sutton [Joanna Freeman Sutton] (laughter), took two lines to record her name when she got marr- when she graduated from college (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And you have how many children? Speaker 2: Three daughters. Speaker 1: And their names again? Speaker 2: Angela Cassandra [Angela Sutton], Alta Phatena [Alta Sutton], P-H-A-T-E-N-A and Dietre Jo [Dietre Sutton] D-I-E-T-R-E. Dietre Jo. That's the name of the--and I still say it when they were growing up one of the things I use to sing a little song to about them, about my three little girls. I had three little girls. I said I don't have much but I got three little girls and I use to--it's something I made up, and I still sing it to them. Speaker 1: Well how does it go? Speaker 2: Let me see the song goes, (singing) "Got no diamonds, got no pearls, ain't got nothing but three pretty little girls," (laughter) and that was, that was it. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: (Singing) "Got the sun in the morning and the moon at night," and I would when they were growing up that was my--sort of my--sing to them. I got no diamonds, I got no pearls, I ain't got nothing but three pretty little girls, and that's the way I felt about them, and the greatest thing I've ever done is in the rearing of those three little girls, not all of this other good. I was blessed to have the opportunity to do that, but my greatest, greatest thing of doing was to rear three little girls and make them wholesome contributing, learned young people and I take great pride in that, and I got four grandchildren--like last night they were locally doing opera on King Solomon and my grandson was the lead singer, he was Solomon. Speaker 1: So he-- Speaker 2: He sings beautifully (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He inherited your voice. Speaker 2: Well? Well, yes and no. I don't do a lot of singing, but my wife sings beautifully and my older daughter was a voice major, his mother and my middle daughter is a wiz on that piano, and my younger daughter didn't major in music although she use to blow the flute beautifully, but she didn't stay with music, but the other two came through in music and he sings beautifully. Beautiful baritone tenor voice and, and the--my middle daughter's first child which is a girl sings and dances and choreographs and so music is very, very prominent in this family. You can tell my wife when we--back when we had no money which is now (laughter) of course. Story_ID: 475557 Speaker 1: You have done so much in your life but if you can decide what your legacy would be what do you want your legacy to--what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I have a saying that I wrote in that book, service is the rent you pay for the space you occupy, and my legacy would be that he served. Story_ID: 475558 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life is there something that you wish you had done or is there something that you haven't done that you would like to do? Speaker 2: Well I had wanted to be an attorney. When I was a boy Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] game to Little Rock [Arkansas], Thurgood Marshall who argued the equal teacher salary, they didn't pay blacks the same that they paid--money they paid whites. And I was about the seventh or eighth grade [at Gould Colored School, Gould, Arkansas] or somewhere along there and I went to court every day to see this tall, slender, articulate black man deal with the issue of race like I'd never seen before, and I said that's what I wanna be, I wanna be a civil rights lawyer and I want to be just like Thurgood Marshall. Well, it turned out that I didn't get a chance to study law. I tried three consecutive years in Little Rock to enroll in the Little Rock law school [University of Arkansas at Little Rock School of Law; William H. Bowen School of Law, Little Rock, Arkansas], but they wouldn't take me, but you know if I had become an attorney I would've been dealing with the same issues that I've dealt with in another form, and sometime I think that I'm better at it than I would've been as an attorney because when you're an attorney, you're an officer of the court and some things you can't do and there was not anything I couldn't do in conflict resolution. Story_ID: 475559 Speaker 1: I remember in Memphis [Tennessee] after Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed Bayard Rustin came into Memphis to lead the next march, you've heard the name Bayard, and when Bayard walked the streets that they were planning the march on, he decided that that wouldn't work. The first place he didn't want young people coming by a building on a construction and then there was a building a little further down under demolition and that provided a lot of stuff that pick--that the young people could pick up and use. And the court order also provided that they could use only half of the street. Bayard decided that was dangerous because if the enemies like the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] could use the other half of the street then could come right by them that close up, it presented a posture or a conflict could easily break out. So he said that we can't do that and since the march is tomorrow we don't have time to file court action to do it. So somebody need to go to the judge and talk to the judge about change. Well, when they decided that's what they ought to do, they said who can do that, and somebody said the person best to do that is [HistoryMaker] Ozell Sutton and when I--we were--those of us who worked for the [U.S.] Department of Justice were meeting every morning, the U.S. attorney [Ramsey Clark], the Civil Rights Division, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], all the Department of Justice people and CRS [Community Relations Service], we were meeting that night and so the head of the Civil Rights Division said, "Ozell I understand you're supposed to go see the judge." I said, "Yes that's right." He says, "You can't do that." Says, "The justice department can't be in the posture of interfering with a judge's decision," and I said, "Well, I promised I'd go to see the judge." He says, "Well you can't do that." I said, "Well I have to." He said, "I am the senior justice department official here and I direct that you don't do that." I said, "You're the senior member of the Civil Rights Division, I'm the senior member of CRS (laughter). So I decide what CRS going to do." He said, "Well I'm going to call the attorney general." I said, "Well you do that," and I don't know whether he ever did or not but I left there and I called Roger [HistoryMaker Roger Wilkins], the head of CRS. I told him what Bayard had said and what I was going to do. He said, "Ozell, you go ahead and you do that. I will talk to the attorney general about what you gonna do." Now if I'd been an attorney I couldn't have done that. Speaker 2: You're right. Speaker 1: But just as a layman in the whole thing I could do that. I went to see the judge and I told the judge what the prohibitive things were and that we would never get away with a demonstration with our difficulty if we took that route and if we didn't have but half of the street. I said the, the order says between ten and two [o'clock], said we gonna have ten thousand people we can't process ten thousand with just one half of the street between ten and two (laughter) and the judge agreed, and he changed his order in doing that, that you would have the full street and you could go down another street just to let them come back and tell him what street they wanted to go down, and they did. There was another winner, the things Ozell was involved in. Story_ID: 475560 Speaker 1: Because this tape is going to be used for the future generations, what message do you wanna send to generations to come? Speaker 2: My message is that we've come a long ways, but we got a long ways to go and we must be diligent in staying on that case, and those who are following us please don't drop the ball. When we had the baton we ran it, now like a relay you have it, please run it. Story_ID: 475561 Speaker 1: I wanna thank you for taking the time to share your story with us because it's going to be an inspiration to so many generations to come, and just know that you can, you will hear the words, you have done a great job. Speaker 2: I don't know, I have done what I could and in my estimation what I should and as that little boy as I say from the cotton patches of Gould, Arkansas. My mama [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] was a widow with eight children, as I grew up six boys and two girls [Lettie Sutton and Delma Sutton]. She was a strong woman and all that I believe was taught to me by her, and she had a saying that kept me going: you can do it boy. Never called me anything but boy. You can do it. So every time I ran up there against something that was difficult and--I wanted to drop out of high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas] because I was washing dishes downtown at night from four in the afternoon 'til twelve at night and that's a hard role to hold and she said, "You can't do that. My only hope is that you will stay in school and you can do it, I know it's hard but you can do it," and because she believed I could do it, I believed I could do it. Story_ID: 475562 Speaker 1: That's me speaking somewhere, I don't remember where. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Kill that top light, hit that switch by the door, thank you, okay got it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Say from, from. Speaker 1: That's--on the right that's my oldest daughter, Angela [Angela Sutton Martin], the second is my middle daughter, Tina [Alta Sutton], the third is our youngest child Dietre Jo [Dietre Sutton], you met her and right next to her is my oldest grandson, Samuel [Samuel Martin, Jr.] and right next to him is his sister Angela [Angela Martin] and right next to her is my--is Afrika [Afrika Pratt-Ansa], the daughter of my middle daughter. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's me and that's an old picture, all my hair was black. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Speaker 1: All right, at the bottom on the left is my older daughter, Angela, the second person is me, the third person, grown person my wife, Joanna [Joanna Freeman Sutton] and fourth person is our youngest daughter Dietre, up at the top is the daughter of my older daughter, that's--we call her Angel, her name is Angela just like her mother, and next to her is Samuel and in the middle with the hat on is Tina and next to Tina, her son Khalil [Khalil Sutton] and next to Khalil is Afrika. Speaker 2: Who's the baby? Speaker 1: That has to be, whose baby is that? Oh, I know who it is, that's Angel's baby, that's Briana, that's a grand, great-grandchild of mine. Speaker 2: That's Joanna and me. Speaker 1: Do you know what year it might be? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's me in some of my younger years, don't have a single strand of gray hair. Speaker 1: I had a picture of your mother unless it came off the wall, and now I don't see it. Speaker 2: You took my momma's picture down? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Off the way. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Now you lost it, aw man. Speaker 1: I can't lose my momma's picture. Speaker 2: I know, I gotta find it. Speaker 1: I rather you lose any of 'em than my momma. Speaker 2: Where is it? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I thought I did, I took it down off the wall, it was upstairs on the wall and it's not there now so I figured it brought it down here but I don't see it. All right, you finished with that one? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes ma'am. Speaker 2: Here is-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I guess we didn't get that. Speaker 2: On the left, my brother Olee [Olee Sutton], the second one is my brother Henry [Henry Sutton], the third person is my sister Delma Loyce [Delma Sutton] and the fourth one is sister Lettie Mae [Lettie Sutton], the next one is my brother Sam [Samuel Sutton] and the last one is me. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Now I have to come closer. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You may if you'd like, you can scoot that chair up sir, now just slide the whole chair. Speaker 1: Move the chair up, bring another chair up. Speaker 2: This will do me just as well. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You just have to move a little to your right so you don't block the shot, a little more. Speaker 2: A little more. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm getting your shadow, so just a little, okay, there we go, okay great, go ahead. Speaker 2: On the left is past general president, what's his name? Johnson [Harry E. Johnson, Sr.] and I'll call his first name in a few minutes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just move your head a little to the right, I'm getting your shadow on there. Speaker 2: Move your head to the right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay looks good. Speaker 2: The next person is our present general president, brother--(unclear) now why these names sneaking past me? Speaker 1: Well it's just fine you can this was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] function and Allstate [Allstate Corporation], they were given the Alphas money or what? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were giving us money for the monument [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Washington, D.C.]. They had a fundraiser in my honor to raise money for the monument. Speaker 1: Okay, the monument of King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, and we netted ninety thousand dollars in a fundraiser in my honor. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Mr. Sutton [HistoryMaker Ozell Sutton], how would you like to sit right here 'cause we got the small series coming up and that way you'll just be closer. Speaker 2: Aw I took it down, it's gotta be here somewhere. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Discussion. Speaker 2: I don't know I thought I had them altogether. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): There we go okay. Speaker 2: On the left that's Brother Henry Ponder [HistoryMaker Henry Ponder], a past national president of Alpha, next to him is Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] who was chair of our campaign to raise money for the monument. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: What is it baby? Speaker 1: And the next person is me of course. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: This is Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. Let me bring this close to me and then put it back up there. That's all that I can identify. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, okay that's fine, you don't have to name everybody if you don't know who they are, just say this is a Alpha convention or something or (unclear). Speaker 2: Who in the world are these? This is me; this is Brother Davis [Milton C. Davis], a past national president. This is Brother Teamer [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.] a past national president. Now who that is I don't know, don't remember. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Okay got it? Speaker 2: That's Joanna and me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, got it? Speaker 2: This is the last one. I can't find--I gotta find the mother's picture, don't know where did I put it. Speaker 1: That was me somewhere in the South Pacific. I don't remember whether I was on Guam or down in the Solomon [Solomon Islands] but I was in the South Pacific. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'll pause the tape and--okay go ahead please. Speaker 2: That's my mother Lula Belle, [Lula Belle Dowthard Sutton] and she spelled it B-E-L-L, she didn't use an E [sic.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Any idea when this was taken or how old she was at the time? Speaker 2: My momma was I would guess in her fifties-- Speaker 1: In this picture (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at that time, um-hm. Course she didn't have any gray hairs that time...