 Story_ID: 278132 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is [HistoryMaker] Mr. Paul Brock. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Ma'am (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, they, they train us to do this, and I, I'm not trying to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: --to be, I'm not trying to be funny-- Speaker 2: --(laughter) I'm sorry. Speaker 1: --or anything, but that's just, they train us to do this and we-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that's what. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] S. Pearl Sharp, initial S. P-E-A-R-L, Sharp, S-H-A-R-P. And you may hear me, me refer to some things when I was using my first name, which is Saundra, S-A-U-N-D-R-A, which I no longer use anymore. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 21, 1942, is my date of birth, in Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a writer, actress, filmmaker, everything in the creative arts. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: August--I'm sorry, April 27, 19--2005 (laughter). Let me try that again, April 27, 2005 (laughter). Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Los Angeles, California. Story_ID: 278133 Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: Is this is a test to make sure I'm sane (laughter)? Speaker 1: How many fingers am I holding (laughter)? I always almost want to ask that question sometime after. We, we do this to everybody. Speaker 2: I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's for historical-- Speaker 2: --'cause that's what doctors ask elders when they're trying to see if they're, you know-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --if they're-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --balanced. Speaker 1: --before we go into depth-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: This is, these are perfunctory questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they just require short, short answers. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I love to eat. There's no one favorite food, but ice cream is pretty high at the top of the list (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: More than one: yellow, purple, red, gray. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Autumn, fall. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, don't get to do that enough to pick the favorite (laughter) yet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, I have a lot of them. Speaker 1: Do you have one that you can share with us? Speaker 2: Don't do to others that you don't want done to you, that's one. And let me think. What goes around comes around, used in certain, you know, certain, certain instances. I'll, I'll have to think on that for a second. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 278134 Speaker 1: What is her [Sharp's mother, Faythe Sharp] date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth was November 26, 19--I'm getting her birthday and my aunt's birthday mixed up. Nineteen eighteen [1918] is my aunt. It was a, it was a--okay, 1942 I was born. She was twenty-four--'42 [1942], '32 [1932], '22 [1922]--so yeah, 1918. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? Fir- first of all before we talk about her, how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I can go back to my great-great-grandmother, Julia [ph.]. And so I, my, I knew my grandmother [Ethel Miller] and my great-grandmother, not my great-great, my great-grandmother and my great-great-grandmother, yes. And one of them, Julia, actually got to hold me when I was a few months old, and then she passed-- Speaker 1: Now, about-- Speaker 2: --right after. Speaker 1: --when was she born? Do you have any-- Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: --information about her? Speaker 2: No, I don't, no. And then I knew my mother's father, my grandfather, Frank McIntyre. And then I had a great-grandfather, Mason Garner. And at one point I was told that he had been adopted into the family. And, but nobody wanted to talk about those details, so I'm very fascinated by the Garners in Ohio that are in Toni Morrison's book, Margaret Garner and her family. Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --the woman in Cincinnati [Ohio] who, was, had escaped from, from Kentucky from slavery and was, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --killed one of the children to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a central character-- Speaker 1: She was, yeah. Speaker 2: --in 'Beloved' [Toni Morrison]. Speaker 1: Right, right, the-- Speaker 2: Right, but her last name is Garner-- Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: --and she's Ohi-- Speaker 1: --she's the one that 'Beloved' is based on sort of, you know. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But it was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it was inspired by-- Speaker 2: And she's in Ohio, so I've, I've wanted to do some research on my great-grandfather, Mason Garner, and see if there was any connection there at all. Story_ID: 278135 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about where your people came from, 'cause presumably they weren't always in Cleveland [Ohio]. I mean I don't know. Speaker 2: No, one of the phenomenon about black people in that '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], era was that time that things were so bad that, you know, a lot of folks claimed being Indian [Native American] whether there were or not. And so I think a lot of our histories got, going to Africa got cut off because we were busy trying to latch onto something Native American, because (laughter) you know, I guess it felt better or sounded better or something. So, but I, I do know that I do have Native American in me. I, I believed it when I was younger, and then when went into the black history movement, I kind of stopped believing it. When my [maternal] grandfather [Frank McIntyre] passed, I could actually see it. I could actually see it in his visage as he was getting ready to leave the planet and realized that, you know, but there was some truth in that, so. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about Native Americans in the family and who they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that-- Speaker 1: --might be and, or, or-- Speaker 2: Not that I--oh, I was, I was told we were Sioux and Cherokee, had Sioux and Cherokee. And-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) are two wide range and one's west and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --one's east I mean, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, so. Speaker 1: So that-- Speaker 2: But see, at that time, I didn't, you know, I didn't know to ask. You know, we were not doing the kind of research and, and family histories then that we're now so I did not ask those questions. Speaker 1: Okay, there's no tradition as, that the families from Alabama or Kentucky or anything like that? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. I always heard that my [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Miller] was from Pennsylvania Dutch area. And I noticed from her cooking that very often it would be different than the way people cooked who were from the South. And my mother [Faythe Sharp] from Chi-, was born in Chi--saying my mother was born in Chicago [Illinois]. I don't know if I said that. And they move, they moved to Cleveland. And my father's [Clarence Sharp] side is Tiptop, Virginia, or Treetop, Tiptop, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, we (unclear) go to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --your side yet first, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, there's no--so other than Pennsylvania Dutch country, there's no, no other place-- Speaker 2: That and Chicago, yeah. Speaker 1: And Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is there--did your mother talk, talk about how the, her family got to, oh, or, or where they came from before they were in Chicago-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or-- Speaker 2: Nope-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --had none of that. Story_ID: 278136 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Faythe Sharp] talk about growing up in Chica- did, did, did, did she grow up in Chicago [Illinois] or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you know where she went to school and where she lived and-- Speaker 2: I don't think--I don't know how long they were in Chicago because I know she went to high school in Cleveland [Ohio]. And so I don't know when, when the transition was made. I know that my grandmother was on the black opera stage. And so my mother was pretty much raised by her grandmother. And so I don't know when that, you know, that transition was made to Cleveland. Speaker 1: Now the black opera, now I, I-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --don't know exactly. I didn't, you know, this should be of interest to people. What is the black opera? Speaker 2: They were the people doing classical, classical singing and touring who were black. And I have all my grandmother's music, piano and, and vocal compositions when I was a music in school, and some of it I used. I mean her name is now written on all of it. And, but it wasn't until I was in my fifties that I really got the full family picture, that she really had kind of put her career ahead of the family and left my mother to be raised, you know, primarily by her mother so that she could sing. But I do remember, you know, they used to put--you had sheet music--they put the six or eight or twelve bars of something on the back. And I had some sheet music that had 'Ave Maria' [Franz Schubert]. And after I would finish practicing my regular piano, I would play these twelve bars of 'Ave Maria,' and I would play them over. And I'd play them on a lower octave, and I played on a higher, and I would improvise. And I guess after about a month or so that she couldn't stand it any longer. And I heard her going upstairs to the attic, but I'm playing my little 'Ave Maria' (laughter) up and down the keyboard. And she stomps back downstairs, and she says, "For God's sake, if you're gonna play it, play it all." She thrust all of this music at me. And that was my first clue about how involved she had been, you know, as a singer in the music. And (laughter) it was all of these, all of this classical music. And all the versions of 'Ave Maria' were singers and all of the different (laughter) keys and, and, and the piano versions. And so she had all of that music stored in the attic and had, you know, had, had--she didn't sing in the choir at her church or anything, so I, I didn't know. And so-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, so she was--how long had she been retired do you think from, from, from that-- Speaker 2: I, I don't know because she had a hairdressing business for a long time. So I'd always heard about her as a hairdresser, but I'd never heard about her as, you know, being on the musical stage. Speaker 1: Do you know where she studied music? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Where she went to college? Speaker 2: No. I don't know if she went to college. I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that, that's not an everyday-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I don't-- Speaker 1: Yeah, avocation for black people who want to do opera, you know, so. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think that--when I say black opera, I think it was opera, but I think it was also some of the, the classic, popular music, semi-classical music as well based on, you know, some of the repertoire, a good deal of religious music in there but not the hymnal kind of music; the kind of music that if, you know, Leontyne Price was gonna do a, a, a spiritual or, or a, a classical religious song, she might pick one of those pieces. Some of the things that have been translated from German and yeah, translated from Italian were in her collection. Speaker 1: That's kind of a learned-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, activity, so, you know, I kind of wondered. So, so you don't know if she went to school or anything or-- Speaker 2: No, I don't, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: And do you know if she--so she toured. Did she tour with her group? Speaker 2: Apparently she did. Speaker 1: And, and-- Speaker 2: Apparently she was on the road and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know the name of the group that she toured with? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I haven't found anything-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --haven't found--but I really haven't taken a lot of time to do the research on the names. I do have an uncle in Columbus, Ohio, that I, I talked with that's in his, he's eighty-two. And we've just been getting to, you know, get some dialogue going about some of that, so. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Ethel-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Marie Miller [Ethel Miller] was her, I'm not sure if Miller was her maiden name or her first married name. I, I have that information. I have to go back and look. Speaker 1: Okay, that might be useful-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --if somebody wanted to know, you know, maybe about black opera companies or black people involved in classical music. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 278137 Speaker 1: Your mother [Faythe Sharp] was, was raised as a little girl in Chicago [Illinois], then she moved, they moved to Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Into Cleveland. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: She went to, I know that she graduated from Central High School [Cleveland, Ohio] in Cleveland, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Excuse me. Speaker 1: Did, did she go to college? Speaker 2: She, she went to college, but she didn't finish. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was studying to be a speech therapist. And then apparently-- Speaker 1: Where did she go? Speaker 2: Ah, I think she went to Cleveland State [Fenn College; Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]. I think Cleveland State. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did she, did she have any interesting stories about growing up, or is there, there any family stories that are passed down on her side of the family that, that you remember? Speaker 2: There were some that were told. Do I remember? Do I remember? I really can't think of any right now, Larry [Crowe]. Speaker 1: Okay, well, Cleveland-- Speaker 2: And we, we passed on the recipes and stuff, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: --and those stories of relatives in the family, their activities? Speaker 2: (Unclear) I know sometimes some uncle--see, I have a very small family, and sometimes their uncles or cousins--my, my grandmother [Ethel Miller] didn't have any sisters or brothers. My great-grandfather, the one they said was adopted had a brother in Virginia that we would go and see once and a while. And they would send me with him as, you know, to kind of chaperone him because they thought he was too old to be driving (laughter). And so, you know, he was in his seventies. I was twelve. It was great team (laughter) out on the road together. And my mother was an only child, so. Story_ID: 278138 Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Clarence Sharp. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth was Tiptop, Virginia. And I don't remember his date of birth, but I think he was about two years older than my mother [Faythe Sharp], I think. Speaker 1: Okay, so maybe 1916. Speaker 2: Around 1916 somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Somewhere in there. Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: My father came from a large family. And there were seven brothers and sisters. And some of them I became close to when I moved to California in the, in the '70s [1970s] for the first time, you know, getting to know them. I do know that, that apparently, he and some friends in Tiptop as teenagers decided to get in some devilment one night and scare some white people who were carrying an old guy on a kind of handmade stretcher. And they made the, caused the folks to drop the guy or something. And my grandfather on my father's side was a minister, and so the sheriff came to him and said, "They're gonna come and get 'em. You know, they're upset, and you, he better get out of here." And so apparently my father left immediately, and they didn't know where he was for a couple of years. And when they finally, when he finally made contact he was, I believe they said in Philadelphia, [Pennsylvania] and he had taken the name Sharp. So the, the family name is actually Rollins. That's the--no, I'm sorry. It's not Rollins; that's my aunts. It's, the family name is actually Sinkford. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what? Speaker 2: Sinkford, S-I-N-K-F-O-R-D. Speaker 1: S-I-N-K-- Speaker 2: --F-O-R-D. Speaker 1: Sinkford. Speaker 2: Sinkford. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so, how, how old was he when he, when he had to leave? Speaker 2: I said he was a, a teenager, so I'm, I'm assuming he was around somewhere, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, maybe. Speaker 1: Now, now do you know much about his family there in Tiptop, what, what they were doing for a living and what-- Speaker 2: I know that they lived on a farm. And my grandmother's name on that side was Louise. And the aunt that I became closest to was here in, after, you know, living here in California, was Juanita, Juanita Sinkford [ph.], and then her married name was Rollins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's all I know: they lived on a farm, that, that the father was a minister, and that the family then spread out, and almost all of the family moved to California. Speaker 1: Okay, oh, okay, so they moved to California after-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When did they move to California, after the war [World War II, WWII] or? Speaker 2: Probably. I know I've, I've heard them talk about trying to get housing in the '50s [1950s] in California, you know, the, the segregation that was happening then. So they would have had to have been there, yeah, before then. And then my father married into a large family that was from, I think, St. Louis [Missouri], and there were like seven or eight children in that family. So, so I'm coming from Cleveland [Ohio] where there are just like, you know, the two of us; and then I come out here (laughter), and it's like all of these people that are relatives that I'd never met, you know, like rooms full of (laughter) them. Story_ID: 278139 Speaker 1: How did your, your parents meet? Now, your, your father [Clarence Sharp] went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 2: But ended up-- Speaker 1: --after-- Speaker 2: --in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was working in the, there was a lot of work in the shipyards in Cleveland. And also, a lot of the members of my family, particularly my father's side, were waiters. So I think when there was no shipyard work, they, they worked as waiters. And a lot of them worked regularly as waiters at the country clubs in Cleveland, and then they worked in the country clubs out here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. But on my father's, the father that my, the family that my father married into, they were all businesspeople. So here in L.A. they owned two funeral homes and a chain of liquor stores and-- Speaker 1: Now he married-- Speaker 2: --other business-- Speaker 1: --into another, I mean he got married in Cleveland to-- Speaker 2: He married my mother [Faythe Sharp] in Cleveland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then when they separated, I don't know when he came to California, but eventually he came to California, and he married into a family that was, that had a lot of brothers and sisters-- Speaker 1: Okay, so this was-- Speaker 2: --who were off in St. Louis [Missouri], right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now is there a story about how your parents met? Did they talk, talk about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't remember how they met. I'm sorry (laughter). I'll, I'll bring, I have the photos, some photos of (unclear) together-- Speaker 1: Okay, but they did-- Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: --meet in Cleveland and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they got married, right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, they got married, right. Speaker 1: Now, and, and you are the only child? Speaker 2: I, I was the only child by that marriage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And how, how long were they together? Speaker 2: They were together, I think, just close to three years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then they separated, yeah. Story_ID: 278140 Speaker 1: Well can you tell us, what kind of a, talk about your mother's [Faythe Sharp] per- personality. What kind of personality-- Speaker 2: I don't want to do that. She's a wonderful person. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) She was a poet. She was a poet. Speaker 1: Is she? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was-- Speaker 1: Now that's something. Speaker 2: She was poet laureate of her high school class. She had tuberculosis at one point in, I think, her senior year or the junior year of high school she got tuberculosis. And so she wasn't able to graduate with her class because she lost a year dealing with the illness. But she came back and did her graduation, and she was poet laureate, and that would be Central High School in Cleveland [Ohio], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, her, well, she has an interesting name, Faythe, F-A-Y-T-H-E. Speaker 2: T-H-E, um-hm. Speaker 1: Is, is there a story behind that name? Speaker 2: Not that I know of, no. But I like her middle name, Bell, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, yeah, well, you told us some more about her (laughter). I just (laughter) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --asking, but. And what, what about your father [Clarence Sharp]? What, what, talk about his personality. Speaker 2: Very gentle, very gentle, quiet person, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Who do you think you take after? Speaker 2: I think I take after my mother because I was with her. And so I don't really, I didn't get to know my father until I was in my mid-twenties, and I came out to California to do 'The Learning Tree.' And that's when we began to develop a relationship, so I didn't know his traits well enough to say, you know, what part of me is him. But I know that, that very strong mother genes (laughter). Story_ID: 278141 Speaker 1: Do you have a first childhood memory? I mean a first, an earliest memory? Speaker 2: I remember being, being held a lot. I remember having the measles, and back in that day, they used to quarantine you when you had the measles. So I remember everybody sittin' around playing cards and me crawling around playing with their feet and shoe laces and stuff under the card table during quarantine time. I remember there was always singing in my family and always singing in the house. You know, we sang when cooked, and we sang when we cleaned. And so I, I remember-- Speaker 1: This is a small household-- Speaker 2: --music and songs. Speaker 1: --so you're talking about your [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Miller], your mother [Faythe Sharp], and, and-- Speaker 2: I lived in the pra- we lived in the Central Avenue projects [Cleveland, Ohio], which was, you know, small housing. And it was just my mother and I for a while, and then my grandmother came to live with us. My [maternal] great-grandfather [Mason Garner] always lived independently. He worked as a security guard and a custodian, and he lived in the building where he was a custodian. And my great-grandfather and I were like this, like two peas in a pod, so. Story_ID: 278142 Speaker 1: Now what was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would-- Speaker 1: --he like? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What was he like? Speaker 2: He [Sharp's maternal great-grandfather] was, he was just very special. He was, he played cornet; he was musician, had been a musician. Everybody in my family had some involvement in the arts, so it's not by chance that (laughter), you know, I end up being the arts. And he would take me with him after Sunday school, after church was over some days because he'd have to go back to the building an stoke the fires. They had the big coal furnace. They'd have to put the coal in the furnace, and they'd have to go around to all of the places and deliver the milk, you know, in the bottles. And this was a building filled with little old, you know, white ladies who had lace doilies on their, their sofas. And many of them had pianos, you know, in their, in their apartments. And they all knew me, and they would invite me to come in. I'd play my latest, you know, little thing that I was learning. And they would give me a nickel or a dime, you know, quarter for my studies. And then I'd go down in the basement with him, and he'd get a towel. And I'd sit on the steps so I wouldn't get dirty 'cause my mom [Faythe Sharp] would get mad and watch him shovel the coal into the furnace, so. And then when I got a little older and I started modeling and doing those kind of, you know, community things, he would very often be the only male in the audience, like at a tea or a fashion show. He never, ever missed a performance of anything that I did; no matter what it was he was there (laughter). So, we were, we were very, it was a very close relationship, yeah. Speaker 1: Now what's his name? Speaker 2: Mason Garner. Story_ID: 278143 Speaker 1: What was, were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, everybody in my family cooked. My [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Miller] made most of our bread. So when she baked loads of potato bread you could smell it a block down the street (laughter), you know. And we baked--she did traditional hot cross buns at Easter and tithe that way. And then around October we would start making up to fifteen, twenty, twenty-five varieties of cookies and storing them in cans and rum cakes and everything. And then during the holidays, we would sell some of them, and we would give some away, again, you know, part of the tithe and, and part of the, part of a business. So there was always, there was always homemade food, you know, the smells of food. And as I said, we sang all the time, so-- Speaker 1: What would you sing? I mean what kind of, what were the songs? Speaker 2: We sang pop songs; we sang spirituals. I came up on Count Basie, and Billy Eckstine, and Nat King Cole, and Dinah Washington, so I, I, you know, I, I knew all of that. And also I had--I, I didn't know it was unique, but instead of reading bedtime stories to me, my mother [Faythe Sharp] would read--I mean once in a while she would do that, but she also mostly read Langston Hughes, and Countee Cullen, and James Weldon Johnson. So, I grew up thinking everybody, you know, went to bed (laughter) having Langston Hughes, you know, read to them. I didn't know. So that I know that strongly influenced, you know, my, my love of poetry. And so that was a lot of laughter, lot of laughter, dancing. People would dance in my house. They'd put a record on and, and dance, you know, so. And my mother taught me to dance when I was getting ready to go out, you know, my first party. She was the one who taught me to dance, yeah. Story_ID: 278144 Speaker 1: And then when I was--we had a lot of theater, did a lot of theater. And when I was twelve I gave my first theater party at Karamu Theatre [Karamu House] in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was gonna ask if you--was, was your mother [Faythe Sharp] involved in Karamu. Speaker 1: Yes, my mother was involved in the Gilpin Players, which was the acting group that preceded Karamu Theatre. Speaker 2: Yeah, named after Charles [Sidney] Gilpin, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, after, named after Charles Gilpin. And the late Frances E. Williams was one of her, was her, one of her acting teachers. And Frances, of course, was in some of the au- not, of course--excuse me--Frances was in some of the Oscar Micheaux films and then became very prominent here in Los Angeles [California], toured with, went to Russia, lived in Mazatlan [Mexico], lived in Ghana. She had a little house with two units. And at one point, she was in one unit; [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou was in one; and Beah Richards was in the third one. So they were all very close (laughter). Speaker 2: She was part of that group in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's-- Speaker 2: --Ghana then, that, that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she was part of group Speaker 2: --that group of black intellectuals and artists-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --in Ghana-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah, back in the '60s [1960s], yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, Ghana and Mazatlan. And she worked with [Paul] Robeson. And so I have a photograph of she and my mother coming across the room toward each other in Mexico, not having seen each other forty years, so, yeah. And so my moth- my mother had been involved in acting, so theater was very much a part of my life; you know, it was-- Speaker 2: Did, did your mother act on stage? Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, saying she was part of the Gilpin Players. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, and the Gilpin Players became eventually the Karamu Theatre in Cleveland-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --which is, you know, very famous all over the world. Speaker 2: Oh yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --started by the Jelliffes [Russell Jelliffe and Rowena Jelliffe] I think. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 278145 Speaker 1: We were talking about, I was asking you about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Yeah, the other thing, I lived in, in the Central Avenue projects [Cleveland, Ohio], so you had all of that project noise, you know, that comes with it, you know, people-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --shoutin' for their children and stuff. And, and my mother [Faythe Sharp] was not a, my mother was not a shouter, extremely classy lady, so it'll be like, "Maurice, come in!" My mother would like, come to the edge of the playground. And she had this little whistle she would do that she had trained me to hear, you know. And above all of the stuff, within a few minutes I could hear that whistle if I didn't see her, and that's all she, that's all I had to hear. I knew it was time to come in, (laughter), so, so. Speaker 1: Did your mother call you Saundra or Pearl? Speaker 2: She called me Saundra. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I loved Pearl. Saundra, I don't know. There were a bunch of Saundras in my, my church and my Girl Scouts, so I assume that might have been a name of the time. But she didn't, it was not connected to anything. But Pearl was my middle name, and I was named after an Aunt Pearl, whom I adored, who lived in either Columbus [Ohio] or Springfield, Ohio. So, about eight or nine years ago I decided to--I had always wanted to use my middle name, but I knew my mother would be very upset. And then I started having this body of work out here in the world (laughter), you know, which was gonna cause confusion. And then one day, day I was just saying what can you do to make yourself happy, and I decided--I said I've always never wanted to hear Saundra anymore. And so I'll start using my middle name, Pearl, and so I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's the story. It, it's-- Speaker 2: That's the story (laughter). That's the story. Speaker 1: Okay, now, other sights and sound--now, now when we talk about the projects, a lot of people that, that hear projects now, they think of, like, some places, high-rises, and people falling out of buildings, and drug dealers and all that sort of thing. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That, that wasn't a-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't that kind of community. I mean it was, there were, drugs were not prominent at that time. Alcoholism was a problem. There, gangs were not violent. There were gangs, but they were not violent like they are now. You could actually send your children out to the playground, you know, and just come and get them to come home. You didn't have to worry about them being snatched, you know, back then. So, it was the projects; it was low-income housing; it was, you know, people crowded together, but it was not what we're experiencing today because of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --those things, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, any other sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: There were always a lot of books in my house, you know, there were, we're all readers. And my family was all politically active, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], whatever else was happening in the community, you know, community involvement, so there would be meetings at the house or people going to meetings. Speaker 1: So your mother was in the NAACP? Speaker 2: My mother is involved, my godparents. My godparents were Sarah [Livingston] and George Livingston. And they were very involved, you know, politically, and we were very close. So I always had aunts and uncles, extended family coming into my space and me going to their place. And there was always the, the conversation about what was happening to black people in the world. And so I grew up with that. And, and it was a, an active conversation rather than a passive conversation, so they were involved. They were on committees. They were, you know, trying to get leg- legislation changed. They were fighting with the city council about this and that. So that, that kind of conversation was always a part of my coming up and you know, became quite natural. Story_ID: 278146 Speaker 1: What side of town did, did you live on? Speaker 2: What side of town? Speaker 1: Yeah, of Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: The Central Avenue projects were near downtown Cleveland. Speaker 1: And how is Cleveland stratified? I mean is it, did black people have, like, one community, or were they in several different communities, or were they spread around, or-- Speaker 2: Black people were not allowed in Shaker Heights [Ohio] at that time, you see. And there's somebody was on 'American Idol' last night from, from Shaker Heights. And black people were not allowed in Shaker Heights at that time, and now, you know, we have a heavy presence there. Downtown Cleveland was low-income East Side. West Side was, I believe, and, and I'm not sure about this, but there was like a Polish community, very strong Polish community at that time. And there was that territorial thing; there were places where you didn't go. There was a lot of redlining. And I remember when we moved to Mount Pleasant [Cleveland, Ohio]. That was a major act of--Mount Pleasant was one community this side of Shaker Heights. So when black people started coming into Mount Pleasant area, I was the first black in a lot of things at my elementary school [Robert Fulton Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] at that time. And I think I was eight when we moved, 'cause I think I remember having my eighth birthday party at the house. We finally had a house in Mount Pleasant. And it was very obvious integration in the school system at that time. I was in a program called Major Work, where if you seem to be headed toward a college path, you were put into Major Work. And in that program, you were chartered from elementary school thrait--straight through high school for college development. And they were allowed to give you more work, harder work. There were certain classes that you had that other students didn't take. And there were, it was about maybe one fourth to one third of us black eventually and the rest white, white being including Jewish, you know, other whites. And so we all knew each other because we stayed in that same class track for elementary school straight through high school. And then there as a, a choral spoken word, spoken word choir. What they call it? A--not a word choir. A speak, I think they called it the speech choir, where you did poetry and songs and lyrics but ten, twenty people speaking not singing. And they tried not to let me into it because they just assumed that I would not be able to keep up and have the proper diction, you know. But my mother [Faythe Sharp] had wanted to be a speech therapist, and that had been the beginning of her studies. So, I was not allowed to get away with anything (laughter). There was no slang allowed in my house. There was no thissy, thatty. There was no, nothing; it would, had to be immaculate speech all the time, which got me into trouble because eventually I became the one that the principal would call on if there was a guest, and they had to be thanked, you know, at the assembly. And then I knew I was gon' have to run home because the kids who thought that that was, you know, uppity or white, whatever, yeah, they were waiting for me outside the school (laughter). So, I paid a price for that, you know, throughout junior, elementary and junior high school [Alexander Hamilton Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio], yeah, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and a lot of good music or sounds. Like I said, you know, the music that I came on, they had the records; we had the Victrola. So I came to know Count Basie's music and all the other musicians I mentioned earlier. Story_ID: 278147 Speaker 1: Did moving change the family's activities any with, with Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio] or any, any of the other? Speaker 2: No, not really, no. In fact, I think it expanded them because we were then in, we were in a different kind of community. We were in a community where there was more community involvement 'cause there was a community, you know, to uphold. People owned their homes as opposed to in the projects where everybody was renting. Speaker 1: So they had more at stake. Speaker 2: They had more at stake. Speaker 1: The stakeholders and-- Speaker 2: Right, right. But we, we, we made, we maintained the same church membership. I was, I was raised in an Antioch Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio] at 89th [Street] and Cedar [Avenue]. We maintained the same social relationships, which were either church or social political, you know, church, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], school board. That, you know, that was your social, your social base. My, my, my mother [Faythe Sharp], my stepfather, and my grandfather [Frank McIntyre] were all Masons, so there was that, also that community. So the Masonic community and those, you know, that came--that was, that was where your friends and your base were, yeah. Speaker 1: Was, was your mother an [Order of the] Eastern Star or anything? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Grandmother [Ethel Miller] too? Speaker 2: I never heard my grandmother mention any of that or go to any of that, so I don't know if she was and you know, had stopped or what. But it was my mother, my grandfather, and then in my mother's second marriage, he was also a Mason. I was in Girl Scouts [of the United States of America]. My mother was a Girl Scout leader, so that was another circle, you know. But a lot of the people who were in Girl Scouts were in church and, and so it was, you know, very often a lot of repeat people in the circle. Speaker 1: Yes, a lot, lot of organized life around you. Speaker 2: Very organized life, you know, that: keep 'em busy so they don't get in trouble thing, right (laughter), yeah. Yeah, they worked that (laughter), the dance-- Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) lessons; I had piano lessons; I had Girl Scouts; I had church; you know, I had camp; I had, yeah. Story_ID: 278148 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl? What, what, or how would other people describe you, do you think? Speaker 2: Talked fast, thought fast, tried to boss people around and control things (laughter). Speaker 1: It's not like today, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Which is how she became a producer, I mean, you know, and a director, yeah, and just like her mama [Faythe Sharp]. I heard that all my life, just like her mama, so. Speaker 1: Well, it does seem like a real direct, you know lineage you got your [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Miller]; you got your mother; and there's you in the same household, and everybody's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is-- Speaker 2: Very, yeah. And I mean we were so good, like, if it was a cleaning day, one could be in the basement doing laundry; one could be in the kitchen on the first one; and one could be upstairs. We'd be clean--we be singing in three-part harmony, you know. You could just hear it throughout the house. We never missed a beat, yeah, so. Speaker 1: What an image (laughter). Speaker 2: And that, that's one of my fondest memories, yeah. Speaker 1: That, that is, that's really, that's a wonderful image. Speaker 2: We could be singing, or we'd be all three in the kitchen cooking, singing in three-part harmony, yeah, spirituals, church songs, pop songs, yeah, so. We sang the song--there is one story I remember. They used to talk about my, my great-grandmother down in the, in the basement doing laundry on the washboard and singing 'St. James Infirmary,' 'cause she'd only heard a few of the lines, and she had the melody, and she kept singing it over 'cause she thought it was a religious song. And she (laughter), so nobody would tell her (laughter), so they just let her keep singing it 'cause she liked it (laughter). Story_ID: 278149 Speaker 1: What school did you start at? Where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started school in an elementary school across the street from the projects [on Central Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio], where I just went right out my door and right across the street. My mother [Faythe Sharp] was a school secretary most of her life. So, she worked in that school until I was old enough to go there, and then she transferred 'cause she didn't want to be in the same school that I was in. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Bolton. I just remembered. Bolton Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay, B-O-L-T-O-L, T-O-N? Speaker 2: I think it's B-O-L-T-O-N, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then when we moved out of the projects into Mount Pleasant [Cleveland, Ohio] I went to Robert Fulton Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio]. So that was the first real integrated experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Alexander Hamilton Junior High School [Cleveland, Ohio] and then John Adams Senior High School [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: John Adams. Cleveland [Ohio], they like to name, name the schools for the founding fathers, don't they? Speaker 2: Yes. I was in a graduation, grad- graduating class of more than seven hundred in, in 1960, Adams, class of '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, let's go back to Bolton and well, in, in grade school were there any teachers that were particularly helpful to you in your development (unclear) young person? Speaker 2: There were. I don't remember names anymore that far back. I remember getting thrown out of nursery school though because, because I, I kept telling the other children they were dumb because they didn't know how to tie their shoes and, and spell their name. And I wouldn't stop singing during naptime. So (laughter), so they finally asked my mother to get me out of there, so she just took me to work with her every day, so (laughter). But I don't remember the teachers in elementary school. I remember in junior high school having some good teachers, having a ma- was it junior high or high school? Either junior high or high school I remember a teacher named Mr. Brill [ph.] who stepped outside of the boundaries of what had been prescribed and really taught us how to think and how to analyze, and got in a lot of trouble for it. He brought in 'The Brothers Karamazov' [Fyodor Dostoyevsky] during the Cold War. And we had a couple of bake sale and paper sales to raise money so everybody could buy a copy of it. And we studied that book, and they, they, they really brought him over the coals for that. And then he did the unforgiveable. He gave us a take-home test for our finals rather than, you know, sit in the class and be nervous and write a test. And they tried to, you know, fire him several ties, and we all fought, you know, to keep him there. He was a white teacher, red hair. I remember red hair. But he was crucial because he did allow us that space and taught us to analyze. And if he had not done that. I think a lot of us, even though we were in this Major Work program, would not have survived the college situation; we would not have been as well prepared for college as were. And I do remember a teacher in elementary school. I don't remember her name, but she taught--she was, she had almost a, a Spanish name, and she taught some of the Spanish classes. And she was one of the few people where you didn't feel the racial tension in the, in the class. And she was very influential on us in elementary school. And then I had a white teacher in high school who's name I've forgotten, but she was the epitome of the racist teacher, who felt that black children came with all of the stereotypes that black people had been labeled with, unable to be taught, and just you know, out of our place, being in Major Work. And so when we would often turn in our papers, she would fail us because she didn't believe that we had actually written them. So somebody's parents were always up at school, you know, having to document and prove that, yes, we did have the intelligence and the ability to write this paper, and yes we know it was--or to do this project, whatever. So, we had the gamut. You know, we were always, it was always this racial situation (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you-- Story_ID: 278150 Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did your mother [Faythe Sharp] ever have to come up to school [John Adams Senior High School; John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] to confront this teacher? Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: What, what happened? What, what was it about? Speaker 1: By the way, Gil Moses [Gilbert Moses] was one of the, Gil Moses who became the director of 'The Wiz' and other things. We were in school together. Speaker 2: Gilbert Moses, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Gil Moses was kind of like my, my play brother. And he'd come over and you know, get something to eat sometimes, you know, sometimes spend the night and-- Speaker 2: Did you know Carol Moses, his sister? Speaker 1: I knew Carol just very, very little bit. Actually, I barely knew Carol at all. Gil and I were in school together. And I'm sorry, what was your question? Speaker 2: No, I just asked if you knew--oh, what-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --describe the incident when your mother had to come to school to talk to that teacher. Speaker 1: Well, actually back in nursery school I remember one time (laughter) I came home, and I was very upset. And I said, "This little girl in nursery school tore up my paper, and she called me a nigger." And I was more upset that she had torn up my paper, my drawing that I had made for, you know, my mother. And my mother was, looked really cool. She said, "Oh, what did she call you?" I said, "She called me a nigger. What, what is that? You know, it, I don't know." You know, I was very--I knew it was something wrong in the way she said, "And what is her name?" And I told her, and she said, "And what does she look like?" (Laughter) You know, and I told her. And so, the next day my, instead of just dropping me off, my mother sweeps into the nursery school and just, "And where is she?" And I point her out, and she gets the little girl. And so. "I'm, I am Saundra's [HistoryMaker S. Pearl Sharp] mother." She said, "I understand you called my little girl a name yesterday, and you, you tore up her paper." And she said, "Yes." And by now, people in the nursery school, you know, the adults are beginning to come around to see what's happening. My mother said, "Do you know what a nigger is?" And the little girl said, "No." She said, "A nigger is a person who tears up another little girl's paper that she made for her mommy. Now what does that make you?" And the little girl said, "A nigger." And my mother got up and like swept out of the nursery room (laughter) school. All the other adults was like, "Oh no" (laughter). So that was my first experience in how you can handle racism. You know, she didn't write any letters; she didn't get mad. She just went directly to the source (laughter). And so, yeah, so, that was a good lesson for me to watch. Story_ID: 278151 Speaker 1: You were probably a good student, I would guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a good student except in math. I was in kind of one of those imbalanced things where I was really, really good in reading and arts and literature and really not good in math and science. And so what they did, by the time I was in my last year of elementary school [Robert Fulton Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] they had, I was in my own reading class by myself. And I had what was supplemental reading for everybody else was my main reading. And then I, I had to write my own reports, and then I had to conduct discussions with the rest of the class about the supplemental reading book. And I got skipped twice, but then, you know, I was dying in math and science. And I paid the price for that when I got to high school [John Adams Senior High School; John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] because I was not able to keep up with the science stuff. So I got my first Ds in high school in physics and chemistry (laughter), you know, and of course in my house that meant the world had just ended. So (laughter), so I remember this wonderful black teacher in high school, a physics teacher who gave up his lunch periods and sat with two of us. You know, we'd all bring our lunch, and we'd sit on the floor. And he'd try to get it into the brain, you know, how this works, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you involved in high school activities, I, I would guess. But this is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and did they allow for everybody to participate in the school that you attended? Speaker 2: They did. Remember, by the time I get to high school, we've already gone through the Woolworth's [F.W. Woolworth Company] picketing. And, and you know, we're at, at, we're at the, we were starting on the second half of the Civil Rights Movement. So things were, they were almost forced to be open. We, I mean we were the first many times. Story_ID: 278152 Speaker 1: When you were a little kid they had to picket Woolworth's [F.W. Woolworth Company] and do all that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah. I was done on the picket line with my godfather, George Livingston, scared to death but knowing that he wouldn't let anything (laughter) happen to me, yes. So, I, I, I regret, I will always regret that I didn't go down south, that I didn't, you know, do, do the Freedom Rides and, and things like that. I was supposed to do the March on Washington and that I was driving with a friend. At the last minute my mother [Faythe Sharp] decided that she was too worried about us driving. And there was a bus that was leaving from Karamu Theatre [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio], but I couldn't, I didn't have any way to get there. And that's probably the only thing I've never forgiven her for was that you know, I was actually packed and ready to, it was like an hour before leaving, and yeah, she put the brakes on it. So, I didn't do the march. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So when, when you were in high school [John Adams Senior High School; John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and it's '56 [1956] to '60 [1960], talking about [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], the Montgomery Bus Boycott's going on when you were a freshman. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And your family is involved in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: And you know about all that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I started a junior chapter of the NAACP when the Little Rock Nine were touring because I knew if, that the adults were gonna take over, and I wanted us to be able to interact with them. So, with my family's help, I started a junior chapter, got a, you know, the friends of everybody who was in the, in the NAACP. And that was the first junior chapter of NAACP in Cleveland [Ohio]. And so we got to actually meet and host the Little Rock Nine while they were visiting in Cleveland, and that was, that was a special moment, you know, for us. Speaker 1: That's interesting. I've got a friend in Dayton [Ohio] now that's from Massillon, Ohio, that she was involved in, in junior NAACP, much, coming about four years after you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what, or so. But it was a big deal in her-- I mean so, so yours was the first chapter in Cleveland, so it must have been the first chapter in that part of Ohio, I would guess-- Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: --probably. Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My uncle, Gloster [B.] Current was involved in NAACP. Speaker 1: Yeah, Gloster Current, yeah, that's a name that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He's in my family. And then when I went to new-- Speaker 1: That's your uncle in-- Speaker 2: Well, when I went to New York [New York] in '64 [1964] he was the head of the NAACP in Harlem [New York, New York], the Harlem chapter or the New York chapter. I'm not quite sure how they named it. And so the first volunteer work I did in New York to get to know people was to go up to the NAACP office and stuff envelopes 'cause, you know, Gloster was there, yeah, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--I'm glad we mentioned that (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 1: Gloster Current, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. The other thing, the most, the most significant thing I remember other than, than picketing Woolworth's was the night that Malcolm X was on national television being interviewed by Ed Merrill [sic.], I think it was. Was it Ed Merrill? Speaker 1: Ed, Edward R. Murrow, right? Speaker 2: Yes, right [sic.]. And I was so, I remember being so nervous and so scared. And everybody is glued to the television. And I'm kind of watching my elders to see what their reaction is gonna be so I'll know how to react, you know, to this black man that we've heard so much about and had been told is a really bad guy because, you know, he wants to go out and you know, and shoot people and stuff (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, that, now that was like after the, the, in the CBS 'The Hate That Hate Produced.' I think that was the first time Malcolm X was introduced kind of like to a national audience on TV. Speaker 2: This was his first national-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --appearance. He's being interviewed. It was at, it was either the, was it 'The Hate That Hate Produced' or was it-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) a Mike Wallace they did this did thing, 'The Hate That Hate Produced'-- Speaker 2: Mike Wallace. Speaker 1: And it wasn't like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It wasn't just an interview of him. It was like the whole Muslim movement. And I think later Edward R. Murrow interviewed Malcolm X as a result of-- Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: --him being-- Speaker 2: --it was that interview-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --'cause everybody was tuned in, and this is, this is before tape, so it's all live. If you miss it, you missed it. And yeah, I just remember the tension and the silence in the room and everybody listening. And then, after it was over and everybody was quiet for a while, they were, you know, digesting it. And I'm, and I'm waiting for my cues, you know, because what my family thinks is what I'm supposed to think. You know, that's, that's how you learn. And I remember my [maternal] great-grandfather [Mason Garner] being the first to speak and talking about Malcolm's courage and appearing to be without fear and that what he was saying made sense. And that was a turnaround because all we'd had was, you know, this is the bad guy. He's the one who's messing up King's movement; you know, we gotta watch out for him. And here he comes on national television. We get to hear him speak for himself for the first time. So for my family to accept what he was saying and to wa- and it was, it wasn't all acceptance. It was, you know, there was, "Well, I don't know, you know. I don't like what he said so on, and I don't think that's, you know, a smart move." So there was this debate going on, but it changed the perception of Malcolm X in my family and in my community and around most of the country because we got to hear him speak for himself and take, you know, decide what worked and what didn't. And I thought that was, for me it was, later I looked back at, on it and realized the power of the media, what if we had not had that moment to hear Malcolm X speak for himself? Speaker 1: Yeah, now this would be-- Speaker 2: It might have changed all of history. Speaker 1: This'll be around '61 [1961] or so, or, or were you, you were out of high school I think when that, when he did that. Speaker 2: Well, I, no, I, I think it was, okay, I think it must have been earlier 'cause I don't think I had left for college yet. I don't think so-- Story_ID: 278153 Speaker 1: --The other media event was Nat King Cole's program ['The Nat King Cole Show']. Speaker 2: His TV show. Speaker 1: The TV show. So when Nat King Cole came on, on Monday night for fifteen minutes, everything stopped, you know. I mean I was a chief dishwasher. I didn't even have to wash dishes. You know, we're usually were eating dinner around that time. Everything stopped, 'cause we all loved Nat King Cole. He was the first black, you know, to have his own show (clearing throat) came on Cleveland [Ohio]. And I mean your phone didn't ring or anything. Only somebody out of their mind would call between 6 and 6:15 on Monday (laughter), you know, 'cause 'The Nat King Cole Show' was on, and everybody black was tuned into a television. If you didn't have one, you went to somebody's house-- Speaker 2: Now I didn't-- Speaker 1: --to watch. Speaker 2: --realize, I guess I was too young at the time. I remember seeing the show and the excitement around it, but I didn't realize it was only fifteen minutes. Speaker 1: Initially, it was only fifteen minutes, right; yeah, that's all they gave him because they couldn't get sponsors for anything else, right (laughter), yeah. Speaker 2: That's amazing, but he had like [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte on the show and you know. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, yeah, and the what--also, the interesting thing about was, because I came up in a very class conscious community, and we don't talk very much about class in the black community. We talk about the color consciousness but not about class. So, conk was off limit. I brought somebody home with a conk once, and my mother [Faythe Sharp] would not let him in the house, okay. The conk was the processed hair. Speaker 2: That's right. Now that was supposed to be a pimp style-- Speaker 1: Right. But Nat King Cole had a conk, okay, so he was the only person who was allowed. They made an exception for Nat King Cole because he conducted himself in a certain way. He was a singer; he was an entertainer; but he was a gentleman, you know. We--he never embarrassed black people. So it was always interesting to me that this exception was made for Nat King Cole (laughter), you know. He, it was okay that he had--it wasn't okay, but we not gon' talk about it (laughter); we're not gon' talk-- Speaker 2: But wasn't it then-- Speaker 1: --about his conk. Speaker 2: --in, in those days it was like, it was considered on the street more of a pimp style thing. But in the, entertainers felt compelled to do that for some reason. Sammy Davis, Jr. had one, Johnny Mathis, other people. Speaker 1: Right, James Brown, yeah, yeah. But see, James was, was doing jump up music, so you kind of expected him to have a conk. Nat King Cole wasn't doing jump up music, all right. Nat King Cole had class (laughter), but he had a conk. So basically, it was like, mm, we see it, but we just don't discuss it (laughter). Speaker 2: What's interesting, for women it seemed to be the opposite. If you did not have your hair pressed, you were considered-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --back, backward or country or something, you know. Speaker 1: Yep. And Cicely Tyson was the one to break, break down that barrier on her show 'East Side/West Side,' and she worn an afro. Speaker 2: Was she the first? Speaker 1: She was the first on television-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to wear an afro. And boy, would the, the gossip, and the phones, and the newspaper columns, and I mean it would just, the beauty parlors, there was nothing else to talk about. This woman went on national television with her hair in an afro, you know, depending on which side it was: "Yeah, she wore an afro," or "She went up there with all them naps, didn't have her hair did." You know, so there was this divide in the community, and she got a lot of flack about that. Even when Abbey Lincoln did the movie with Sidney Poitier, what was that film? Speaker 2: 'For Love of Ivy.' Speaker 1: 'For Love of Ivy,' right, beautiful film, wonderful story. Most of the dot- most of the rap in the community was about her wigs, whether she had on a wig or not, whether she should have had on wigs or not (laughter). So hair has always taken precedence in the dialogue of the community. Story_ID: 278154 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about--we, we talked about the visit of the Little Rock Nine with the N-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How did that go? What was it like? Who, who came to Cleveland [Ohio] and what did you do with them? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I remember all of them came. I mean this was a long time, this was a life, couple of lifetimes ago. I remember all of them came, and I believe--I don't remember if Ms. [Daisy] Bates was with them. I believe she was, 'cause this was a very specific-- Speaker 1: Ms. Daisy Bates, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, this was their first time touring, you know, as a group. And so every church, every NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] wanted them. And I remember it was, you know, a kind of a long tour. I remember us, I just have this image of us hanging out on some steps of a building and, and talking and talking about, you know, that kind of awkwardness that teenagers sometimes have you, as you're trying to get together. And their, their dialect sounded, you know, odd to us, you know, 'cause they were from the Deep South, and we, we were not, and that just trying to get to know each other thing. I just remember, had that image of us standing around on these steps talking. I know there was a reception and you know, the formal kind of stuff. But I do remember that moment of standing outside talking to each other. Story_ID: 278155 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school [John Adams Senior High School; John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio], what did you project as a career for yourself, or had you projected, you know, what you were gonna be doing in the future? Speaker 2: When I was in high school, I think I projected doing something in the arts, but I was also interested in law, and I was interested sociology. So when I went to Bowling Green State [University, Bowling Green, Ohio], my, my dis- my debates were between music, and law was second, and being a social worker was third. Speaker 1: And how did you decide to go to Bowling Green State? Speaker 2: Money (laughter). I wanted to go, I wanted to go to Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York], but we didn't have the money. And I could go to Bowling Green State for less. I went and tested. Speaker 1: You could have went to Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] too. Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: You know, you, you could, you could have went to Kent State. It was closer to Cleveland [Ohio]. But did you-- Speaker 2: Kent's, Bowling Green had a, Bowling Green State had a very good music school, and Kent State did not, and since music was my first choice. I was interested in music as a profession. My mother [Faythe Sharp] and I made a deal that if I got my education degree and that she would not bother me after that. You could get your education degree in something so that you could make a living, and after that you can do whatever you want to do, and, and we'll support you on it. So I did music education as my first choice. I was still playing around with law and sociology, but then in my freshman year, I saw an ad in the paper that they, the campus radio station was looking for announcers, and they had played all classical music at that time. And so anyone, you know, they were having auditions, and they were paying something like a dollar and eighteen cents an hour (laughter). (Unclear) and I was like, people get paid to be on the radio? I didn't know people got paid to be on the radio. So I went up to audition, and that was my first or second or third racial encounter at Bowling Green State University because they didn't expect any black folks to show up, to apply to introduce ra- classical music on the radio station. They were totally unprepared for that. And this guy who ran the station and made the decision was just like, "That's out of the question," you know. But I was studying classical music. I had been studying classical music all my life. I knew how to pronounce [Ludwig van] Beethoven, you know. I knew what the 'Fifth Symphony' was. I could say that with, you know, a, enough diction for them. And so it became one of those cases. And I ended up getting the job, and that was my discovery of radio and radio production and producing. And then I was able gradually over the four years I was there to convince them to open up a little bit from strictly classical music. Story_ID: 278156 Speaker 1: And I did my very first interview with Miriam Makeba, and she was--the only way I, reason I got away with it because she was coming to campus in the lyceum program as one of the, you know, the special guest to do a concert. And-- Speaker 2: Now what, is this your freshman year or? Speaker 1: I, by now I think I'm a sophomore. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think I may have been a sophomore. Speaker 2: She's alway--also someone who appeared on television with a natural, I think-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --in the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Yes, right. Well, she appeared in some, couple of films (unclear) yes, and then she was working, performing with [HistoryMaker Harry] Belafonte, and she had her natural. And, but see, for her it was different because she was from Africa. For us, you know, we're, we're Americans looking at African with a particular, you know, jaundice, missionary kind of connection. So she's from Africa. We don't know what they gon' do. But Cicely Tyson is from the United States, so you know, her going on television with a nat- with a natural was a different kind of representation, because that Cicely was representing us. Miriam was not necessarily representing us because she was an African. And it's, you know, I think it's important that we always look at the psychological parameters that we're operating in, in a given time, and, and that was it. Our relationship with Africa was not what it is now; there was no TransAfrica back then. Speaker 2: But you wanted to interview Miriam Makeba and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --what, what was--now you, you had like a political education sort of in, in Cleveland [Ohio] and, and involvement in the arts and so forth. I mean did you, were you starting to feel like a bond with Africa yourself at that point or? Speaker 1: I looked at that schedule. She was the only black person coming that year. And nobody was gonna interview her. They had just dismissed that. And so I fought for the right to do the interview and to make sure that it got broadcast. So that, that was the situation. It was not that I knew that much--I mean I knew who she was. I'd heard her music. I liked her music. I didn't know a lot about her political background. I knew she was the only black person (laughter) on this schedule who was coming this year. And she was not gon' leave Bowling Green [State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] without being interviewed by somebody. And I was terribly nervous. It was my first interview. And we were sitting in the dining room. I guess (unclear) we're, we're in the dining room, and they were there breaking down or setting up for the banquet that evening. And so all these dishes are clinking around us, and I couldn't remember whether it was Miriam Makaba or Makeba or Makaba or Makeba. And finally I asked her, and she told me. And my very next sentence I said it wrong. (Laughter) I still have that, I actually still have that tape; I kept it. But that was my first interview. And she was very gracious and very beautiful, and I got it on the air. And so that was my first on-air interview as a journal, as a radio journalist. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so from them on, I, I went into the television department as well. And at that time they were beginning to do, they were actually talking about color television is gonna be great, so that's where we were in the, in the spectrum. And they were beginning to do classroom education, producing courses on television that were broadcast closed circuit to the community in Bowling Green and to other classrooms. And they hadn't even expanded yet to broadcasting though to colleges yet. And so I began to get into that, and, and I had a lot of ideas for production. And I had one professor there who encouraged me and pushed me and let me stretch out and do whatever I wanted to do. So, even though I was a music major, I actually ended up accruing all of the credits for a television major. And at a certain point, I had taken all the courses that they had 'cause they didn't have that many. So he made arrangements for me to take some of the graduate broadcast courses in television, even though I was an undergrad, until I had literally taken everything they offered in radio television production at Bowling Green State. And then I was, I had a radio show; I got my own show. And I would--I really wasn't doing very good in the music department in terms of history and recitals and stuff (laughter), you know, 'cause I didn't have time. So my ploy became to let the professors come on my show and perform, and then they would kind of like make amenities. You know, they'd kind of ease up on me a little bit in their classes where I wasn't showing up 'cause I was over in the television or radio studio--so, again, my first discoveries of, you know, the power of the media. People want to be on the air. They want to be on the air, so. Story_ID: 278157 Speaker 1: Had we gotten to the point where people were forming black student organizations on campus yet? Speaker 2: No, no. When I arrived at Bowling Green [State University, Bowling Green, Ohio], that was the year, 1960, that the campus had made a decision to integrate the dorms. So prior to that, the very, very small black population had either been off campus, or they had commuted from Toledo [Ohio] or they had hung with each other in the dorm rooms. The majority of them were on athletic scholarships; only a few were not. And so this year, 1960, they said okay, we're gonna enter, integrate the dorms. And there was this huge freshmen dormitory that had four quads in it. And what they did was they placed one of us in each floor of each section of the quad, so we were like solo. So we had to find our own ways to hook up and connect. And one of the young women who was integrated whose name was Carmen [sic. Carla] was from Cleveland [Ohio]. And Carmen had the Hottentot physique. She had a huge behind, not very tall. And she came to us one day. She said, "I'm having a lot of problems with my roommate." Well, all of us were having some kind of roommate problems. She said, "We gotta deal with this." She said, "Every night when it's time for us to start, you know, breaking down and getting undressed, she starts to cry; she gets real nervous; and she runs out of the room; and she disappears for an hour. And then she comes back like after we've turned out the lights or all in bed." This had been going on for like, six weeks now, seven weeks. So we get together. So, a couple of nights later it's time to go to bed. The woman gets nervous. She starts to cry. She runs out of the room, and she runs into an wall of black women. We're standing in the hall waiting for her. "What is it?" And she gets nervous, and she starts, she's like, she's literally hysterical, hysterical. And she hysterical, and she starts to crumble against the wall. And we crumble down on the floor with. "What is it? Why are you doing this? What is it?" And finally, she lets it out. Her family had told her that black people had tails. So divine intervention, she gets put in the room with a, the sister who has the biggest butt of all. And she's been petrified that she's gonna see her tail when she undresses. This is 1960, in Ohio. Speaker 1: Are you sure that, I mean, when you hear a story like this, you know, one is compelled to think that the woman is just, the girl is just insane or emotionally-- Speaker 2: No, we had, we were in Toledo, Ohio. A lot of white people, including two of my roommates, had never been around any black people. They were from towns so small that there weren't even black people cleaning in their towns. They had never been around any black people before. So I was dealing with, you know, I had one roommate who never been around any black people and was trying to get it together, you know, whatever she had heard. And then I had another white roommate who was from Chicago [Illinois] from a very wealthy family whose mother--you know, my mother [Faythe Sharp] sending us, you know, peanut butter and crackers and cans of tuna fish. Her mother's sending her little jars of caviar and, and chocolate-covered ants legs and stuff (laughter). And so we're, we're working this out. So, a good percentage of our education in freshmen year was about integrating the dorms, and helping people who had never been around black people get comfortable, and then us having to adjust to them, 'cause we never lived with white people. We'd gone to school with them, but what had been very clear in that Major Work program that I talked about in elementary and junior and senior high school, in school we were like this. We were in the trenches academically. School was over, we went our separate way. We never invited those white folks to our house, to our birthday parties, you know, to our picnics. We lived our separate worlds. Now we're, we're in the dorms. You know, it's, it's, we, we were, everybody was adjusting to each other. So, yeah, it was, she was, that's what-- Speaker 1: That is, that's just so hard to (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --understand, you know, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But remember the soldiers when the soldiers went to, to Europe, the black soldiers went to Europe, part of the discrimination that was instilled was white soldiers told white women that black soldiers had tails. So it had happened already in the armed services, so-- Speaker 1: Well, they, I know they said that, but there were a lot of black babies left behind in Europe, so. Speaker 2: Yes, there were, but the point I'm making is that some of those white soldiers are some of the people whose children are ending up in these colleges all over the Midwest. They come back home. You know, these are war stories and what we're told. We tell--you know, the racism in the North was not the, the, it's not the white-only signs and the water pumps. Racism in the North was: be careful, blacks folks, they have tails, you know; or they stink; or they're not as intelligent as you are, so you may have to tutor them, help them along in school, but don't give them too much of your time. You know, and here we come around, you know, we're the Major Work group. We're here; we're dealing; you know, we're acing college; we're prepared. Story_ID: 278158 Speaker 1: And you know, they were, they were upset. They tried to keep me out of the music society. I made the music honor society. And they had a meeting, and one woman tried to keep me out because, because there had never been any blacks in the music honor society chapter, Iota Phi Lambda [Sorority] at, at Bowling Green [State University, Bowling Green, Ohio]. And so finally, the faculty and some other people got involved, and I came in, and she dropped out, end of story (laughter). Speaker 2: Wasn't big, wasn't big enough for both of you, huh? Speaker 1: Apparently it was, it was a, the iron, irony, ironic that you should say it wasn't big enough for both of us 'cause literally it was about twelve or fourteen people. That was the total group (laughter), you know. It wasn't like a whole big thing; it was like, the music school's honor society. You couldn't get in til you were junior anyway. How big could it be? Twelve, fourteen people. Yeah, she didn't, she didn't want it to happen. Speaker 2: Well, the more I hear these stories, I, some, some things still shock me. This is a, that was a, that's, that's an interesting story. I-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, yeah. Speaker 1: Car- Carmen, Carla; her name was Carla. The sister's name was Carla, not Carmen, Carla. So I just thought it was amazing that she with the Hottentot figure gets put in the room with this particular, you know, young lady. Speaker 2: To heighten the fear of the (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Right, right, I mean (laughter), yeah-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --so. Speaker 2: Well, what other--so the black students never formed black student organizations or anything like that when you were there? Speaker 1: We formed them, but they weren't public. Now, eventually, by the time we became juniors, they did form a chapter of, I think it was they formed a Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] chapter, the women. There was already Alpha [Kappa Alpha Sorority] and Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity] on campus. There was Alpha on campus, and I think Kappa was forming. So the fraternity route was the first way. I did, I was not into fraternities-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and sororities--into sororities so I didn't go that-- Speaker 2: And we weren't black then; we were Negroes. Speaker 1: Yeah, we were still Negro. Speaker 2: Negroes, right. Speaker 1: We were still Negro then. We were just beginning, because remember the, the Vietnam War is happening. And we're in our ivory tower, kind of dealing with all this racial stuff, the Civil War--the Civil Rights Movement, you know, is active, so that was, that was kind of the energy. And we were not leaving Bowling Green. We were, we had, we had enough civil rights stuff to do there on campus, so there, there--I don't remember anybody leaving to go deal with the, the, the Freedom Rides or the sit-ins or, you know, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, now, those were really going on like, they, the Freedom Rides are just startin'. The sit-in movement started in '60 [1960]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I guess. And then you had, like, Freedom Rides of '61 [1961], '62 [1962], and then the Freedom Summer, '64 [1964]. And '63 [1963] in Birmingham [Alabama], there were students-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --going down there. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: I don't remember anybody in our group going down to do that. You know, we were dealing with what we had to do here in Bowling Green and Ohio. Speaker 2: Did, did anyone come, come up to speak, any members of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] or SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or-- Speaker 1: Not that I recall, not that I recall at all, no, unh-uh. When I got that, I got that when I went home for the summer, or if we went up to Toledo [Ohio], there might be something. But usually I sang with the dance band; I sang with the Bobby Haskins Trio [ph.]. So usually Toledo for me was I was going up with the band to sing, which didn't leave me a lot of time to just go up and hang out on weekends. Story_ID: 278159 Speaker 1: You know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You seem pretty busy though. You got the radio show-- Speaker 1: I was very busy. Speaker 2: --classical music. Speaker 1: I was very busy. Speaker 2: You got-- Speaker 1: And that's when I learned to manipulate because literally I didn't have money for clothes (laughter). And everybody loved the fact that I sang with the Bobby Haskins Trio [ph.]. So what I would do is, on Saturday afternoon, I'd stand out in the hall, and I'd say: "Saundra [HistoryMaker S. Pearl Sharp] is singing tonight, and I need something to wear." And women, the white women would come out with (laughter) stuff. "Oh, oh, did you, did you, did you wear my blue, I got something new; look, I just got back, and so my mom gave me this; try it on." You know, so I rarely had on my own clothes even when I was up with the bandstand (laughter), you know. And if I wanted to learn--I wanted to have the music. I, I love [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, and I wanted to learn everything Nancy Wilson, you know, did, so I could try to sing it. But I didn't have the music, but I had a tape recorder. I had a Wald and Sach [ph.] tape recorder. So the women would come to me and say, "What, what, what should I be listening, what music should I get?" I said, "Why don't you get Nancy Wilson's new so and so, or why don't you get such and such." And then they'd get it. I said, "Can I tape that?" And so they'd--I'd send them out to get the music I wanted. I'd tape it, and then I'd take my tape recorder, and I'd learn my music that way. I said, "You know, there's this, there's this Dinah Washington song that you'd probably really enjoy, and it's on such and such an album." And they'd call their parents, and their parents would send it. And I'd tape it, and then I'd go sing it (laughter) with the band. By the way, I was not very good as a, as a, as a pop singer, as a jazz singer. I was just, I was at that point of trying to copy people that I'd heard that were good. So I'd listen to Carmen [McRae]. I'd listen to Nancy. I'd listen to, to Dinah. I, I did regular shows on these people, but I really wasn't very good-- Speaker 2: Did, did, did-- Speaker 1: --as a singer, but-- Speaker 2: --you ever meet Nancy Wilson, 'cause I know she was at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] I guess in-- Speaker 1: I met her but not-- Speaker 2: --in the early-- Speaker 1: --during that period. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I met her later when I was living in New York [New York], yeah. So, but we were very isolated. Toledo [Ohio] was the--[H.J.] Heinz Tomato Factory in Bowling Green [Ohio]. That was it; that was it. When the college was closed, the, everybody who wasn't connected to the college was connected to the tomato factory pretty much, or you were coming down from Toledo, so. Yeah, so it was an experience. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, so your major was music education still? Speaker 1: Um-hm, and my minor was radio television production. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I ended up basically doing a double major. Speaker 2: Were there any, before we leaving Bowling Green [State University, Bowling Green, Ohio], were any major teachers, in terms of, any teachers that really stand out--or were there any black teachers on campus? That, that, that's a question. Speaker 1: There were, as I recall, no black teachers on campus at that time. There were approximate--in 1960, when we went in, I think there were like 164 black folks on campus--I remember that number--and something like nine hundred and some white folks. And as it grew, it, the, the percentage at that time became smaller for us, even though there became more of us, the college was at a, a growth period at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Bowling-- Speaker 1: Now they have a-- Speaker 2: --Green like--yeah. Speaker 1: --now Bowling Green has a black president [Sidney A. Ribeau]. Yeah, a brother is president of Bowling Green now, and there are a black faculty in, you know, departments and stuff. But at that time, it was definitely, definitely an integration situation. We did 'Show Boat' on campus while I was there, and that was like a major step, to do 'Show Boat,' because it was a piece that dealt a little bit with race. Somebody in 'Show Boat' is passing, you know, as you recall. And there was this big controversy about how they were gonna cast it, to cast it with a white person or to cast it with a black person. So I was in, in that show but not in, in that, you know, obviously not in that, that pivotal role. The athletics, the, the music, it was just, it was a perpetual, perpetual integration. The one thing that was not a racial issue was, by the time I was deeply involved in the television department in, in my junior and senior year, I had a, a friend named Hope Parker [ph.], who was a white student, taking the same courses I was taking. And she is now working in the industry out here. And we were very strong in what we did. We knew we were good. We were working it. But something was happening we couldn't quite figure out. And one day I'm walking down the hall, and I see all the guys from my class are in this little room with this white teacher, this white male teacher, and we're not in there. And class had been canceled or something like that we'd been told. And I popped my head in there, and they're like, like the deer in the headlight. And come to find out, that he had, he had been making cracks in class like, "Women belong in the kitchen and in the bedroom." And we weren't--I mean this is before the women's movement. You know, if I knew then what I know now I would probably own Bowling Green, but I didn't know that then. And what he was literally doing was having meetings with the guys, having classes with the guys to teach them the camera and technical stuff that he didn't want to teach us. And by the time I found out and really got clear on it, we were like halfway through our senior year, you know. So there was a lot of stuff that I should have learned in that course of studies that I didn't because of his position about women, you know, not about, it wasn't about race. For him it was women, so, yeah. Speaker 2: That's something. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 278160 Speaker 1: So anything else about Bowling Green [State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] before we--what did you decide to do after, after you graduated? Speaker 2: I got on the next bus to New York [New York], literally (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now why? How did that, how did that, how, how was-- Speaker 2: --literally. Speaker 1: --that hooked up? Speaker 2: I'd had, I had a friend named Jenny Love [ph.] who had been at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio]. She'd been a dancer at Karamu, and she had gone to New York. And I had heard so much about New York and the plays and you know, she'd auditioned here, and she had (unclear) and so I starting wanting to do that. I wanted to get there. When it was time for me to graduate, too close to graduation, they called me into the counselor's office and told me that I had, had kind of overdone it on the art side, but I hadn't finished my requirements, which they had never been clear about or had never put in writing for my education degree. And I had to come back and take math, one, one course of math and art appreciation and philos- something like that in order to graduate, one, one of those little requirements. And I was so angry. So I came back for one semester, 'cause I didn't get to walk with my class. I came back one semester, and I took, I took like the math and the art, whatever the third was. I was like, I'm out of here (laughter), you know; I know what I know. And I figured out, because I'd been sending out resumes, this is a what-you-know business. And when I finished my last classes, I called my family and I said my trunk--I had a friend, a roommate from Panama who's very close. I said my trunk is in Marva's [ph.] room. When I get to New York she'll send me the address. You can come and get the rest of it, or you can leave it. I'm out of here. And I literally went to the pool room, and I played pool until the next bus to Toledo [Ohio] came. And I was gone, and I went to New York. I didn't know anybody in New York except Gloster [B.] Current. And I didn't really how to reach him at that point. At, at that point I didn't know that I knew him and that he was in New York. I knew him. I didn't know where he was. So I didn't know anybody. I had, I had something like twenty-six dollars and some money, my last paycheck from working in the cafeteria in my bank account in Bowling Green, which I didn't even have. I was so naive, I didn't know that you couldn't go to another state and say: no, but I have some money in, in this account in New York I can just (laughter), in Bowling Green, Ohio. They were like, I don't think so (laughter). So I, I got--oh, I, I had been to New York once before 'cause I was looking for jobs. And I had gone with a group of people who, we had rented, we had bought a car that somebody was selling, and they, we bought the car. We pitched in for it, and he said don't turn it off before you get to New York because it may not turn on again. And so I said, I'd called the Harlem Y [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York], and I said you, you have a room? They said yes and blah, blah, blah. And I got all this information, and they dropped me off in front of the Harlem Y with my luggage. And I went inside and discovered that they didn't have rooms at the Harlem Y. But I knew one, one musician who had been, I had met at Karamu named Michael [V.W.] Gordon, who went on to become a professor at Indiana U [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]. And now he's down at, in Virginia. And Michael and I were supposed to hook up. And I have no room. I got to find Michael. I get on a bus, and I'm head toward where I think he lives. I don't know New York at all. I'm on the Lexington Avenue bus going downtown. And I'm staying at the front of the bus because I want to get off at this particular street. I think they're sending me to another Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)]. That was it; they're sending me to a Y that has housing. And I look out the window, and there is Michael going across the street on 34th Street. He's trying to, he's been looking for me at the bus station. He's now headed to the train station, but I don't know this. I'm like, "There he is! There he is! I have to get off!" And they're like, no, the bus stops across the street. No, no, I have to get--no, the bus stops across the street. We don't let you (laughter) off. By the time I get off the bus I can't find him. He's like lost in a zillion people in New York. And I remember I'm standing underneath this World's Fair sign. It's '64 [1964]. The [1964 New York] World's Fair [New York, New York] is there, and I just start to cry. And then I finally get to this, get to the Y, and I check in, and then I find Michael. And somehow I get hooked up with this guy named Roy [Eaton]. I have to find his last name for you, Roy--oh, come on, Pearl [HistoryMaker S. Pearl Sharp]. He was a musician. He was one of the few blacks who was working at an advertising agency. And this is the brother who wrote the 'Deep, Dark, Delicious Yuban' commercial. He was writing spots, music spots for advertising. I think I had a job interview. I think that's how I met him. And I went to the job interview the next morning with him. And he said where are you staying? And I said I'm kind of not. I said I only have so much money on me, and I'm staying at the Y. And I can only stay there one more night, and I don't know anybody else in New York. And he said if you don't mind two screaming babies, you can come home and stay with us and help out with, you know, with the babysitting or something. And that's what I did, and I (laughter) stayed with him for a couple of months, until I got my, my first apartment in New York. Yeah, so, coming to New York (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a coming to New York story that, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a story, yeah. Story_ID: 278161 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What year? Speaker 2: Yeah, this was '64 [1964]. Yeah, the [1964 New York] World's Fair [New York, New York] was happening. Speaker 1: The New York World's Fair, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, so the first trip when they dropped me off in Harlem [New York, New York] I wasn't there to stay. I was just there I think it was Easter break, and I went back and finished at Bowling Green [State University, Bowling Green, Ohio]. And then that August I came back, and that's when I met Roy [Eaton]. I had this job interview with him, and I stayed with his family. And then my first job was at TV Guide. And there was a black man, Richard--I'm so bad with names--Richard, I think the last name began with a V. He ran a, one of those headhunters agencies, because now, another result of the Civil Rights Movement is I'm finding people are, corporations are looking for black people because they've got to meet their quotas now. And he set up a headhunters. He was very good. He was one of the best in the business. And I went to his company, and they sent me to TV Guide. Interviewed by phone; went over and did my test. They said, "We're gonna hire you to go through the old files and update some of the, the files on the show." They had little three by five cards. And I figured I'd be in a back room. And you should report to work next Monday. And when I came in that following Monday I had been given a promotion to a full copywriter. And so I worked as a copywriter for TV Guide for my first year in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: You were the first black person-- Speaker 2: I believe I was the first black person at TV Guide, and they gave me all the black shows. So, at that time, again, because things are not being taped yet, you know, they were just beginning to tape things I think by '64 [1964]. I think so, but most, a lot of stuff was live in the (unclear). And because I had a music background, when Lena Horne did her special they sent me. You know, when somebody else did a music special they would send me. And I'd get to see the taping and then write about it, and I'd get the press kits and all of that. And that's how I ended up on the 'Captain Kangaroo' show. It started out as an office joke. They said you ought to--they found out, you know, I was an actress--you ought to send your picture over to 'Captain Kanga'--no, no. No, no, they have people--no, no, no. So somebody took my picture and sent it over to 'Captain Kangaroo.' Story_ID: 278162 Speaker 1: We just were talking about some of the other black folks at Bowling Green [State University (BGSU), Bowling Green, Ohio] when you were there, and just-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Bernie Casey was in Bowling Green while I was there. He was playing for, football for San Francisco [San Francisco 49ers], but he would come back Bowling Green. And he was working on his art degree, and that was encouraging to us, because here was somebody who was out in the professional world in something that was making him a lot of money, but yet there was this other art, this craft, this passion that he had, and he was approaching it in an academic way. So I think he was a very good influence on a lot of us at that time. And then also Nate Thurmond, the basketball player was-- Speaker 1: A great rebounder and a shot blocker. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, he played for--a lot, most of the, most of the brothers were there on, on athletic scholarships. And we had three Bobby Reynolds. We had a short Bobby Reynolds who had done 'Show Boat' with me. We had a medium-sized Bobby Reynolds who played ball [Robert Reynolds], and we had a huge Bobby Reynolds (laughter), all at Bowl- BGSU at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay, and anybody else? Speaker 2: A lot of, a lot of us are very tight. It was just actually had a reunion in New Rochelle [New York] with Eugenia Hodge Miller and Carol Williams and Pat Clark. We had all gone through elementary, through high school [John Adams Senior High School; John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] together. And Genie and I had gone all the way through college together. So we get together every once in a while and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --have fun. Story_ID: 278163 Speaker 1: All right well, now, let's, let's go to 'Captain Kangaroo.' Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Captain Kangaroo'-- Speaker 1: --you're at TV Guide, you're working at TV Guide-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --first black-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --copywriter at TV Guide. Speaker 2: I'm at TV Guide, and one of the staff members sends my picture over to 'Captain Kangaroo' as a kind of, really as an office joke. And they called me up, and they said we understand that you sing, and we'd like to talk to you about doing a show. And so I go over and I talk to them. And they had, they had me come back and do a couple of songs or I, I would, sometimes I played the piano for myself or something. And I did 'Inch Worm,' 'cause they had a little inch worm character. I sang 'Inch Worm.' And then, I can't remember what sang, what song I sang to Bunny Rabbit. But at the end of the song, Bunny Rabbit gave me a carrot. Speaker 1: So you made it on the show; you know, you, you auditioned and-- Speaker 2: I made it on the show. I actually taped a show. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I actually taped a show, and at the end of the, the song, Bunny Rabbit gives me a carrot. And they told me later that script-wise, this was the first time that Bunny Rabbit had ever given away a carrot because he was notorious for, for hoarding his stuff. So one of my most illuminating first (laughter) is that I got the first carrot from Bunny Rabbit on 'Captain Kangaroo' (laughter). Speaker 1: That's, that's something. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you know who, did you meet the person who played Bunny Rabbit? I guess you did, right, or, or-- Speaker 2: No, there was-- Speaker 1: --'cause it was a hand--it was a-- Speaker 2: --it's a, it's a puppet, yeah. Speaker 1: --puppet, yeah, I know, but somebody was behind there-- Speaker 2: I probably, yeah, I met all of them. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: I met the, I met the Captain-- Speaker 1: But Bunny Rabbit-- Speaker 2: --the whole bit. Speaker 1: --was silent too; he didn't say anything. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No, he just made his little noises and stuff (laughter). So it was, it was a fun experience, and it was my first, I think that was actually what got me into the union, in to AFTRA [American Federation of Television and Radio Artists; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my first union as a, as an artist, as a performer, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. That's something. Were-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were you the first black person to appear on 'Captain Kangaroo,' do you know? Speaker 2: I doubt that; I doubt that, no, because remember, 'Sesame Street' was happening. I think 'Sesame Street' was, was beginning around that time. Speaker 1: (Unclear) in '64 [1964], I think 'Sesame Street' doesn't come along until-- Speaker 2: I'm in, by now we're at '65 [1965]. We're, we're maybe-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --sixty-five [1965], maybe-- Speaker 1: It's about ta-- Speaker 2: --early '60s [1960s], yeah. Speaker 1: --'Sesame Street' starts up '68 [1968] I think. Speaker 2: In '68 [1968], that late? Speaker 1: Yeah [sic. 1969]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I may have been, but I, I kind of doubt it. Speaker 1: 'Cause I was out of high school when 'Sesame Street'-- Speaker 2: Because there were other-- Speaker 1: --started to run-- Speaker 2: --there were a lot of performers that they made use of, you know, who were doing Broadway shows and, and off-Broadway, and that was happening. Story_ID: 278164 Speaker 1: So, but what happened for me after I left TV Guide, or around that same time, later than TV Guide, I left TV Guide and went to RKO [Pictures]. But in my personal life, the HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams] had started in Harlem [New York, New York]. So [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson is president. They've initiated the Great Society, and they have the poverty program. And in Harlem the poverty program began HARYOU-ACT, which was H-A-R-Y-O-U, dash A-C-T, Harlem Youth--what do the AC stand, ACT stand for? Harlem Youth, hyphen, some, the T was for Training, Academic and Cultural Training [sic.], I be, I think but don't quote me; I think that's what it stood for. So, one of the professors was Al Fann, who had been an actor at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio]. And he brought with him Minnie Gentry, who was this wonderful, incredible actress from Karamu Theatre. And they're all living in New York [New York] now. So Al was running the drama divis- division. I was dating a young man at that point who had wanted to take some acting classes. So I just kind of went up to the acting class with him for a few weeks. He stayed a few weeks; I stayed, you know, for years, and we developed an incredible unit of actors and artists, because Al Fann was very much into positive thinking. He actually used the book, 'Positive Thinking' [sic. 'Psycho-Cybernetics'], Maxwell Maltz. We, we dealt in personal development and self-esteem development at the same time that we were developing the acting. And what we became was such a force that people could see us walking down the street in Harlem and they'd step aside. And out of that workshop came Renee Watson, who's done a lot of series, a lot of commercials; Candida Mobley, who developed Voices Incorporated, one of the leading radio production companies; [HistoryMaker] Adam Wade, who became the first black television [game show] host; Lawrence Hilton-Jacobs, who, you know, was, lot of credits-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --lot of credits, one major, major actor; Tamu Blackwell, who was in 'Claudine' with [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, and other film credits and then became a, a producer/director; Tim Pelt, whose daughter was Danielle [Spencer], who was on the series 'What's Happening!!,' and Tim was an actor. So that, that's the caliber of people who grew up and came through, were nurtured through that workshop. And we-- Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: --we made our mark. Speaker 2: There was, there was time, you talk about positive thinking and image building and so forth. There was a time when in '60--1965, we have Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], you know, raising the call for black power. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And you also, and that's about the time that the Black Arts Movement sort of starts. Would you consider the Al Fann group part, part of the Black Arts Movement? Speaker 1: Yes, we were. Amiri Baraka was doing--I'm trying to think of a particular play. Speaker 2: 'Slave Ship[: A Historical Pageant]' or-- Speaker 1: This was before 'Slave Ship,' the one where the white people really get, get talked about badly and, and they like him. Well, we had, we had these-- Speaker 2: I know the 'Dutchman' was one. Speaker 1: 'Dutchman.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was doing 'Dutchman.' And we had these flatbed trucks, and we're literally driving into communities, driving into parking lots, you know, driving into schoolyards and passing out flyers and telling 'em to come, come back at, you know, when it gets dark we're gonna do a play (laughter). And we were doing, he was doing 'Dutchman.' We were doing '[A] Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry]. And we were doing 'Raisin in the Sun' at places where people were laughing in all the wrong places and throwing tomatoes and eggs at us from their, from their upper apartment windows (laughter), I mean literally. So, we were part of a movement, when people talk about the Black Arts Movement, what they don't talk about a lot is the development of an audience. We helped an audience develop from feeling so uncomfortable with 'Raisin in the Sun' that they were throwing stuff at us and laughing in the serious parts to the point where they knew really how to take that play and how to understand it and appreciate it. And that's, that's what I think was significant. Story_ID: 278165 Speaker 1: We were taking Langston Hughes and [Paul Laurence] Dunbar and puttin' it out in the middle of the street. I was po- I was poeting with [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez and Felipe Luciano and [HistoryMaker] Nikki [Giovanni], where they would roll a flatbed truck into the middle of 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. Boulevard] on Saturday afternoon and put some speakers on it, and we would go up and do our poetry. You know, and I, I remember one, one stellar moment, Felupan, Felipe Luciano was on the stage. It was like a Saturday morning, and he's doing this poem, "The Jibaro, Jibaro, my pretty nigger" ['Jibaro, My Pretty Nigger']. And this drunk caught my eye. He came around the corner, and he was like holding up against the wall. And he heard this, and this whole this was like, and, and Felipe said, "My pretty nigger, I love you." And he's like, "Was he talkin' to me? Is he talkin' to me?" And, and it was like he was trying to get to this light; this drunk was trying to get to this light 'cause he felt like somebody was talking to him. And that's, I, I remember moment 'cause it kind of capsulized what we were doing out there with our poetry. And the poets were, were publishing their own books. We were jacking up printers, you know. "Just give me this many copies, and I'll pay you next week 'cause I know I'm gon' sell all of 'em now" (laughter). We put a couple of printers out of business back then. So it, it was an exciting time, and, and the arts were there. I remember going to the Harlem Y [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York]. I had just arrived in New York [New York], and I saw this flyer about these people were gonna be at the Harlem Y, and it was poetry. And I found my way up there, but I got a little bit lost, so I was a little late. And I walked in, and this kind of short guy, he's standing there reading poems by Langston Hughes. And I'm thinking, I'd love all this po- I know all this poetry, but he is, he is really messing it up. He's, this is not a good reading. Why are they letting go on like this messing this up?" And after a while, and I'm, it's so I pain listening to the way this guy is reading Hughes' poetry. And then the guy says, "Okay, we're gonna take a little break, and Langston's gonna come back and read some more," (laughter). I was like (laughter), I was like ohhhh--like that, that, that was the first literary event that I went to in Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: It was educational-- Speaker 1: In the Harlem Y. Speaker 2: --experience (unclear). Speaker 1: In the Harlem Y, yes. Speaker 2: That's a 135th Street Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)], right? Speaker 1: 135th Street-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --right. And then, as we began to get our naturals, this, this barber named Bob Keys [ph.] had a barbershop in the basement of the Harlem Y. And he developed something that would take a permanent out of your hair within a few hours. So in the basement of the Harlem Y, everybody is going through this transition into their afros. I mean you could, you could, you couldn't get in there sometimes on the weekend. Speaker 2: Now where, where would you date the afro in terms of what--when did you get your first afro? Speaker 1: When did I get my first afro? (Unclear) I did 'Dolly' in '67 [1967], '8 [1968] (unclear) think around '68 [1968], because I remember we were in 'Hello, Dolly!' And nobody had an afro when, when we came in, maybe one person had an afro. And a number of the sisters started get, getting afros. Some of them actually, when we went to [Washington] D.C., 'Hello, Dolly!' performed in D.C. for a month before we hit Broadway. And they put some chemicals in some of the dancers' hair, and it made their hair fall out, and so they just got afros. And Pearl Bailey hit the ceiling. She was not having it in her show, because the sisters, they, they looked so beautiful. They were so beautiful, and it just, it freaked her out. And so there was a lot of tension in the show. That's, that's how I remember, because we went to D.C. in '67 [1967]. When we came back we opened in November of '67 [1967] on Broadway. And so it was around that time that some of the women got their afros--so it must have been later in '67 [1967] or early '68 [1968] when I got mine. Story_ID: 278166 Speaker 1: You all are doing this community theater-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --under the HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York]. There's, I'm sure, when I hear this story, it reminds me so much of the other stories I've heard and the stuff I've actually been into. But, people doing this I guess from, I guess from '65 [1965] all the way through the mid-'70s [1970s], the same kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, it's like Black Arts Movement time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: [Amiri] Baraka's sister had a coffee shop; Kimako [Baraka] had a coffee shop called Kimako's. That was the first place I ever heard Toni Morrison read. I walked in and she was reading from the 'The Bluest Eye.' And I, you know, I've been down with Toni ever since, so yeah. And Kimako's actually opened late in the movement. Richard, Richard the playwright, Richard Wesley-- Speaker 1: Wesley, yeah. Speaker 2: --Richard Wesley used to write for some of the black papers under a pen name, and he would review a lot of the groups. So I started a group called Poets and Performers. I think by now we're in, we're probably in the seven, we're probably in the late '60s [1960s]. And [HistoryMaker] Bill Duke was one of the original members, Bill Duke, the director; Donald Green; Norman Matlock, who was a playwright and writer. And I'm trying to think of the sister's name. What's the sister's name who was with us? But we, I would have four--Jackie Earley, the poet, was with us for a while. So usually it would be two males and two females. And what we did was we did poetry, but we did each other's poetry; we interacted, so it was a little bit of a drama with it. So, I might do some lines for yours, and somebody else might jump in some, and you might pick up (unclear). And that's why we were called Poets and Performers. And our, we got an incredible review once from somebody, and I couldn't figure out who it was. And finally, after about six months, I found out it was Richard Wesley writing under a pen name (laughter). And I kept saying, "Who was there? Who could have done this? Who was there, you know, at that performance?" So, yeah, so he helped a lot of us. I mean doing that helped a lot of us because it, it, it gave us a review, a legitimate review that we could use to promote whatever we were doing from a black perspective, a review from a black perspective, so-- Speaker 1: Now, now there's a lot, I have a lot of information. I'm not sure what order this comes in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, you, you did 'Black Girl,' 'Hello, Dolly!'; you wrote-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'The Sistuhs,' which was published in an anthology. Was that performed as well? Speaker 2: 'The Sistuhs' were per- was performed, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and you studied with John O'Killens [John Oliver Killens]. Now, can you put it in chronological perspective for-- Speaker 2: No, because a lot was all happening at once. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, HARYOU-ACT, Al Fann & Co., the first professional things that Al Fann companies did was a lot of us got jobs as extras on 'Up the Down Staircase,' a film that was-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --being done about-- Speaker 1: Sandy Dennis, I remember that. Speaker 2: Right. And a couple of the actors got big parts in it. So that was our first professional push, and then we went on from there. So, Al would be, try to get us booked as a group whenever possible. I was singing, I'd been singing with the Sammy Benskin Trio, but by that time, pretty soon I started working with Danny Holgate. And Danny Holgate is one of the major arrangers. He arranged 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' and just a, a whole lot of shows. And he was wonderful to work with, and he helped me find a different voice. And so, one of the last major shows that the Al Fann & Co. did was at Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York], and I believe it was either with Sidney Poitier, or it was honoring Sidney Poitier or something. And that's where I made my debut and my new voice (laughter), singing a, singing a belt song, doing a solo thing at, you know, at Lincoln Center. So, the poetry and all of that was all going on at the same time, went into 'Hello, Dolly!' in '67 [1967]. Story_ID: 278167 Speaker 1: That's when we went into rehearsals that summer. We opened in Washington [D.C.] in November of '67 [1967] or late October and opened on Broadway in November of '67 [1967], the Pearl Bailey company--again, a lot of discussion, why did we have to have an all-black company? Why not have an all-black company? But we made history because we were the first black, all, first all-black company on Broadway since maybe Eubie Blake or something, you know. It, it-- Speaker 2: Since 'Shuffle Along'-- Speaker 1: --had been a long time. Speaker 2: --or something. Speaker 1: It had been a long time, right. And then we made history because Pearl Billing- Pearl Bailey being who she was. You know, all the celebrities in the world came to hear her. And this third act developed where once we got to the curtain call, she would do a little bit more, which got to be more, which got to be more, which got, until it became the third act. If there were any celebrities in the house, she would usually invite them up on stage. So we had been on stage with [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson, with Josephine Premice, with Sammy Davis [Jr.], with I mean, just you name it. If they came to 'Hello, Dolly!' they had come up and done something with her at the end, and so there was, there was no, no Dolly company quite like the Pearl Bailey company. One of the things that happened when, we were doing 'Dolly' when [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, and I remember I had stopped--I was on my way to understudy rehearsal, and I had stopped at this little fruit stand to get some fruit to go to the theater when I heard it on the television. And I got to the theater, and everybody got together down in the basement and we took a company vote. The management came to us and said do you want to do the show tonight or not? We took a company vote, and we said yes, we wanted to do the show. We think it's important because us being on Broadway is one of the things that King stood for, opening the doors, letting us have full opportunity. We're gonna do the most incredible show you've ever seen in your life tonight for King. We get dressed. We're ready. We get up on stage and we find out that Pearl Bailey has canceled the show. She decided that we should not perform that night because of, you know, the assassination. So there was a lot of tears, a lot of weeping that night 'cause we wanted to do that show so badly that night for him, and we didn't get to do that, so. Speaker 2: Now did you hear recently that Carol Channing is black? She was the first Dolly. Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, I didn't hear that. Is she saying that, or is somebody else saying that? Speaker 2: She's saying that. Speaker 1: She's saying that? Speaker 2: She's saying that, that she, she was told by her relatives, finally, that she was actually black and that she, and somebody said how, how come you, you're, you think, you know, why do you think your eyes are so big? And well (laughter), and she-- Speaker 1: I wouldn't be surprised. Speaker 2: --and she, well, you know-- Speaker 1: I wouldn't be surprised. Speaker 2: --so she's black in a sense that there's black ancestry in her family somewhere, but she not-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I wouldn't be surprised. Speaker 2: She was on 'The Today Show' ['Today'] talking about this-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --which I thought was incredible 'cause everybody say that Pearl Bailey was the first person, the first black person to play that role-- Speaker 1: And she said no-- Speaker 2: --where the-- Speaker 1: --she was. Well, they do like to take our history away from us, you know. The other racial incident that happened in the show was we, because we were late coming in as a company, we only were entitled to one week vacation. But the musicians, who had been there from cal- Carol Channing on, their contract, they were entitled to two weeks' vacation. So they had to figure out something to do with our company for a week, so they sent us to St. Louis [Missouri] to do an open air theater there for a week. And the newspaper, the black newspapers there, had these banners out: "Black Dolly Coming to, you know, St. Louis." They were happy; they were thrilled. Again, Pearl got incensed, and she sent a letter to them saying not to refer to us as a black company. We're just a company and blah, blah, blah. And so there was, you know commentary on the radio, and people kind of backed off. And we found out about it, so some of us sent a letter to them and said we are the company, not just Pearl. We're all here, and we can't wait to get to St. Louis; and thank you for welking ma- welking- welcoming us as a black company, you know; we're, we're coming. And they were just wonderful. You know, the black press came out. The black churches came out. I don't think they'd ever seen that many black people in that theater, that outdoor theater before. And we were invited to dinners, we were invited to people's homes, you know. So they did welcome us, and they were glad. Story_ID: 278168 Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to know Pearl Bailey very well? Speaker 2: Yes, very carefully (laughter), very carefully. Yeah, there, there were, it was constant drama; it was constant drama, and a lot of it was ugly, yeah. I mean, I'm not gonna go, tell you stuff. I, I will tell stuff off camera that will just, your jaw will drop, you know, that you would not think would be capable of somebody. But, for all of her incredible talent and all of her beauty and all of the fact that the world loved her, she was a very extremely insecure person, and those insecurities were in play all the time, so, yeah. The only time she seemed to be totally comfortable was when Louis came around, Louie Bellson came around. Speaker 1: This insecurity, now this is something I may want to speak, explore a little bit. I-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as I recall, I think she was probably, of all the big superstar black women in those days, she was rather the darkest. Did, did that have anything to do with her insecurity? I know she had a white husband and-- Speaker 2: I didn't think she was any darker than Dinah Washington or-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --you know, some of the other stars, no, no. And she got a lot more play than they did. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was very popular, yeah, you know. Speaker 2: She was very popular; people loved her, loved her, yeah. And, and she's a brilliant artist. I mean we would sit and watch her work her stuff. You know, we'd take and watch her take a line and, and turn it into a whole moment, you know, take, take something that was just, you know, like that for all the other Dollys and turn it into a five-minute, you know, piece that would have people in the aisle. She was brilliant. But backstage it was often hell, and onstage it was often hell, 'cause it was, you know, stuff doesn't stay backstage; it comes on stage, yeah, so. Speaker 1: I just know it wasn't easy for dark women in those days necessarily-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --in-- Speaker 2: --right. Speaker 1: --in show business. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And they, and they didn't-- Speaker 2: The other thing-- Speaker 1: --get a lot of chances, so I'm just saying. Speaker 2: Yeah, the other thing that was we, we put together was both she and--she had a white understudy, a wonderful named, lady named Bibi Osterwald, whom we just adored--both of them came out, out of the [Great] Depression, and most of us did not. We were on, you know, the next generation, the next edge of that. And so a lot of their behavior was connected to the Depression, you know, things that you, you learn to hold onto, or a certain, certain things that they developed during that period. And so we were able to hook that up after a while, and so okay, maybe she does that because of this. That's, you know, still holding onto that, but yeah, so. Story_ID: 278169 Speaker 1: Now you made a transition, sort of, of doing community theater with all, with a lot of self-conscious message and meaning to doing 'Hello, Dolly!' Yeah, so, how did you feel about that? Speaker 2: It was all happening at the same time. What was interesting was [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer, writer/director, had a theater. What was the name of Barbara Ann Teer's theater? It was 125th Street. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know it. Speaker 2: And they-- Speaker 1: National Black Theatre [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: National Black Theatre, right. She talked a lot a, against going downtown. So, there were as downtown cultural arts and theater, and there was uptown cultural arts and theater. And everything uptown was black, and political, and you know, changing society. And everything downtown was white folks and commercial. And this divide was kind of created where you were not good. It was, it was bad to go downtown, and it was only good to be uptown. Well, as little as we were making on Broadway, downtown was paying something. You could be a working artist. You could collect unemployment. Half of the cast of 'Hello, Dolly!' was teaching part time. We were substitute teachers. We were reg- we were teaching all day, whatever. Half the cast had teaching licenses (laughter) in 'Hello, Dolly!' because they, they weren't paying us enough to survive doing eight shows a week on Broadway. They really weren't. We went on strike in 1970, let's see, we went in '67 [1967]. We went on strike I '68 [1968], and after the strike I think we were making on hundred and thirty-nine dollars a week, something like that (laughter), okay. We were doing eight shows a week. So we had to teach-- Speaker 1: That's the-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --salary of a factory worker in a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, at Ford [Motor Company]-- Speaker 2: But then again-- Speaker 1: --or GM [General Motors] or something, you know. Speaker 2: Right. But remember, Negro Ensemble Company existed. They're downtown; they're down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. So, we had to overcomp- we had to deal with this, this kind of social divide that was created about is it wrong to go downtown and be an artist and get paid in what is basically white theater, even though you're in an all-black show. And there was a lot of discussion and debate about that. This went on for years. But Barbara Ann Teer had her company. Roger Furman had a company. [Babatunde] Olatunji opened the Olatunji Dance and Drum Studio [ph.]. Story_ID: 278170 Speaker 1: And I was [Babtunde] Olatunji's first secretary, and I also designed his first retail line of dashikis because that's when the brothers began to wear the dashikis, right. And so all of this activity is happening in Harlem [New York, New York], and it's wonderful, but-- Speaker 2: Were those the dashikis with the heart-shaped, made out of the Indian fabric? 'Cause there were so many of those out. Speaker 1: Oh no, he was bringing in, he was getting, he was getting African fabric. Speaker 2: From Nigeria, right? Speaker 1: No. Well, what happened at that time--we're going off in a whole 'nother tangent here but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the fabric would be often made in African countries, but the colonizers controlled the fabric industry. So most of the fabric went to Holland [the Netherlands], and it would come through with a Holland stamp on it. It would get waxed or treated in Holland, and then it would come through the Jewish vendors into the garment districts of New York [New York]. And Tunji and I would go down to the garment district, in the Jewish garment district, to get the African fabric that had come from Africa by way of Holland to take it back to Harlem to make the dashikis and the African costumes and stuff. The only other fabric is if when, when he would go home to Nigeria he would often bring fabric back, but that was what the dancers wore. But when the community started wearing and embracing the African-- that's where we're actually getting it 'cause I remember how hurt I was the first time I went with him to actually get the fabric and discovered where he was getting it from. And why does it have this little thing about Holland and other little stuff on the edge of it? Because this is the circle it goes through. So at that time, the colonial coun- countries, the African countries were not controlling the fabric industry. It was still being controlled by the colonizers, even when they had their independence. So I think Burkina Faso was one of the first countries to begin to control their own, create their own fabric industry, I think; I mean don't, don't quote me on that-- Speaker 2: I know they had some called-- Speaker 1: --but I know-- Speaker 2: --team of textiles in Ghana that was-- Speaker 1: Ghana, yeah-- Speaker 2: --I know that at-- Speaker 1: --yeah. But it was, for a long time that wasn't happening. If you went to that country, you could sometimes bring something back. But what you got in the United States when you got, you know, if you needed fifty yards of something in a roll, you went to the Jews to get that, yeah. Story_ID: 278171 Speaker 1: Tell us about black, 'Black Girl.' Now that was, they made a movie of that, but you were, you were in that rig- the original cast. Speaker 2: Was in the play, and that was a [HistoryMaker] Woodie King [Jr.] production, and Woodie King was a primary, and still is I believe, the primary black theater producer in New York [New York]. There was another brother named Ashton Springer. Was it Ashton Springer? Ashton Springer was a producer who produced a couple of things on Broadway. You don't remember Ashton? Big, heavy, big, heavyset black guy, couple hundred pounds. I'm trying to think of some of the things he produced, was--he might have been involved with the Jack Johnson piece. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: One of the [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: I think he might have been in, involved with that. And he struggled. He struggled a lot. I think he had one success and a couple of things that weren't very successful. He was always trying to get, you know, investors and backers. But Woodie King was doing New Federal Theatre [New York, New York], and this production he put off-Broadway called 'Black Girl,' by J.E. Franklin. And Dick Anthony Williams was in the cast. Was Dick in the cast, or did Dick direct? I think Dick Anthony Williams was the director [sic. producer]. No, no, no, Shauneille--I'm sorry. Let me get this right. Shauneille Perry was the director. Retta Greene [Loretta Greene] was in the cast. Dick Anthony Williams' wife was in the cast, Gloria. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Gloria Foster. Speaker 2: Foster, yeah. Speaker 1: Gloria, no, not Gloria Foster, Gloria, not Gloria Foster, Gloria--what's Gloria's last name? Can't remember it. Gloria Foster was married to Clarence Williams, III. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh-- Speaker 1: Right, Gloria Foster was married to Clarence William, III. Dick Anthony Williams was married to Gloria--I can't remember her last name right now. And Minnie Gentry was in the cast, and [HistoryMaker] Arthur [Wellesley] French, yes. And, and so that played off-Broadway in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. And I had a role in that, and then I was a standby to Janet, not Janet MacLachlan [HistoryMaker Janet Angel MacLachlan], the other Janet, Janet, or Janice [sic. Janet League] in 'To Be Young, Gifted, and Black,' the, the Lorraine Hansberry piece. And then we took that to the thea--to Philly. We did it a couple of weeks in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at a theater there, so. So that was the other thing, is that, that black plays by black playwrights were also being done at that time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And there was a lot of black theater, and it was in every nook and cranny, you know, that, and we kind of moved away from just doing the, the platform, you know, roll the platform up in the parking lot kind of stuff. And anything that could be turned into a theater was turned into a theater. Story_ID: 278172 Speaker 1: --I've heard it, I've read that you were the first black person in a commercial, you and Marcia McBroom. Speaker 2: Okay, not quite. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was the, I was in the first all-black commercial. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What happened, one, one of the residuals of the Civil Rights Movement was folks saying okay, there'd been a few blacks in commercials, but they were so light that we didn't know they were black, 'cause you didn't want us to know that they were black. So now we had to know that these folks are black. And I believe that Emily Yancy, singer and actress, was in the first black, was the first black-- Speaker 1: Television commercial. Speaker 2: Right--visibly black actress in a television commercial, national television commercial. I'm not positive that it, but I'm pretty sure it was Emily. And then sometime later, they did a commercial with Crisco Oil, and amazingly there was a black producer. It was Compton Advertising [Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising, New York, New York], and a brother named Percy Hall was a producer for Compton. And the script was that there would be two black women throwing a party in their home, and they would be frying a chicken in Crisco oil. And so I was one of the actresses, and Marcia McBroom was the other actress. So this became-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --the first all-black commercial. Speaker 1: Now this was considered unheard of and dangerous and maybe-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --even, you know, scary-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --to have two black people in association with each other, even if they were just conspiring over oil, right? Speaker 2: Plus, plus a party, this is a black party. And I'm sure that there had been de- the debates about making it an integrated party and all of that and well, in fact, I know they were. And Percy said, "No, let's just let them do what they would normally do. They're in their own home. They would have their own friends." So he won that battle. We show up on the set. I have an afro, kind of moderately afro, not too big. Marcia has an afro, kind of a curly afro. Hers is a little more moderate than mine. Mine's kind of afro. They start to shoot, or they start to set up, and then the client, who's from Ohio--this is a Procter and Gamble [Procter & Gamble] product--starts to get worried about the hair. And the director comes into the room, and he says, and he's trying to be very delicate about this. He says "It's, it's the hair." We're like, yeah-said, "They're afraid that two afros in the southern market will appear to be to be too militant. So, is there anything you guys can do?" Well, we're not really prepared for this, so they send Marcia home to get her, to get a wig that does not look like an afro. They taxi her home. We wait. She comes back. She puts on this wig. It's so, so. They go and get another wig from someplace else. They get a wig. I look like Suzie Wong. They put me on that. They don't want that look. We're back to the two afros again. They're getting ready to shoot. "No, they can't have that." We start over again. They send me home to get a wig. I had some crumpled up wig in the back of the drawer, 'cause I'm not into wigs, had been in there for months. I just took it just like it was. I took it and I kind of put it on my head. They're like, "Oh, no, no, that's not gonna work." (Laughter) So this goes on. It's now like almost lunchtime, and they have not gotten the first shot off yet. And the crew is taking bets about will we ever shoot today. The director is getting more and more frustrated 'cause thousands of dollars are being burned up while they're debating about this hair. Well, finally he decided it'll be okay. And this one at, this one white woman from, from the client said, from Procter and Gamble says, "Well, what if she wore bangs? Wouldn't bangs be cute?" And then they just, they all go off. They started screaming and hollering at each other. And finally the director comes in the dressing room. We now have, we're back to our afro. He says, "It'll take you guys at least two or three hours, won't it, to get your hair back again?" And we're like, "Oh yeah, absolutely." And he turns around, and he walks out to the clients. He says, "They've all got hair. Let's shoot this mother fucker!" And he goes out (laughter) onto the set, and then we started to shoot. And we ended up doing what became the first all-black commercial. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Story_ID: 278173 Speaker 1: Oh, I wanted to ask you about your play, 'The Sistuhs' too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean tell us about the, the development of that and the production of it. Speaker 2: Okay, can I tell you about the, the Avon thing first, 'cause I think-- Speaker 1: Yeah, sure, okay. Speaker 2: --that's key too, yeah. I was the first black Avon lady on television. And that came about, again, a residual of the civil rights. We had gotten blacks on television now. But [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson and Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] began to push to have the behind-the-scenes picture change, so that we had more black producers, directors, writers, but also the crew people, camera, hair, you know, set dresser. And there were hundreds of black people who had been working in the industry who had never been able to break the union. And so he asked the advertising, he went after the advertising agency 'cause he knew that was where the money was, and he said we have to have some changes here. So Ogilvy & Mather, which was probably one of the top four advertising agencies in, in the country or maybe even in the world, stepped up to the plate, said we'll do it. And Avon was one of their, one of their clients. Speaker 1: Yeah, the popular commercial in those days, the bell would ring: ding-dong. Speaker 2: Right, and the bell rang. Speaker 1: And you would say-- Speaker 2: Door, Avon lady. Okay, she had always been white. So what was really interesting--and I didn't know any of this was happening in the background. I just knew I was up for the part. I got the part. We get on the set, there is one complete white crew that's not working: makeup, hair, wardrobe, set design, script supervisor, camera, assistant camera; and there's one complete black crew that's working. And the white crew doesn't want to leave. They're not giving up their territory. They got attitudes. And the black crew is trying to make this work 'cause this is the big test, and, and the entire industry is watching, (laughter) okay. So we're going through the day. It was a two-day shoot. It takes a long time to ring that doorbell. And about halfway through, about two-thirds of the way through the set, the first day, there's so much noise, and there are so many people in the room. And the first AD [assistant director] he says, "Look, anybody who does not absolutely have to be in here, just you know, please step outside. If you want to talk, just step outside." And there was about thirty seconds of absolute silence, and then everything went back just the way it was, not a single person moved; nobody (laughter) left the room, 'cause nobody was giving up their control or their territory. And that's how that commercial got shot. But it did help to break the unions for some. The other time that I saw that happen was when [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks did 'The Learning Tree,' and he broke a lot of the unions. And I mean break was a gentle word, 'cause I actually sat there in the office in Kansas and watched some big, burly guys leaning over their desks at Gordon. And Gordon was flanked by Joe Wilcots [Joseph M. Wilcots], who was the, the cameraman I believe. Yes, he was a cameraman. Bernie [ph.], a wonderful, elder, white guy named Bernie--I'll think of his last name--was the DP [director of photography]. But Joe Wilcots was to me the first cameraman, and the guy named Eugene, who I think was electrician. We had a, a wardrobe lady who had been in the business for seventeen years and had, they would always cut her off, because you had to work a certain number of days and then you made union. And they'd let them work up to the day before or two days before, and they'd cut 'em off. They take 'em off the job so they couldn't break the union. And these guys are hovering over Gordon, and Gordon just kick back and is like, he's not givin' it up. And so he fought the good fight, and so we got, we broke about four, Gordon broke about four or five unions with 'The Learning Tree,' broke meaning that for the first time blacks were officially and legally working their way into that union and getting that respect, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about 'Sisters'? Did, did you want to talk about that? Speaker 2: Okay, oh-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: --because what I did in 19--was it '80 [1980]? Does that say '80 [1980]? That says '80 [1980]--in 1980 I did a directory of blacks working behind the film--behind the scenes in film and television ['1980 Directory of Black Film/TV Technicians, West Coast'], and there had not been a book like that before. And some people were very welcoming with it when it came out; some people were like, don't wanna touch it; some blacks didn't want to be in anything that was all black; some blacks welcome it. Alex Haley became my guardian angel. He loaned me some money. He gave me the first check, first real check, for production. And the when I got in trouble I went back to him, and he loaned me some money to finish it. He called Sidney Poitier and told Poitier he had to do something. He called [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy and called me back and said you can pick up a check from Berry Gordy's office on Wednesday; this is who you see. He made those calls so that the book was paid or by black people, and that's what I wanted to have happen. And I thought it was very interesting because when it was all done and was out, and I took the book, I took the money that I owed Alex Haley back to him. There was used to be a little soul food restaurant on Sunset [Boulevard] that he'd invested in, and he'd be in there all the time. You could always find Alex in this restaurant. And I went and I gave him back this money, and he looked so surprised. He says, "You're giving this back?" I said, "It was a loan. You didn't give it to, it was loan. I'm supposed to give it back." He looked at me. He said, "You have no idea how few people, how many people borrow money from me and how few people ever pay it back. Somehow they just think like I don't need it or, you know, it's not important." And I just thought that was a very revealing moment for us, yeah. Story_ID: 278174 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, now 'The Sistuhs.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'The Sistuhs,' 'The Sistuhs'-- Speaker 1: This is in the late-'60s [1960s], right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: When? Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s], 'cause I didn't go to New York [New York] until '64 [1964]. And then John Oliver Killens had a writer's workshop that met at Columbia [University, New York, New York]. I believe it was every Tuesday evening, for years. And when he was no longer at Columbia, we'd meet at his house. When he was teaching at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], he also had a circle there. And some incredible writers were in his workshop, Arthur Flowers, Betima [ph.], [HistoryMaker] George Davis, Wesley [ph.], Wesley--what's Wesley's last name? All of these writers ended up publishing their first novel or first collection of, you know, of books. One of the members of The Last Poets was in the workshop, the original Last Poets. Gylan Kain was in the workshop sometime. And we just sat around the table and, and read and critiqued, and John would always give his critique last. So I started working on this play about black women. It started out as a monologue, and then it kept growing into a one-woman piece, and then it was a four-woman piece, and then it was four women and a couple of guys (laughter), and then it was four women and a couple of guys with some music. And it became 'The Sisters,' and I worked on it through the Killens workshop. And then I did the first reading of it in the Frank Silvera [Writers] Workshop. And again, Richard Wesley was the moderator of the discussion that evening. And it went on to be produced, a really frightening, awful production at Howard University. It was, was the premiere. It was just, it was a, it was quite a tragedy because the, there were a lot of political things going on there that I didn't know about. And the director that they assigned to it was a lesbian. And they said, "Do you mind that?" And I said, "No, can she direct?" And they said, "Yes." And what I didn't know was that the head of the department really wanted to direct the play, and, but he--I said I wanted a woman director, so they picked her. What I also didn't know was that she was studying with a white instructor who was saying you can do anything you want to do with the theater piece if you're the director, which is not true. Apparently, the head of the department, the black male, was challenging her job because of some of the things that she was teaching, and she was countersuing him. I didn't know all of this was going on around my play. I just show up opening night or, yeah, opening night, and the play is like an hour longer than what I wrote. It's like interminably long. I just wanna like climb underneath (laughter) the chairs. My family is there; [HistoryMaker] Woodie King [Jr.] is there; some other people from New York are there to look at the play about taking us to New York, and it is just--and they had been putting things into the play that I didn't write. And I didn't-- Speaker 1: Actual dialogue? Speaker 2: Actual dialogue, actual scenes, actual stuff that I didn't write. I was up all night going through the script line by line saying what did I write that they thought--where did they get that from? What did they write? What did I do wrong, you know, that, that they thought they, it, to get that interpretation from it? And then the next night I just went and I took over the theater, and I cleaned--I cut out as much as I could. And, and then I found out, it turned out that there's an actor, whose name if I could think of it right now, you would know. But his daughter was a student there, and she made me remember, you know, she knew me through her father. And I, I said I'm sorry to do this to you, and I had grabbed her. I said you have this monologue. You're not doing this--and I said I don't know where you got this from. She said well, it was on this, on this, on this, on the pages they gave us. And I found out that they had put a lot of people in the cast. Most of them had never seen the whole script, and they had never seen the original script. So they didn't know that what they had was maybe something that I hadn't written or had been expanded on what I wrote. And so they're looking at me like I'm totally crazy (laughter). So it was an experience. I learned a lot about a playwright and you know, how you have to function. And it's, it's not an experience I want to ever have again or anybody else have again. But the play went on to have an extremely successful run in Los Angeles [California], directed by Dick Anthony Williams, and with a, with a great cast, and was extended several times. It had a great run in Oakland [California]. That was my favorite production, directed by Sati Jamal and produced by Sandra Richards [ph.]. It was done at the Billie Holiday Theatre in Brooklyn [New York, New York]. It was done at several community theaters throughout the country and had, you know, it had, it had its life, yeah. Story_ID: 278175 Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess we're about to time of 'The Learning Tree,' I guess, sixty-- Speaker 2: Ah 'The Learning Tree,' yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, now how did you get in that project? Speaker 2: I was in 'Hello, Dolly!' And the word went out that they were gonna cast 'The Learning Tree' and that there was a part for a young fifteen or sixteen year, there was a part for a fifteen year-old and a sixteen year-old. And at that time I was twenty-five, but I was still--I had just stopped doing teenage modeling 'cause I did--I know people will say well, you know, it's an ego trip when you say this, but I really did not look my age. I was actually playing younger parts. And I could not get an audition for this role to save my life. And you know that a part is yours when other actors are coming up to you and saying, "You auditioned for that didn't you? 'Cause you'd be good for that" (laughter), you know--'could not get an audition. And a, a modeling agent that I had called up finally and said--and I could not get the book. Everybody, every copy of the book in the, the universe had been, you know, consumed by actors who were trying to read the story. So this ad, this agent called up and says, "Barbara so and so has an audition for 'The Learning Tree,' for the part of the sister, and she's in Cleveland [Ohio]"--my hometown--, "so would you please do me a favor? Would you go over there and pretend to be her, and let me know what happens?" And I was like, "Oh, sure (laughter), sure." So I got myself together and I, I started to put braids. I said no, everybody else was gonna do braids, so I just wore my hair long, and I put a big bow, bow, kind of old fashioned bow, 'cause it's a period piece, period to us. And I went over. And the other thing that happened before I went was, because I had stopped being a teenage model and I was now trying to be sophisticated and a real adult, I had had new pictures made, the new sophisticated, you know, looking Saundra Sharp [HistoryMaker S. Pearl Sharp], right. And so I got my little pictures, and I go over. And the minute I walked in the door I saw the receptionist. Her antenna kind of went up, and she's lookin' at me like this, you know. So I sign in I'm here for the role of Prissy. I sign in and she takes me in to meet [HistoryMaker] Gordon [Parks], and I see her kind of give Gordon a signal. And I sit down and meet Gordon. We talked a little bit. He asked me to read. At the end of the reading Gordon says, "That was good." He said, "Yeah, I like that, but these are the worse goddamn photographs I have ever seen." And he takes my photos and he tears them up (laughter) into pieces. And I just wanted to, like, become part of the carpet, I was so humiliated (laughter). And then a couple of months went by, and I got a call that I was being flown out to California to screen test. And I did my screen test. And the only other person that I know that was up for her screen test at the same day was [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones' daughter, who had a totally different look than I did and totally different field. And then I got a call that I had the part. And I was doing 'Hello, Dolly!' at that time. So I was the second actor to leave 'Hello, Dolly!' to go do something else and went out to Kansas. And it was just absolutely one of the most incredible experiences of my life. Working with Gordon I learned so much. The cast was just incredible. Stelle, Estelle Evans, Esther Rolle's sister, played the mother, and Kyle Johnson played Gordon [sic. Newt Winger]. And a number of newcomers, a young man [Stephen Perry] who now owns a restaurant, has owned a restaurant for a number of years, called Stevie's On The Strip [Los Angeles, California], he was one of the little boys, little boy they called Beniger [ph.] that Gordon saw driving down the street and pulled over and said, "What's your name?" He said, "Beniger." He says, "That's your name, "Beniger?" "Yeah." "You ever do any acting?" "No." "Want to?" "Unh-uh." "Come with me," (laughter) so. And just to watch Gordon operate in front of the, I mean behind the camera with the, the sense of family that he created, because everyone who's there wanted this project to succeed because Al--just for the record, Gordon Parks was the first African American to, to direct a major feature film for a major studio, which was Warner Bros. [Warner Bros.--Seven Arts, Inc.], so there was a lot on the line. So he not only broke the unions, but he went back to Kansas where, when he left his little boy, he had experienced where--when he lived there as a little boy, he had experienced a lot of discrimination. Now he's coming back as this internationally known artist and bringing all of these people and his money and this, you know, this project with him. And so there were, there were moments that, that, that reflected back on that period. Story_ID: 278176 Speaker 1: We did a lynching scene that's in the film. And the day that we're doing the lynching scene, we had done part of something to do with it. We had some reactions to do, so I was in costume and another actress in costume. We were gonna do these pickups, I think the reactions to the lynching scene, at some point. But we had stepped out into the crowd to watch the lynching scene and as--had a lot of the crew, you know. People were not involved 'cause this is very significant. And the actors, they're doing the thing where he's being--Glynn Turman--that was 'Minstrel Man.' I'm doing, I've gotten my stories mixed up. We have to stop. I'm sorry--need to make, let me be clear--are we still rolling? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I just got my stories mixed up. The lynching scene is in 'Minstrel Man.' Speaker 2: Is in 'Minstrel Man' with (unclear)-- Speaker 1: That's another film. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm back on '[The] Learning Tree.' Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --'Learning Tree.' Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, you had my ears picked up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry. Yeah, we'll get to 'Minstrel Man' in a minute. Okay, 'Learning Tree,' I was trying to think of some of the stories-- Story_ID: 278177 Speaker 1: Oh, we did do some shooting there in the, I think it was in a Masonic hall or something, and all the guys came out with their fezzes and you know, watched us (laughter), you know. But, but for the most part, people, people that [HistoryMaker] Gordon [Parks] said would not speak to him when he was a young man were coming out with their scrapbooks and their school yearbooks talking to show us how they were friends with Gordon Parks when he was (laughter) in school with them. And Gordon's family, you know, a lot of it, a lot of it, his family was there, and they opened their homes and fixed home, wonderful home-cooked meals and had us over. And Gordon's son, Gordon Parks, Jr., was on the set. Speaker 2: Now there's a scene in-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he later died, yeah. Speaker 2: There's scene in '[The] Learning Tree.' I'm not, I haven't seen it in a long time, and I didn't know you at the time you were in it. Did you play the, the young woman who was the maid in the, in the big house that, that was-- Speaker 1: Gordon's girlfriend [sic. Newt Winger's girlfriend, Arcella]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was. Speaker 1: No, that was Mira Waters. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Myra Waters played that role. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, the girlfriend, and she gets pregnant, and she-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: --and she leave--he comes to the house and she's gone. Yeah, that was Mira. But Mira also was my age. We were both playing roles ten years older than we were. And so every morning, Mira had a bust line; I didn't, so they would tape her down. But I had this gray hair had started, you know, coming in. I had, I was known for the actress with the gray patch, so they, I'd, they'd take, I would take eyebrow pencil, and take my gray out. And Gordon threatened us. Seventeen magazine came to interview us, and Gordon said if you, "Don't you dare ever tell your real ages, I don't care who asks you. You know, you are, you know, fifteen and sixteen." And we said okay, so we went to this interview with Seventeen magazine pretending to be fifteen and sixteen (laughter). So, but it--I, when I left the set, we, we finished shooting in Kansas. We came back to do three weeks in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And then I was going home to celebrate my twenty-sixth birthday, and we had this wrap party. I was leaving for the airport after the wrap party. And I was okay till it was time to hug Gordon, and then I just started to cry, and I cried all the way to (laughter) Cleveland [Ohio]. It was just that kind of really wonderful experience. Speaker 2: And you kind of learned some stuff about activism in terms of the, the crew and, and that-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --breaking the union and all that. Speaker 1: All of that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And also, people from Hollywood would come out, what we called the, the folks from, the producers are called the suits, you know. So the suits would come out from Hollywood every couple of days. And you'd see them show up, and they'd, you know, put their arm around Gordon. You'd see them walk down the road, and they'd walk back. You know, and they might stay for lunch, and they'd get on their plane and go back, you know. This kept happening. So, one day we came out, and on the side of Gordon's trailer there was this huge sign with a cowboy hat, and Gordon always wore his cowboy hat--just had a cowboy hat in the corner, and it said, "Get your hand off my shoulder, and stop giving me advice." That's all. We saw a lot fewer suits for the rest of the shoot. That's all it said (laughter). So, his way of handling things was, was always very cool. Story_ID: 278178 Speaker 1: Okay, now 'Minstrel Man.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now this is the one with the lynching. Speaker 2: This the one with lynching, 'Minstrel Man,' yeah. Speaker 1: And, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Minstrel Man' starred Glynn Turman, and Ted Ross, and Arthur--I'm sorry--Earl Billings, who's from Cleveland [Ohio], and Art, Art Evans, and oh my God, I'm trying to think of the actor's name. Speaker 1: Ben Vereen wasn't in it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Can you stop this for a second while I get this together? This is crucial. Speaker 1: (PAUSE). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Stan Lee [sic. Stanley Clay] was playing the younger brother of Glynn Turman's role. And Stan Lee was a musician in the, in the film who didn't want to do the old timey vaudeville stuff. He wanted to do this new sound that he was hearing and developing called ragtime. And he starts introducing ragtime into the show, into the vaudeville show, and the white people start to protest. And he refuses to stop, and he challenges one of them. And ends up getting lynched. So we're filming the lynching scene where Glynn's character comes out, sees him hanging from this tree, and takes him down from the tree. And because we had to do our reactions to the lynching, I'm in wardrobe, a couple of other ladies are in wardrobe, and we're standing out with the crowd. This crowd in the city has gathered. I think we were in Greenwood, Mississippi, when we were shooting this. And while we're shooting, we hear these two white guys from the community start this conversation across the crowd: "Hey, John." "Hey man, how you doing?" "Yeah, see what they're doing?" "Yeah, um-hm." "Takin' them an awful long time, um-hm." "Yeah, it don't never took us that long." "Unh-uh." They had us out of there so fast, back to the trailers, locked the doors, okay, 'cause they were not expecting that. And so that was one of those moments that, you know, you don't forget. And that was also where we were, I think that's where we were filming something in a Masonic hall. And a lot of the folks came out with the fezzes. I can't remember if that was '[The] Learning Tree' or 'Minstrel Man' now, one of 'em, but they, it was like, this is our hall. And they were on the roof and at all the doors, and you know, you're just gonna have to shoot around this; (laughter) we're not leaving, kind of thing. And then the other incident that happened with 'Minstrel Man' was the night that, of the first shooting, I guess the night before the first shooting, 'cause I got there late, and I'll, I'll tell you that story in a minute. But, there was a black crew member and a white female crew member and another white, a, a black male and a white male and a female, white female, crew members who went into the Holiday Inn where we were staying, or across the street or something, to have dinner. And they had dancing there, and they started dancing. And somebody else in the crew said we don't think that's a good idea. Y'all, maybe, y'all in Mississippi (laughter), right. But they went ahead; they were dancing; they were partying. The first day D [director] gets a call, production manager gets a call around 1:00 in the morning. They have arrested the white woman as being a prostitute and the black guy as being the john and the white guy as being the customer, because they were dancing together, you know, and partying in this club. So he had to go get them out, so. I remember when we were shooting under these magnolia trees, you know, the heavy stuff coming down. I remember Glynn saying, yeah, we're gonna have to pay for that one some way down the road (laughter), you know. So, these little reminders kept popping up on, on 'Minstrel Man' about, you know, where you are, where you are. And things have changed, but they haven't changed. We were in a couple of hotels where all of the cups and all of the flags had Confederate symbols on them, so. Speaker 2: This is 1975, you say, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is 1970--no, this is nine, yeah, 1975 [sic. 1977], yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --'cause I had just come to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Story_ID: 278179 Speaker 1: Did you come out to, to be closer to the movie industry or? Speaker 2: No, actually I came out to get away from New York [New York], and I was only gonna stay for about four weeks and if I got some work, maybe six weeks. And a casting director that I knew in New York was casting a commercial, and I just called to say hi, I'm here. And she says, "Well, why don't you come on in." She says, "I'm having this audition that--it's a Jackie Kennedy type." Okay (laughter), Jackie Kennedy that's pillbox hat, Jackie Kennedy. And I'm thinking Jackie Kennedy, like, they're gonna have a lot of black ladies, you know, doing a Jackie Kennedy pillbox that kind of thing. And I get there--and she kept saying it over and over again--and I get there, and I'm the only black actress who's in there, and I end up getting the job. So I said well, okay, I'll stay a couple of more weeks, and then nothing happened. I just, I couldn't get arrested. Meantime, they started casting for 'Minstrel Man,' and once again, people are saying, "Did you go out for 'Minstrel Man' 'cause, girl, this part sounds just like you. This is your part." I can't get an audition. I can't get arrested (laughter), you know. So finally I was just so furious. And I, I'm gettin' broke, and I still got this apartment in New York, so I was literally packing my bag. I take my bag down. I was packing my bag to go back to New York. I hadn't made a reservation yet, but I was starting to pack when I get this call that they want to see me for 'Minstrel Man.' And I'm like, I don't know. I was just packing. I don't know if I even have time, 'cause you--it was like I didn't care anymore, you know. I was tired of, of the--New York and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] are two totally different towns for actresses. In New York you could hustle. In New York you could go by; you could call an agent; you could go by the place. In L.A. nobody wants you to do that. You can't, you can't hustle. You have to sit back and wait for everything to be arranged by somebody else, and it just was not my style. So I ended up going out to, to audition. And I didn't know that the crew, that the, some of the crew had already left for location, and the company was leaving--the actors were leaving the next morning, on location. I had no idea. Story_ID: 278180 Speaker 1: Tell us about BADC. Speaker 2: The BADC is the, an acronym for the Black Anti-Defamation Coalition. In 1980, NBC decided to do a miniseries called 'Beulah Land,' and it was one of those antebellum South four-part miniseries. Ivan Dixon was one of the directors who, I'm per- I don't know whether through his agent or exactly how, but he was going to be, possibly, a director or one of the directors, and he got a script. And he was very upset by what he saw in the script, so he made a couple of copies. And at that time, there was an organization called Media Forum, and this was a group of actors, directors, producers, black, in the community who were dealing with issues in the industry. And so he got it to some Media Forum members. It continued to spread. The more people got it, the more people started Xeroxing the script, marking what, you know, need, needed to be dealt with. Out of this, was formed a protest to 'Beulah Land.' And this protest became an organization called the Black Anti-Defamation Coalition, which we, we called the BADC for short. And we were able to get actually, get NBC to reshoot a couple of scenes and to make some changes in this miniseries that made it not as bad as it was. Speaker 1: Can you give us an example, a specific example of something that-- Speaker 2: You know, it used to be I knew all of this right off the top of my, my tongue, and that--can, can I get the book for a second? I may be able to get something to kick in. But one of the things that happened--just give me one second (pause). Speaker 1: Probably pause a second again. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (PAUSE). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The 'Beulah Land' in BADC papers, a couple of excerpts from the original script: "After a few moments, the door opens and Dr. Porterfield [ph.] comes out looking exhausted. He said something to the slaves, and they're voices rise in protest and grief: 'Oh no, no, Ms. Deb., don't leave us. Oh, God, mercy, Lord, don't leave us.' The script contains numerous instances of black women happily, even voluntarily, giving their bodies to white enslavers. Nancy Clovis [ph.] and Floyd are black slaves. Leon [Kendrick] is the master heir apparent. Nell [Kendrick]: 'Stella [ph.], that lamp needs trimming.' As Sarah pulls her out the door say says, 'I'll fix it, ma'am,' pleasantly. The door shut. Stella smiles, goes, goes to the door and bolts it. Felix [Kendrick], who is the aging white invalid, with a brandy bottle under his arm, pulls the cork with his one good hand. Stella: she turns away from the door, gives him a big white-tooth smile and pulls her dress over her head." And so it continues. We had about ten or fifteen examples of scenes that were very specific, presenting slaves as being happy in their lot, protective of the master no matter what, black women wanting to be sex, used sexually by black men, and then some, some-- Speaker 2: By white men you mean, right? Speaker 1: By white men. And then some larger scenes which, I'm sorry, twenty-five years later I don't, I don't remember all of them. What happened was we were successful in getting some changes-- Speaker 2: What-- Speaker 1: --and that was the good part. How that played out was when the, when the miniseries actually aired, then people said, "Well, what were they so selt- all upset about? It isn't that bad." Because they didn't know what we had gotten changed, you know, we had dropped out. So, in a sense, it almost backfired on is us because we wanted to use, we wanted to get a movement and use this as the example. If we can change this and make things better, we can keep an organization going like this. But people, you know, they didn't quite get it, because it ended up not being as bad. It ended up not being as bad because of the changes that, you know, we got NBC to make. There was a lot of heat put on some of the actors who had accepted some of the roles. We made a, a, an organizational decision not to condemn them publicly, you know, not to put them on the spot. However, one of the actresses, Clarice Taylor, had her attorney call us and threaten to sue us for black, getting her blacklisted, or they figured we should at least--it had of been white listed (laughter) in this case. And then we never heard from them again. But the first correspondence we got was from the Jewish Anti-Defamation League, who, who, they were threatening to sue us for copyright infringement of the name. Speaker 2: Anti-Def, Defamation. Speaker 1: Ant-Defamation. Well, you know, I, I don't think we even, I know that we either answered them or, I know we had some discussion about answering them. I, I would have to look in the papers to see if we did that or not. But, at that time, we were literally having rent parties to maintain an office in the same building that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was in at Hollywood [Boulevard] and Vine [Street], you know, trying to make the rent. We were struggling to make the rent every month. So, like, you want to sue us, knock yourselves out. What are you gonna (laughter) take-- Story_ID: 278181 Speaker 1: Did the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], did [HistoryMaker] Willis Edwards or any of the people over there join in with you all on this? Speaker 2: We got some support from them, yes; we got some support from them. But as we got past 'Beulah Land' and we became a bona fide operating organization, we ran into other situations, such as the series 'Webster.' And 'Webster' was a series with the little boy who was, had no black parents and no black family, and he's taken in by a white family. And he became the third black child on television being represented that way, and we said this has got to stop. And unfortunately, at that time Willis was still with the NAACP, and Willis, rather than assisting us in our protest, went, led the NAACP in a campaign to get black writers for the show, while we were trying to get the show canceled. And he also took a kind of behind-the-scenes job doing some consulting with them. So there were a number of times where the NAACP unfortunately became more of an enemy to the work we were doing than, than a friend to it. And 'Webster' was one of those absolutely definite, you know, situations. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Webster' was a knockoff of the one with-- Speaker 2: 'Diff'rent Strokes.' Speaker 1: 'Diff'rent Strokes,' yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, yeah, 'Diff'rent Strokes.' But in between 'Diff'rent Strokes' and 'Webster,' there was another pilot that was made with a little girl who lived with a family, and it had aired a few times. And I don't know if it ever made it nationally, but we knew about it. And so that really made--for most people 'Webster' was the second one, but act, actually 'Webster' was the third one with children. We said we cannot continue to have our children being presented as nobody in the community takes care of them. Nobody takes care of them, so therefore they have to be taken care of by white people. This has got to stop, you know. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can, can we stop for one second? Speaker 2: (PAUSE). Speaker 1: Now, yeah, tell us about 'White Dog.' Speaker 2: Well, let me, let me just add, in terms of 'Webster,' that when I was talking about the NAACP, I was talking about the local NAACP. But through [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock, who is with the national NAACP, the national NAACP was giving us a different kind of support, and that was key. And then I also walked, worked with Paul Brock on a project called 'White Dog,' and he, and he, representing the NAACP and the BADC [Black Anti-Defamation Coalition], worked together. And this was a project that was done by a white director who is very popular in Europe for doing B movies. And 'White Dog' is a dog that has been trained to attack black people. And that, this was the story of, it was an actress, a white actress who is very supportive of the Panthers [Black Panther Party]. What was her name? And the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], because of her support of the Panthers, the FBI-- Speaker 1: I know it-- Speaker 2: --tried to blackmail her by putting, planting articles in the press that she was having a relationship with one of the Panthers when she wasn't. She was having a political support thing. And then she got pregnant, and they claimed it was, you know, a black baby and all this kind of stuff. I can't remember her name. But anyway-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I know it too, and I can't think-- Speaker 2: Yeah, this was all happening at the same time. And so, when we found out about 'White Dog,' I contacted Paul Brock, and I let him know. He had set up a meeting, and by now--this film was being done by Paramount [Pictures, Los Angeles, California], but by now Paramount is owned by Gulf and Western. And so Paul is meeting with Gulf & Western [Corporation; Gulf & Western Industries, Inc.] in New York [New York], and I'm meeting with some people out here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And there was an attorney who worked at one of these stations, one of these companies, who had a copy of the script. And I'm not gonna give his name, but bless his heart. We met at a restaurant. He got me the script, so we now had the actual factual thing we were looking at. We took the script. We got it out. I got it to where, you know, people that we knew would, would deal with it, and Paul was one of them. So Paul is in this meeting at Gulf, with, with Gulf and Western. And the head guy there is saying, "We're definitely gonna cancel this project. It's not gonna happen; in fact, it's been stopped." And I'm on the phone with this guy at Paramount, and I can hear the dogs barking, and the guy is in the editing room. We could hear the dog. I said, "Paul, they're editing the film right now. You can hear the soundtrack in the background." So they told us that it would never be released, but it was later released in Europe and I imagine eventually, you know, made its way back here. So, it, it never really stayed on the shelf 'cause they need, they wanted to get some of their money back, so. Speaker 1: That's--these--some of these stories are incredible. Story_ID: 278182 Speaker 1: Yeah, we also dealt-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with the issue of the Malcolm X story, because long before Spike Lee got involved, long while Spike Lee was in elementary school, the Malcolm X story was on the boards. The same producer who did a biog- an autobiography of Malcolm X, the documentary-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Martin--again, I can't remember his last name, Martin something [sic. Marvin Worth]. I should have read this book last night (laughter). Speaker 2: I know his name too. I, I know the name too, but I can't-- Speaker 1: Anyway, the same produced wanted to do the, the, a feature film, and he'd been trying to do it for years. So, the word comes down that it's now going to be done. Richard Pryor is going to play Malcolm, and-- Speaker 2: Richard Pryor? Speaker 1: Richard Pryor is gonna play Malcolm, and the white composer, Lalo Schifrin is gonna do the music, and the director is gonna be Lena Horne's ex-hus- Lena Horne's husband [sic.], Sidney, is that Sidney Lumet? Speaker 2: Lumet, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Lumet. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Sidney Lumet will direct. And we're like, the Malcolm X (laughter) story. And you have to understand that this comes down not too long after Richard had show up his wife's tires of his wife's car with the gun and had set his hair on fire and all this kind of craziness. And when he was in 'Lady Sings the Blues,' I discovered he was a wonderful actor. He was a good actor, but we really felt that his image was not the one we wanted portraying the Malcolm X story, so we had to go out and, and start a protest on that. The first move we made was to contact the family. And the answer that I got from Betty Shabazz and Attallah Shabazz was that they were very pleased with the autobiography of Malcolm, that Martin [sic. Marvin Worth] was a friend of the family, and that he had their permission to proceed in whatever way he wanted to. And so we met on that. We talked about it. And when I say we, by now we're a small core group because most people only wanted to come on board if there was a big issue to deal with. But the BADC [Black Anti-Defamation Coalition] was one of those organizations where some newspaper in New Orleans [Louisiana] could call me at six o'clock in the morning 'cause they've just got something come down the pike. I mean it's six o'clock here. It's nine o'clock there, and they want to know what our opinion is on ABC doing so and so and so. You know, so you have to jump out of bed and run and get the trades, and find out what are they talking about, you know, and deal with it. But we had, we had a couple of people representing the community, a couple of us representing the industry. We had a wonderful psychology- psychologist named Dr. Gareth Murray, who was representing the psychological aspect. And he had one a lot of research in the psychology of the media, and he was at US, he was a professor at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. And then, then we had the rest of the actors and artists who were there, you know, as a support team. And so anytime an issue came up, we would get together, and we would do the scenario, you know, if we get to meet with them, if we have to approach them, if we have to write a letter. They're gonna say so and so, and then Gareth would say well, okay, we'll say psychologically so and so, okay. They're gonna say this is just a bunch of unemployed actors, you know, complaining, so I will document blee, blee, blah, blah. They're gonna say so and so. So we played these, these mind, you know, word games back and forth, these scenes to anticipate what would be, what would be thrown back at us. So, when it got to 'White Dog,' we talked about that one. Which one was I on? I just lost my thought. Speaker 1: In the Malcolm (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, the Malcolm movie. So in the Malcolm movie we met and we decided even though the family had given this producer their blessings, that the community was not going to be in favor of Richard Pryor doing this role at this time. And so we started a national campaign. And what we had done is we had hooked up with various community groups that were dealing with image or dealing with media in key cities around the country. So, when anything went down, we had somebody in Dallas [Texas]. It was Third Eye in Dallas. There was a group in New York [New York]. There was a group in Chicago [Illinois]. There was a group in [Washington] D.C. that we could send stuff to, and we knew they would run with it. So very quickly we were able mount a campaign against Richard Pryor and the other, you know, Lalo Schifrin doing the music and all of that. And the project just faded back into the shadows for another, you know, ten or so years, until they did the piece ['Malcolm X'] with Denzel [Washington], same producer. Story_ID: 278183 Speaker 1: That's interesting. So, did you ever have a discussion with, with Mr. [Richard] Pryor about why-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --he would want to-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, we didn't. We did have a discussion with, another project came. Gary [Coleman], who played in 'Diff'rent Strokes,' the, before he went on that series, he had a movie of the week ['The Fantastic World of D.C. Collins'], and I was supposed to play his--was that the same one? Let me get my stories right. Anyway, it was a movie of the week with him. And he was a little boy who had all these heroes that he dreamed about. And he would go into the fantasies, and each of the heroes would kind of come to life. Well, he didn't have any black heroes. They were all white. He had John Wayne as a cowboy. He had some--they were all white, you know. So I--Robert, this Robert, this, this was being done by [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume's company. So we first called Robert, and Robert seemed to not have a problem with it. And we talked to his producer, and his producer, you know, was kind of in the same pocket. So we said okay. We went to the top. We didn't get the response we wanted. Now it's, you know, it's on; it's war. And so, what we ended up doing was we ended up getting them to change from John Wayne to Deadwood Dick [Nat Love]. And the wonderful Dr. [HistoryMaker] Mayme Clayton gave us a humongous poster of Deadwood Dick done by her son, the artist Avery Clayton, which we hand-delivered to the studio. And they actually reshot a scene. And to get a studio to reshoot a scene as they did, you know, a couple in 'Beulah Land' and to do for this show is just, I mean that's about the biggest victory you can get, because they, you know, it costs them too much money. They don't want to reshoot anything, and plus it's an admission that something was not right in the first place. But they did reshoot it (unclear) and they, they put the poster on the wall and put a little cup of something and where he makes a reference to, to Deadwood Dick, so he has at least one, one black--and I think they may have put a couple of other black basketball stars on the wall. And you know, re-shot the room a little bit, but I actually never saw the final, I don't think I ever saw the final picture, but somebody did. So those are the kind of things that we were, you know, engaged in. And there was always the debate, well, you know, why do we have to, you know, worry about our image? You know, we, our, you know, whatever, but, you know, we felt that it was affecting young people. And we always could go back to the psychology of what happens to you if you only see a certain kind of image of yourself in the media. Speaker 1: There was a, a play produced in Chicago [Illinois] written by [HistoryMaker] Useni Eugene Perkins called the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'Image Makers.' And I think what you all, I mean this whole situation speaks to the problem that we don't make our image in Hollywood. We don't have final say-so over the image, this image that's put on this huge screen and with a big sound behind it, stereo, and everybody looks at this, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's an overpowering image. We have no control over it, or very little. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So this is an attempt to try to at least check the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --powers that are making these images. Speaker 2: Right, right, and we had some--and we did it, we did not pick, we never picketed; you know, we never picketed. We, once in a while, held press conferences, and then we stopped doing that because it took about two years before they start--stopped calling us that disgruntled group of actors and writers and started referring to us by our name (laughter). You know, that alone took almost two years, you know, in the press. And I lost a lot of work from it, those of us who were involved who were actors: Arabella Chavers [Julien] was involved; Arnold, the late Arnold Bankston, late now. Arnold Bankston was involved; Nick LaTour; Sa, Suti Collier [ph.], Ero Collier [ph.], who's not even an actor. He's not in the industry, but he's an accountant who is a very strong political mind, had a lot of artists, you know, on his roster, and was very involved politically. Faruke, Earl Walter Faruke [ph.] was also representing the community. Earl and Suti had done children's albums, including black history and, and taking pop music and putting the alphabet to it and making products for families to use, black products for families to use. And so they very concerned, and so they were part of that core group that worked together, and we stayed together for five years. But like I said, it was you never knew what was coming at you. And any morning, if you get phone call, something happened, you know, that you had to deal with. And it just got to be really exhausting and stressful, and we needed more backup. And the community in general I think was getting very comfortable. You know, we had 'Good Times' on the air and '[The] Jeffersons' on the air, and so they, they were not responding politically the way they might have earlier, and so we finally just kind of threw in the hat. We discovered in the process that a lot of people because they saw black people on the screen, for example, in 'The Jeffersons,' that they just assumed that black people were in control of everything, and they assumed that all the writers would be black and all the directors and all the producers and all the folks making money would be black. So we had a lot of educating to do of the audience in the community about what was the reality behind the scenes and why they should be concerned. And it was, it was, it was a lot of work. I'm glad we did it, but I sure don't want to go through that again (laughter). Speaker 1: And how long did the organization last? Speaker 2: We lasted five years as the BADC [Black Anti-Defamation Coalition] plus the year or so that we put in with 'Beulah Land.' Story_ID: 278184 Speaker 1: Now you were, you formed another organization or, or with, or at least with part of the forming of something called Poets Pay Rent Too. Speaker 2: Poets Pay Rent Too is my own private literary company. And I try to support other writers and artists through that, sometimes just through cash grants, sometimes through publishing something, consultation, whatever I can do. And then I perform, I do a one-woman show sometimes with musicians, and I perform under Poets Pay Rent Too, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I guess during some of this, now you, you did get some work. You, you worked on a couple of soap operas too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: 'Bold and the Beautiful' [sic.] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'Knots Landing' is kind of a soap opera, a TV series or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Knots Landing' was a big series. I don't watch the soap operas, and so when I got that part, I didn't, I had no idea what was happening. And I was actually, I guess it was good for the part because it was one of those days when your agents call you and send you to Santa Monica [California]. And then they call back and say you have an audition twenty minutes later in the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California], and that's not possible. You can't, you know (laughter), that's simply not possible. But by the time I got to this (unclear) I was like one really pissed black woman, you know, and I didn't care, and I let it show, and they hired me (laughter), so. It was a storyline about a white couple had twins, and somebody had kidnapped the twins. And I was the nurse. And there were only two people left who knew where the twins were and how this happened, and I was one of them. So we had this scene one day when they kind of found out, somebody has found out that I know, and they're questioning me. And the, the, the script said oh, you know, I'm just, I'm just a, I'm poor, black, uneducated, divorced, former drug or something like that. I was like, oh my God, I'm not gonna be all of these things (laughter). So, when we're in the dressing room, and I wish I could remember the, the tall white actress that had black hair who was on, one of the leads on the series [Michele Lee]. This name thing is like a disease; it's a disease; forgetting names is a disease. Anyway, I mentioned it to them, and she said, she says, "You're absolutely right. I agree with you." She said, "But don't say anything in rehearsal. Wait till we get on the set in rehearsal in front of the director and the writer. Don't say anything in the, in the closed-room rehearsal." So I said, "Okay." So, we get in the, the middle of the, the large rehearsal, and I'm sitting there saying, "Yes, and you know, I'm just poor and black and I," I said, "Excuse me, but do I have to be all of these?" "What? What?" I said, "Do I have to be poor and black and former drug and--can I, how about two out of three or something like that?" "Oh, oh, well--," and you can see the nervous energy, right. But what I also felt was at that moment I felt her, the other actress, move forward and stand right behind me, and she just stood there and looked at them. And they said, "Well, okay, well, what do you want this to be?" I said, "Okay, how about I'm just like, like poor and, and, and divorced? And so, you know." And they went for it, and that was the change. So, you know, sometimes it's just a line or two that you gotta fight for, but you know, there's always a, there's always a fight for somethin', yeah. Story_ID: 278185 Speaker 1: Yeah, it was all those descriptions like, like a, like hammer blows, hammering you down (laughter), poor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --black, drugs. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right. We did a, an actress named Marilyn Coleman and I did a Betty Crocker commercial once. And basically it was, we had this line like, "Even my Henry doesn't know," meaning, like, he thinks it's a real cake, but I've used the Betty Crocker cake mix, and even he doesn't know. And so we do the audition. We get the part. We get on the set. And Marilyn and I are I the dressing room, and I said you know, this is like putting down, we're, we're both saying--I don't know which one of us said it first--like putting down another black man, like he's too dumb to know or putting something over on him. We agreed. She said well, let's try to play around this. So we get on the (laughter) set, and it's like, "Even my Henry doesn't know." Cut, no, I want to: "Even my Henry," da--cut. About take seventeen the director was like, "You're not giving me what you gave me in the audition." And Marilyn's, you know, we're like, "Hold on, hold on, if we can just get through this day." And so we managed--finally, he just, he couldn't figure out why we weren't giving him what he had in the audition, which was that, that reading that would have put down, you know, the husband. And we got out of there, you know, with a, with a reading that was not the one they wanted. But they had no choice because we never gave it to 'em. But that's because we came to together, and we decided to team up and, and hold down the fort (laughter), so. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had, you had a reoccurring role on 'Knots Landing' and 'St. Elsewhere' too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, not much to say about that except that Denzel [Washington] was on that series, and that was good. And there were Eric [Laneuville], not Eriq La Salle, the other Eric, the short Eric was doing some directing at that time, yeah. So the same producer of 'St. Elsewhere' was the same producer who did 'Welcome Back, Kotter.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--not, no, not 'Welcome Back, Kotter.' What was the thing about the white basketball teacher with a black team? Speaker 1: Oh, 'The White Shadow,' 'The White Shadow.' Speaker 2: 'White Shadow,' the 'The White Shadow,' not 'Welcome Back, Kotter,' 'The White Shadow,' yeah. Story_ID: 278186 Speaker 1: Okay, now you were involved in a lot of publication work in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --seventies [1970s] and '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You helped Robert [Earl] Price produce 'Blood Lines.' That's one, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I published 'Blood Lines.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not to be confused with the big novel, 'Bloodlines,' but Robert E. Price's collection of short stories and poetry, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have--he loved his work. And his wife at that time and I were best friends. And he was so shy, so shy about his work that it would be laying somewhere on his sofa. Actually, actually that's how I discovered his work. I was trying to sit down, and this thing was on his sofa, and I picked it up. And it was poetry, and I started to read it, and like, "Who wrote this?" And she's like, "Robert." I'm like, whoa, and that's how I realized what a powerful writer he was, and yeah. I was making a lot of money doing commercials then, so I would put it into projects. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You said a lot of, lot of poetry was published in the '70s [1970s] I guess. Yeah, a lot of--and now it's coming back, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --there, there was a time that it was like, almost like you couldn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --get one published. Then Media Matters, now what was that about? Speaker 2: Media Matters was the newsletter of the Black Anti--Anti-Defamation Coalition [Black Anti-Defamation Coalition (BADC)]. And what we did was to, because we couldn't deal with everything directly, but a lot of things had been coming down the pike, we put out this newsletter, and did most of the writing. And Robert Price, whom I didn't mention, Robert Price was the other key person in the Black Anti-Defamation Coalition. I, I don't want to leave Robert out. Robert and Arabella [Chavers Julien]--Robert would do a lot of the research on it and feed it to me. Helen Miller [ph.], another writer, was involved. And we would get this out and would be--at that time we didn't have email, so we would fax and mail out these tidbits of other things that were happening and then hopefully people would pick up on them, you know, mention them in radio shows, mention them in their community, community meetings and things, so. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is very important here, and I think you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you brought a copy with you, the Directory of Black Film/TV Techni-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Technicians and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and Artists ['1980 Directory of Black Film/TV Technicians and Artists, West Coast']. Speaker 2: Right. That's the one where I told you that Alex Haley had loaned me the money for it. So this-- Speaker 1: And there's a picture of the beautiful edition right here (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear) happening. The U.S., West Coast-- Speaker 1: Hold it up for a second. This is, since we have it (laughter), okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: But that's a, a tool that people can use to-- Speaker 2: This was a tool, right this was--I don't know if I put anything in here about it, but there are over three hundred black people working behind the scenes in this book. Nothing had, like this had ever been compiled before. And what was important was that it lists not only how to contact them if they're in a union, what their primary skill is; what their secondary skills are; references so that if somebody wants to say, you know, who did you work with; credits - we would list up to 10 or 12 credits and any awards that they received. And I was determined to go from A to Z, and the closest to thing to Z was W, which was a black wrangler. And, and a wrangler is a person who works with the animals, particularly horses, and I actually found a black wrangler who was in the book. There were some people who did not want to be in the book. They didn't want to be in anything all black, and that was interesting. But there were also people who came and volunteered their time. Hal Williams was doing a series on one of the lots at that time, and he took bunches of applications. And he said I will make sure that every black person on this lot fills this out and gets it back to me, and he did. I knew that some white people would try to get into the book, so we had a checking system. Everybody had to be verified by somebody on our list, either Ivan Dixon, Charles Floyd Johnson [HistoryMaker Charles F. Johnson], [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock; three or four other people we knew had to know you, Hal Williams, somebody; they had to know you, because you couldn't be in this town and be working and one of them, those five or six people didn't know you. And I, we did have a couple of white people who tried to get into, you know, filled out the applications, tried to get into the book. But I think it covers about thirty-some different categories. I remember when we took the book when it was finally finished, we had a, a wonderful party. We actually finished it at my hou- my apartment the night before the premier party, 'cause the pre- the printer had printed some pages backwards (laughter). And so I said we have to have at least three hundred copies of the premier party. And so there were, there were a slew of people who came to my house, around fourteen or fifteen of them, and they worked through the night. And they turned these pages around, put this binding in by hand on the covers to get these books ready for the party. Story_ID: 672154 Speaker 1: So, I am the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Today is February 26th, 2018. We are in Los Angeles [California], at the offices of Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP], and we are here with [HistoryMaker] S. Pearl Sharp. Speaker 2: Who's cleaning her glasses. Excuse me. Speaker 1: And this is a continuation interview. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So thank you for being back with us (laughter). Speaker 2: Thank you for having me back. Story_ID: 672155 Speaker 1: And I, I want to go backwards before we go forwards. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You, you had talked quite a bit about the organization BAD-C that you co-founded. Can you tell me what does BAD-C stand for again? Speaker 2: The Black Anti-Defamation Coalition. Speaker 1: And you founded it in? Speaker 2: We, we started--we founded it in 1980, but the work that produced it started around late '79 [1979], when NBC had a, a script come out for a four part series called 'Beulah Land.' And Ivan Dixon was one of the people who was possibly gonna direct one of the segments, so he had the script, and it was, like, three hundred some pages. And at that time, there was an organization called Media Forum, which many of the leading black producers and actors and directors were members of. And so through Media Forum, we found out that this was--there were scenes in this that were just not acceptable, and we began to pro- protest 'Beulah Land.' And as that was going on, we realized that we really needed to have an organization that could monitor other things that were happening, in terms of images of black in the industry. And that's how the BAD-C, as we came to be known, was formed. And we made alliances with other organizations that had the same concerns around the country, Third World Alliance [ph.] in Atlanta [Georgia] and--I'm sorry--in, in Dallas [Texas], and African Cinema Society [ph.] in Atlanta and one in San Francisco [California], and other organizations that we would a--be able to get the word out that way, 'cause this is, you know, before Internet (laughter). Story_ID: 672156 Speaker 1: And so if we look in context, we were talking a little earlier about the Civil Rights Movement--and, and so we're going back even further--and how the Civil Rights Movement impacted opportunity for black people, not just actors, but all the different roles in Hollywood. Can you, can you give us some context about that? Speaker 2: As an actor, I know that I benefited from the Civil Rights Movement because there was a call for us to be seen more on the screen. So I definitely know that I benefited. I don't know if, if directors and producers benefited as much. But I do recall I was the first black Avon lady, and it came about because Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] made a call for advertising agencies to hire more blacks behind the scenes. Ogilvy Mather [Ogilvy and Mather] was the very first advertising agency to say, "Yes, we'll work with you on this." And Avon [Avon Products Inc.] was one of their products, so Avon products and Ogilvy Mather worked together with Jesse Jackson. But what happened was, it was a union thing, where a lot of blacks who had the skills and had the credits had not been allowed into the unions. And what happens with the unions, you have to work X number of days in order to get credited. So, many hairdressers, camera people, all tech people, they'd get right up to the day before and then they'd get released. That been--had been happening for, for many years. So, all of the white union members and white crew members showed up and stood around on the set watching all of the black members doing their jobs. And (laughter) so you literally had two sets of crews in this room, and it was very intense. It was very inten- we shot for two days. Speaker 1: And when was this? Speaker 2: It would had to have been in around early '70s [1970s], somewhere between '70 [1970] and '75 [1975] I think that that happened. Speaker 1: And were you aware of the work that Jesse Jackson was doing before this-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Were you involved at all? Speaker 2: I wasn't involved, no, because they were in Chicago [Illinois] and you know, I was in New York [New York] and then Los Angeles [California]. In--when we did 'Beulah Land,' I was here in Los Angeles. And-- Speaker 1: So, but, so 'Beulah Land' is now about ten years later than, than that first ad, right? Speaker 2: About, yes, about, less, maybe a little less than ten years. Speaker 1: Little less than ten? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, even though Jesse Jackson with Operation PUSH, it was headquartered in Chicago. He--this was targeting Hollywood, right? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, because many people in the Civil Rights Movement were saying, "We're not being seen in the entertainment industry. We're not being seen on screen, and we're only being seen as the bad guys, as the crooks, as the drug addicts, the drug dealers, the pimps." And so there was a, you know, really a move to, to change that. I think, as a, as a woman, I think the women got more play as mothers, teachers, judges, doctors, nurses than black men did. They, they tended and want, to want to keep the black men--as they're doing now. I mean, how--you know the commercials now, you very often see it's the, the hoodie; it's the, the, the hood look. And you go into auditions, and they say, "Can you be more black please?" (Laughter) Like (laughter), so--unfortunately that's still happening today. Speaker 1: Well I, I mentioned to you I had interviewed [HistoryMaker] Charles Weldon, and he talked about his acting roles during this, that time in the early '70s [1970s]. And he had been the bad guy, whether it was the pimp or the drug dealer-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, the criminal, and that he said he, he was in L.A. and heard Jesse Jackson on television saying we need to have more positive images of black people and black men. And the unintended consequence he said he had was that he stopped getting roles. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember him during that period? Speaker 2: Yes, I knew him. I knew him from Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 672157 Speaker 1: Who were some of the other actors who, black actors who were working when you first came to Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: Well, I actually came out with a lot of actors who had been in Al Fann acting ensemble [Al Fann Theatrical Ensemble]. And that grew out of the HARYOU-ACT poverty program [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Excuse me--(clears throat). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So I was working with a lot of actors who came out who had been in Al Fann and company, which grew out of the HARYOU-ACT program, so Vernee Watson [Vernee Watson-Johnson], [HistoryMaker] Adam Wade, who became the first black actor to host a game show ['Musical Chairs'], Lawrence Hilton-Jacobs, Tamu [Tamu Blackwell], who was in--I just watched it the other night. [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll and [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, and they have all the children ['Claudine']. Speaker 1: Oh, man. Speaker 2: Oh, I just-- Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: It'll come to me. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It'll come to me--yeah, but Tamu--so all of us came out and we got work because there was an opening for black actors. But they also wanted actors who had acting--theater experience more than just television experience. So it is a very exciting period because you had 'Good Times,' you had 'The Jeffersons,' you had 'Sanford and Son.' And you had other dra- dramatic pieces being done, and so there was work for us out here. Speaker 1: And this was in the early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: This was '74 [1974], '75 [1975]. Most--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Mid-'70s [1970s]--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: --most of us came around out in--I came out in '75 [1975]. Some of them came out in '74 [1974]. Story_ID: 672158 Speaker 1: So before you came, you were--what was the work that you were doing in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: I was doing a lot of commercials. I was doing a lot of voiceover, and I was doing theater. I did--I was in the chorus of Pearl Bailey's company of 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart]. I was in 'Black Girl' [J.E. Franklin], which Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] produced. I was in 'Young, Gifted and Black' ['To Be Young, Gifted and Black'], one of my favorite pieces, by Lorraine Hansberry. Speaker 1: And where was that performed? Speaker 2: 'Young, Gifted and Black,' I didn't--I was understudying, I was understudying someone who was doing it in the regular theater. And I did it for, for a week at a--in a Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] production. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Black Girl' was at the Theatre de Lys [Lucille Lortel Theatre] down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. And-- Speaker 1: And 'Hello, Dolly!'? Speaker 2: 'Hello, Dolly!' on Broadway. Speaker 1: It was. Speaker 2: It was on the Saint--oh, yes, absolutely. She, she replaced Carol-- Speaker 1: --Channing. Speaker 2: --Chan- Carol-- Speaker 1: Carol-- Speaker 2: --Carol (unclear), Carol-- Speaker 1: Channing. No--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Carol Channing. Speaker 2: Yes, Carol Channing, right--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Yeah, Carol Channing. Story_ID: 672159 Speaker 1: This was early in your career when you were on Broadway. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I actually left 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart] to go do 'The Learning Tree,' Gordon Parks' film, because I remember they called up. I had auditioned, and they called up and he said, "We are, we're calling from Warner Bros. [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc.], and we're flying you out for a screen test. And your flight is on Friday." And I said, "Oh, I can't go. I'm in 'Hello, Dolly!' I have a show." And they said, "Dear, we've already taken care of that. We've already talked to the producers. You'll be in the plane on Friday" (laughter). I was like, ah (laughter). Speaker 1: What was it like to work with [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks? Speaker 2: Incredibly wonderful. Working with Gordon Parks was probably one of the highlights of my career. First of all, who he is, he's definitely a renaissance man. There was a lot of pressure on him because he was the first black to direct a feature film for a major studio. And so, we'd get up. We'd come out in the morning, there'd be these guys in, you know, suits and ties who were just flown in, you know, from Los Angeles [California]. And, and they'd put their arm around Gordon's Park, Parks' shoulder, you know, and they'd take a walk. So we came out one day, and on Gordon's trailer, on the board, there was a sign, like--he said, "Take your hand off my shoulder and stop giving me advice." And nobody said anything. We just went (laughter)--and we just, like, laughed all day. And then we stopped seeing the suits, as we (laughter) called them. They stopped coming out. But on that show he did a lot to help break the union problem. There were fif- ten or fifteen people on the crew who, as I said earlier, had been trying to get into the union, had it been stopped. So he broke that. He fought some of the unions to get them in. And he was a very calm, just cool, you know, very--only one time I saw him go off, and he was totally justified. So just to watch him work and to see his vision be manifest and, and, and to see everybody pulling together, was the sense, we got to make this work. I remember there was a really intricate scene that we shot on the water. And it was supposed to be a picnic, but it was freezing cold down there. And so they were spraying the trees green, and the roosters were getting in the paint. And we had blankets that we had to sit on as soon as they wanted to shoot. And then, as much as work as that took, somebody scratched the film at the lab. So that scene isn't in, you know, in--yeah. So that kind of thing was happening. There was, there was sabotage happening all around. And so everybody who was on it was committed. We got to make this work. We got to make this work. And I had a very tiny, tiny part, you know. Speaker 1: Did you interact with him directly at all? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. We got to be friends. We got to be friends. When I was doing my book, 'Black Women for Beginners' [S. Pearl Sharp and Beverly Hawkins Hall], I wanted one of his photos. And I told my publisher, I said, "There are, there are five photos I want in the book. I'll take care of these," 'cause I knew if he called they'd--he'd get agents. It wouldn't happen. I called, "Gordon, hi, this is Prissy [HistoryMaker S. Pearl Sharp]. Let me ask you something." He's, "Yeah," he says, "you got it." He says, "If you got to my agents they're gonna say no." He says, "Go ahead and use it." So we had that wonderful kind of relationship, you know, through the years, yeah. Speaker 1: As a young actor in 'The Learning Tree,' you said you observed him a lot. What do you feel that you learned about your craft from observing him? Speaker 2: Well, for one thing, there was a funeral scene (laughter). My mother [Faythe McIntyre Sharp] has passed. And when they started shooting, I'm crying of course, not realizing the, the camera is like a block away. You know, and then the camera's close in, okay. By the time they get to close-up on Prissy, I have nothing left. So when Gordon looked at me. He says, "Okay, can we get some tears on Prissy?" I just wanted to die. I just wanted to die because I was--you know, I wasn't fulfilling my part. So then I began to watch in a different way, you know, what the crew was doing and how that affected me, you know, as an actor. Speaker 1: Well, because you had come from the theater-- Speaker 2: I came from theater, right. Speaker 1: --which is very different. Speaker 2: Very different, very different (simultaneous). Speaker 1: So you're now learning about how shots are framed. Speaker 2: Right, right, and it's one thing to be an extra, you know, where you're just always in the background. It's another thing to have a small part when they are gonna do a close up on you, you know. And you need to know what to do. Story_ID: 672160 Speaker 1: But may I share the story of my audition? Speaker 2: Please. Speaker 1: I don't know if I talked about this before. But everybody was auditioning for the role of Prissy in 'The Learning Tree,' the, the younger sister. And I've always looked a little younger than I am, and so I know that, you know, I want this part and I can't get an audition. And other actors who know me were saying, "You, you, you went up for 'Learning Tree,' didn't you?" And I'm like, "I can't an audi-"--(unclear)--"I went up--I was sitting there thinking, you should be playing this part; this is your part." I couldn't get an audition. So finally, about, I think it's like the next to last day that Gordon, or the last day he's auditioning people. An agent, who only called me once in a while, called up and said, "My client, would you do me a favor?" And I said, "What's the favor?" And she said, "My client"--Becky [ph.] or Deborah [ph.], whatever her name is--"had an audition for 'The Learning Tree,' but she had to go to Cleveland [Ohio]. And I'm wondering if you could go over and pretend to be her." I--"Sure," (laughter), "sure, I can, I can do that." And so I fixed my hair. I said I'm--I know a lot of people who come with Afro puffs or something. Let me do another style. I had long hair then. And I remember how my mother [Faythe McIntyre Sharp] had, you know, worn her hair when she was little--when she was young. And so I did that, put a little bow in the back. And I went in, and when I walked into the receptionist and said, "I'm here to audition for [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks," I saw something happen in her face, you know, kind of gave me a clue. So I go into an audition. Gordon's very calm. I read the scene, he says, "That was very good, but these are the worst goddamn pictures I have ever seen." And he takes my pictures and he tears the up into four parts and hands them back to me (laughter). And what had happened is I had decided to stop playing teenage and young roles. And I was gonna be this sophisticated woman, and so I got these sophisticated woman photos. And that's when I--that's all I had to bring in (laughter). And so he tore up my photos and handed them back to me. And I just wanted to like, leave the room under the rug or something. And I called my mother. She said, "How did it go?" I said, "It's went terrible." She said--(unclear)--"He taped--he tore up my picture." She said, "Don't worry, darling; it'll be all right." I said, "No, no, no, I'll never work again." "It's gonna be"--"No, you don't understand. This is Gordon Parks. This is the most important photographer in the world. I'll never work again" (laughter). Speaker 2: And how long before you got the part? Speaker 1: Was a few months, was a few months before the screen--they called it a screen test. Speaker 2: So you didn't think that you had it. Speaker 1: Oh, I knew I didn't. I thought, literally thought I would never work again. I mean, I was done. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: You know, I went back to 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart] (laughter) and I was like, this'll probably be it, you know, be in the chorus, you know, for the rest of my life (laughter), so. Story_ID: 672161 Speaker 1: When did you work on 'Our Street'? Speaker 2: That was in the first half of the '70s [1970s], like '72 [1972], '70 [1970], '72 [1972], I think was 'Our Street' (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And that was filmed in Baltimore [Maryland], right? Speaker 2: Was filmed at the PBS station [Maryland Center for Public Broadcasting; Maryland Public Television] in Maryland-- Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: --in Owings Mills, Maryland. Speaker 1: Yeah, tell me about 'Our Street.' Speaker 2: 'Our Street' was the fir- I believe the first black family drama that PBS produced. And it screened, not only in Baltimore, it screened all along the East Coast and sometimes as far across the country as Chicago [Illinois]. It never went beyond Chicago. And it was a family drama. And it had already been in progress when something happened with the actor playing the daughter, and so they asked me to come in. And most of us actually lived in New York [New York], and we would take the train down to Baltimore. And we would rehearse for two days, and we would film for two days. And it was a wonderful experience. And we had, you know, just developed this relationship around the show. Speaker 1: And Howard Rollins was in that show, correct? Speaker 2: Howard Rollins was in it. It was his first television work. Speaker 1: And he was from Baltimore, right? Speaker 2: He was? I don't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --remember. Speaker 1: Think so. Speaker 2: I don't remember. Barbara Mealy played the mother [Mae]. Where is my cheat sheet? Speaker 1: And what was your, what was your role? Speaker 2: I played the sister [Cathy]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember my name. But I also sold my very first television script to the show. I wrote one episode of the show, and-- Speaker 1: Great. Speaker 2: --and they filmed it, yeah. Story_ID: 672162 Speaker 1: And so you, you said it was two days of rehearsal, two days of shooting [for 'Our Street']. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And how did you get to Howard in the midst of that? Speaker 2: Well, what happened, we had so much free time. Like, we might rehearse in the morning; we'd have the afternoon off. And I had been a member of John Oliver Killens' writing workshop in New York [New York]. Killens was teaching one or two days a week at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. So I would just take a bus from Baltimore [Maryland] into Howard. And I would audit it--audited his class. And at that time, Eloise Greenfield was in the class, the children's author. Rosa Guy was in the class working on her first children's book ['The Friends']. And a number of other authors who went on to become, you know, very, very prominent and very published were in that class. Speaker 1: What were you working on at that time? Do you know? Speaker 2: I don't remember what I was working on then. Speaker 1: Talk about working and learning from John Oliver Killens. Speaker 2: Wonderful. John would--we had a class at Columbia University [New York, New York] and it was sitting around the table. You come in. You bring in your work. He taught us something that I use whenever I'm working with writers now, and that is, in terms of receiving criticism, take notes, don't, don't respond, just write everything down, go home, use what you can use, discard the rest. Those were his words, use what you can use, discard the rest. And that is been my mantra, you know, to work. He allowed us to bring anything into class. We had open political discussions. If there were periods of time when Columbia wasn't available, we went down to Brooklyn [New York] and we sat on his floor. Speaker 1: But now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And we had class (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --at Howard, what--was it similar at, at Howard? Speaker 2: At Howard it was a little different because it was a classroom situation where people were taking class for credit. The one at Columbia was, was like a community service that Columbia offered, that for many years he had this workshop. We met once a week. Arthur Pra--Arthur Flowers was in that class, Fa- Fatimah [ph.], the poet. Wesley Brown published--wrote his first novel ['Tragic Magic: A Novel'] in that class. Another brother--two other brothers--I can't remember--wrote their first novels and got published. So it was serious work. It was serious work (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And so, while he was the continuum, Killens, from when you were at Columbia and then at Howard, what was it like for you being on Howard's campus? Because hadn't--you're--where you went to undergrad was-- Speaker 2: I went Bowling Green State [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what was Howard like for you? Speaker 2: I really, I didn't get the sense that much of being on the campus. I mean, you know immediately you're in, you're in black territory (laughter), you know. You know where The Fish and Grill [ph.] is down the street? (Laughter) But pretty much I was like, come in, find the class-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --do the class. And I had more, more time to spend time at Howard later on when I would come back to do readings or I would come back--I would be in Washington, D.C. for something, and there might be something happening on campus, when Haile Gerima was, you know, was teaching there and, and I had a number of chan- chances to visit the campus then. Story_ID: 672163 Speaker 1: So you did 'Our Street' for--couple of seasons. Is that right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah-- Speaker 1: And this is-- Speaker 2: --until we got canceled. We got canceled by PBS [Maryland Center for Public Broadcasting; Maryland Public Television]. Speaker 1: Do you know why? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't re- if I knew, I don't remember. But I remember we were incensed, and people were writing letters--excuse me--(clears throat)--people were writing letters asking that it not be, you know--(clears throat)--excuse me. Come out if you're coming out, come on (laughter). I don't know why we got canceled. I just know people were writing letters, and there was a campaign to keep it on, and-- Speaker 1: Because this is the early '70s [1970s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is what--like, in 1970, that's when Essence was founded and Black Enterprise. And there was this groundswell of claiming our culture. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then you say 'Our Street' was the first black family drama-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --on--series on--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure it was. Topper Carew was doing-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And I'm not sure how those, those years coincided. But I think the 'Our Street' came before Topper Carew's family drama. Speaker 1: But he was one of the people-- Speaker 2: He became-- Speaker 1: --creating content at that time. Speaker 2: --PBS's [Public Broadcasting Service] golden boy, yes. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you ever work with him? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: On what? Speaker 2: I did. I worked with him on a couple of the family things he was doing. I think I did little bit of acting extra, but I also had a script of--a series of--was it a--it was a, it was kind of a movie of the week for, for children, and he optioned it. And it was about a little boy who is in a foster care home. And I was all excited, and then what happened is the--some people came in and said, "Well, you know, that's not legal. That can't happen. Well, that, you know, that can't happen with a foster care person." I'm like, that's not the point of this story. There's a little imagination that happens in the story. And he couldn't, you know, he couldn't fight them around that, and so it, it never happened. I'm still trying to sell that script (laughter). Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: I still believe in it, yeah. Story_ID: 672164 Speaker 1: What did you do after 'Our Street'? Do you remember? You were still in New York [New York] then. This is before you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Right. I think the last thing I did was--was it min- no, I did 'Minstrel Man' after I--I was still living in New York, but I'd come out to L.A. for, for a break, when I got 'Minstrel Man.' Then I went back to New York, and I tried to be bicoastal. That means you have to have work on both coasts. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And that wasn't happening (laughter), so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Well, and even 'Minstrel Man' was filmed in Mississippi, right? Speaker 2: It was, yeah. Yes, it was. Speaker 1: Had you been to the Deep South before working on that film? Speaker 2: No, I had not. No, I had not, so I was not prepared for stepping into a hotel and having Confederate flags on the cup and Confederate napkins (laughter) in the bathroom. Was like, ooh. But we had, we had a little racial stress right when filming began, you know, so it, it was, it was kind of tense the whole time we were there. And, and glu- Glynn [Glynn Turman] had kind of warned me. He said, "You know, we all have to be on guard because there are people who don't want to see this film made. And we'll--," basically what Glynn said is, "The, the magnolia trees and the moss is still hanging down there," which meant, you know, the lynchings, the history of the lynchings; that, that atmosphere was still there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And there was a lynching in the film. Speaker 2: Yes, there was. And we were filming the lynching. I was watching the lynching. They were filming it, but I was in--(clears throat)--I think I was in my costume because they were gonna film my response. And another actor was with me, and a lot of townspeople were gathered around watching. Speaker 1: These are not extras. These are the actual townspeople. Speaker 2: These are the actual townspeople. And one very tall, large white gentleman in a cowboy hat called over across the crowd to another and, "Hey, (unclear), how you doing?" Yeah, um-hm, "Taking them a lot longer than it took us," um-hm. Snatch, the AD [assistant director] snatched us so fast out of there when that sentence floated across the (laughter) room, back to the trailers. Nobody leaves the set, you know, so. Speaker 1: So you got to see--a taste of what the previous generation had experienced on a regular basis. Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, that was such a, you know, such a, a tiny taste, but yeah. Story_ID: 672165 Speaker 1: Did you ever work in the Deep South again? Speaker 2: I never worked there. I went there once accompanying Beah Richards, but I, I never worked there again, yeah. Speaker 1: When did you work with Beah Richards? Speaker 2: I knew Beah because of her incredible work at Inner City [Los Angeles Inner City Cultural Center, Los Angeles, California] as an actress, and a couple of times I had gone back to talk, you know, with her. I didn't--(clears throat)--I didn't know her, you know, personally. But then in '92 [1992], when we had the big earthquake, what they called a Northridge earthquake, her house shifted off of its foundation, so she had to, to leave. And she was staying with different actors from time to time. And I don't know quite how it happened, but somehow I ended up connecting with her on the day she was moving a lot of her clothes back into her house. And I said, "I got a car. I'll get you." And we started to talk and helped her unload, and we became friends. And through the months, I realized that she wanted to do a book, but she didn't want to do--you know, this happened Hollywood. This happened in Hollywood. She didn't want to do that kind of book. And Beah is an intellectual and very much a philosopher, extremely well read. And everybody who came to her class knew that you did not come to your class without a dictionary. She always made you go back to the word, back to the root word. I would study privately with, with Beah when I was--she was coaching me with something, and we may take two hours to get through two sentences. It was that intense. So I started working with dictionaries and bringing in different kind of dictionaries as we began to talk. When she went to do the test week for 'Beloved,' when she, when she--whoa, let me back up a bit. For 'Beloved,' they--she--they--she was considered as the actor in 'Beloved,' to play Baby Suggs. A couple of their actors are being considered. And she and Jonathan Demme had not met yet. He was the director. So at one point, they sent her a new script. And the white writers of the script had taken out the scene in 'Beloved' that Toni [Toni Morrison] wrote about love yourself, love your body, love your liver, love your lungs, all of that. And she looked at that, and she said, "I wanted to do this role because I wanted to take a message to my people for the 21st century. But they've taken this out. I'm not doing it. I'm, I'm, I'm through." And I said, "Beah, let's not let it go that fast." I said, "Let your agent know what you're upset about." "Eh." I said, "Now, come on." I said, "Tomorrow call your agent. Let them know what you're upset about." So she did, and then she got the part. And she said when she went in to meet Jonathan Demme, he opened the door and he said, "Oh, Ms. Richards, it's so good to meet you. And we put it back in; we put it back in" (laughter). Speaker 1: Very good. Speaker 2: Very good. So Beah had serious emphysema. And she also felt that maybe she shouldn't try to do the part because of her health, but we said, you know, "You can do this." So we went away. Down near San Diego [California] there's a health retreat. We went there for a week. And then there was a prep week in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], where they were shooting the film, where they tested the dog; they tested the costumes; they tested everything. And I went with her during that week. And the first two days we were there it was rain. So we're in this huge apartment, and that's when we started talking. That's when I started recording her talking about her life and the things that she wanted to say in this book. And it became a collection of essays-- Speaker 1: Beautiful. Speaker 2: --where she's talking about the role of women; she's talking about racism; she's talking about growing up in Mississippi; talking about her first theater encounters and what it meant to, to know that people saw her as unattractive, you know, black, short, dark, nappy hair, and how she had to learn how to push through that and open doors. And, and so through that--from these dialogues and conversations, we began to develop the book. And I called it 'There's a Brown Girl in the Ring' [Beah Richards and S. Pearl Sharp] because when Beah was happy about something, she'd get out her tambourines. And she had this record from this Caribbean group called Exuma. And her favorite song on the record ['Reincarnation'] was "There's a Brown Girl in the Ring" ["Brown Girl"] and it was always on her record player. And she'd put that on, and we'd get our tambourines and we, every--whoever was there would dance. We'd just dance around and sing this song (laughter). Speaker 1: That's great. Story_ID: 672166 Speaker 1: So Beah Richards, you--when, when she was preparing for 'Beloved,' that was what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997] I think was when they tested, and, and then they shot later that year. Speaker 1: And were, were you there with her when she was actually shooting? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I only went for the, for the one week of prep. Speaker 1: And you, you mentioned that she was dealing with the fact that she knew that people were not thinking that she was beautiful based upon how she looked. How--what did she say about that? Speaker 2: I think that was the source of her spirit, because she said that her family always taught her that she was of value, that she was precious. It was only when she stepped outside her door that she got a different view of herself. So she started studying acting I believe in San Diego [California] and went to the Old Globe [Old Globe Theatre] and again, trying to get roles in a situation like that. She also studied dance. I think she had studied with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham or at least she studied the Dunham technique. So she had so much to offer that what happened, I think people eventually, you know, they saw that. She pushed through that, but it is difficult to always have to push through that kind of--we see you coming and, and we've already dismissed you, you know, kind of approach. But she talks about opening doors. She talks about believing in herself. And she talks about understanding the source of her family as, as the root of her self confidence through her belief in herself. And she talks about her mother being able to do anything. She said she could go into the white stores where they weren't allowed to try on the clothes. She would look very closely at the clothes and go home and make a pattern and make whatever she saw in that store. So her family was, you know, very grounding, grounding for her. And when she came to Los Angeles [California] from San Diego--and this is a very interesting story. I'll talk later about Frances Williams [Frances E. Williams]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Frances Williams had a house in Los Angeles. And there were two little cottages on the front. And at one point Beah Richards was staying in one, and [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou was staying in the other. So there was this vortex (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --of energy on, on this corner. But that's when she became involved with the James Baldwin piece, 'Amen Corner' ['The Amen Corner'], and went to New York [New York] thinking, she said, that it would probably just last a couple of weeks. And-- Speaker 1: And how long did it last? Speaker 2: 'Amen Corner' became a hit on Broadway, became a-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --history making, groundbreaking, yeah, piece. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Story_ID: 672167 Speaker 1: Image, the image of black people in film and television is something that--you, you've been in it as an actor but also as an activist. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: In your years of being in the industry, especially in the early years, what--who were the people getting work, you know, and, and what did they look like? Because we know that that's always been a point of interest, let's say (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah. I think prior to the Civil Rights Movement, they were mostly very light skinned blacks. Hal DeWindt, you know, worked a lot. They were models, actors, and they could look like maybe they were white. What happened, and Ron O'Neal is the perfect example of this, is that once the Civil Rights Movement call was responded to, that we see ourselves on screen, they wanted people who looked really black, unidentify- what I called unidentifiably black. So even-- Speaker 1: Undeniably-- Speaker 2: Undeniably black. Speaker 1: Undeniably, right. Speaker 2: Right, undeniably black. So even if you came into an audition speaking the way I speak, they might want you to sound more black because this, this kind of stereotype had come in. What happened was, then very light skinned workers--actors could not get a job. So when 'Super Fly' came along for Ron O'Neal, it was like, you know, it was amazing gift for him because he had not been able to get work because he was one of the very light skinned actors. So, it's, to me it's always been ironic because the class distinction that we have always had inside the black community, the brown paper bag test, the, you know, you're too dark, you're too light then became a tool that the industry used. And we became kind of the unwitting victims of that, so. Speaker 1: Well, did we create the paper bag test? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not sure about that. Speaker 2: I know we, but I know we-- Speaker 1: We followed it. Speaker 2: --we continued it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We continued it. We made it manifest. Speaker 1: Now for you, did you find yourself being considered light skinned or brown depending upon where you-- Speaker 2: Depending-- Speaker 1: --were? Speaker 2: --it, it depended upon who was talking (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, right. I mean, I, I bet. Speaker 2: Depended upon who was talking, yes. Speaker 1: And, and so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you, and, and as you describe the way that you speak, how did you navigate your own career, being sort of in the middle, so some--how did that work for you or against you? Speaker 2: I tried to just keep jumping out there and just be out there. But when you mentioned the, the color thing, when I screen tested for the role of Prissy in [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, from 'The Learning Tree,' the other person who screen tested for my role was Quincy--one of Quincy Jones' daughter. And she was very, very light skinned. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Gordon had already made a decision about Estelle [Estelle Evans], Estelle--I'm forgetting her last name, who played the mother in the role. And so she really--the--Gordon--Quincy's daughter would not have fit in with the family as well, in terms of if you're just looking at just their skin color. So when he got us together we looked like a family. Now that's a kind of an odd sensent- sentence to say, since black people come in all colors, and there are families that have all colors in them. But when you're looking at putting something on the screen in a condensed, capsulized version, you often have to take that into consideration, so. Speaker 1: And then, there's a potential politics of that. Speaker 2: Oh, always. Speaker 1: You were up against Quincy Jones' daughter, Quin--Q was big-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --then. Speaker 2: Yeah. And he [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] and Gordon were friends, yeah. Speaker 1: Do, do you know what happened behind the scenes with that? Speaker 2: No. I have no--didn't--never asked (laughter), never asked, yeah. Speaker 1: Because we know that these things happen, and, and-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --people are selected for roles because of-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --the so called good old boy network, even among black people. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's why I've been blessed to be a writer, because I didn't have to depend totally on acting. You know, I didn't get desperate about the roles that I didn't get, because sometimes you don't get a role because you're too tall. I, I was up for a role once, and the star of the film was kind of short. And she basically almost had it in her contract that there was nobody taller than her who was gonna have any kind of a, a representative role. And so, you know, I was in there trying to, you know, shrink down, but it didn't work (laughter). It didn't work. Speaker 1: And how tall are you? Speaker 2: I'm only 5'6". Speaker 1: Right, but that was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --tall for that, that job. Speaker 2: For whatever that was, yeah. And I mean they basically told me, you, you know, we're sorry, but, you know, we got to find somebody who's a little shorter with this one, or she's gonna give us hell (laughter). So, you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You never know what it's gonna be, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --you can't correct it, you know, there's no need in getting--going home, getting depressed 'cause you lost a part, 'cause you, you know--for something that you cannot fix. Now if I did it 'cause I gave a bad audition, then yeah, I'm gonna be spanking myself (laughter). Story_ID: 672168 Speaker 1: You mentioned that you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --wrote one episode for 'Our Street.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When did you start writing? Speaker 2: I started writing when I was around five or six. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: I started writing poetry very, very young. I started writing--I came up in a very strict household. And sometimes when I was really mad, but I knew I couldn't say what I was mad about, I would go in the back of my closet and I'd sit down and write. And then gradually I realized I didn't have to write just when I was mad (laughter) or angry or feeling offended or something, or feeling punished. I could write, you know, other times. And that's how it began. My mother [Faythe McIntyre Sharp] was a poet. My mother was poet laureate of her high school. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Did your mother teach you to read? Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. Speaker 1: Because you're writing poetry at five or six. That's pretty early. Speaker 2: Yeah, she taught me to read. She taught me--by the time I got into kindergarten, I was completely bored because I already knew everything they were teaching (laughter) us in kindergarten. Yeah, my mother was determined that that was gonna happen. Story_ID: 672169 Speaker 1: And do you have siblings? Speaker 2: I have one sister, Emily [Emily M. Newsome], and she's fifteen and a half years younger than I am-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --nothing in between. Yeah, my mother [Faythe McIntyre Sharp] remarried and so. Speaker 1: And are--when, when you--well, when she was growing up were you close? Speaker 2: We were close. My mother and her father got a divorce kind of early on, so I was trying to be the hippest big sister I could be. But I had to, you know, jump in and kind of be the other mother once in a while and rescue her from situations that happen when people are, you know, headed to divorce court (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes. But-- Speaker 1: And what did she end up doing? Speaker 2: She is living in Dallas [Texas]. She has four children. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And she is now working on her docorate--doctorate in--on her master's in psychology. And she's also become a minister. So she's working on, on both of those and doing very well. And I'm proud to say that none of her four children have ever been arrested. They've never been on drugs. They haven't been jail. So that's a extremely wonderful accomplishment, you know, for a black woman in, in this time and period-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --to do. Speaker 1: Did you ever marry? Speaker 2: I never married, and I never had children. Speaker 1: Was that a goal for you? Speaker 2: You know, I taught for a while. It, it was a goal kind of not--it was a decision not to have children. I didn't want to adopt, and I thought that I would adopt. I didn't want to do a single adoption because my mother had been divorced three times, and I really wanted that anchored family. Later on I regret that I didn't do it. Quite a few of my friends did do a single adoption. And as a matter of fact, she worked at Essence, short Afro. Speaker 1: Let's see, who-- Speaker 2: And she did a single adoption. Speaker 1: Oh, Diane Weathers. Speaker 2: Diane Weathers, Diane Weathers--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Of course. Speaker 2: --and I were friends, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sure, sure. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was, you know, supporting her when she was going through her adoption process. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Story_ID: 672170 Speaker 1: So writing, you started when you were five or six. When did you first get published? Speaker 2: I think I may have had a poem published in something in Cleveland [Ohio] before I left. And then I left to go to Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] in '60 [1960] and was working at the--I got--began to work at the radio station [WBGU Radio, Bowling Green, Ohio]. I did, you know, some writing for that, continued to write. My first book came out in '70 [1970]. I was living in New York [New York]. And the-- Speaker 1: What was that book? Speaker 2: 'From the Windows of My Mind' [S. Pearl Sharp]. Speaker 1: Poetry. Speaker 2: Poetry. And-- Speaker 1: So let's talk about this for a second, because your mother [Faythe McIntyre Sharp] was a poet laureate, so you knew that you could work as a poet, that, that, that poetry was not something that you just hid in your closet, but you could actually-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --get it published. Speaker 2: Well, they actually read poetry to me instead of--or along with bedtime stories. They're reading Langston Hughes to me (laughter). And I'm thinking that everybody is having Langston Hughes and James Earl Johnson [ph.] read to them, you know (laughter) at bedtime. And then you get into junior high school and you discover you're not supposed to like poetry. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, poetry is, you know, not hip. So I kind of suffered through that until I couldn't stand it any longer and yeah, now I gotta, I gotta claim this 'cause it's, this is part of my life; this is what I do; this is what I hear. And-- Speaker 1: And at--as you were at Bowling Green, did you take any poetry writing classes? Did they have that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: No, no, I--if they did, I was- I wasn't in the literary department. I was in the music department and the film and television production department. So I didn't take any writing classes when I was there, but I continued to write. Story_ID: 672171 Speaker 1: What were you thinking that you wanted to do when you were younger? Speaker 2: I wasn't sure--I--my debate was between being a lawyer, a social worker, or going into theater. Speaker 1: Those are very different. Speaker 2: Yes, they are (laughter). Social worker was third, lawyer was second, and theater or music, music was first. And it wasn't until I actually got to Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] that I kind of--I know all the options were still on the table until about my sophomore year. And by that time I was working with the radio--with the television--with the radio station [WBGU Radio, Bowling Green, Ohio], and they were be- getting closer to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: On campus. Speaker 2: --television, on campus, on campus. And so that became-- Speaker 1: And what were you doing there? Speaker 2: I was--first of all, I was the first black announcer. It was a classical music station. And I saw an ad on the job board one day that they were going to be auditioning for announcers with the station. And you had to be able, you know, to pronounce the classical stuff. And I think they were paying a dollar and thirteen cents an hour, a dollar and twenty-three cents an hour or something like that. And I said, "That's my job." And I went up there, and this kind of middle to older aged white guy looked at me and like, what are you doing here? "I'm here to audition for the--." "No, you need to know music, and you need to be able to pronounce--." "Yeah, I do." And it was--he just tried to, like, make me leave the room. And so, I don't remember whether I left and came back or what, but I finally got to audition. And he found out that I could pronounce Rachmaninoff [Sergei Rachmaninoff] (laughter), you know, and Berlioz [Hector Berlioz]. And I became an announcer on the station, and then I saw openings to do other things. And our concert series, Miriam Makeba was coming onto the state--onto the campus to do a concert. And I said, "May I please interview Miriam Makeba? She's coming." And, and they said, "No. You're a freshman. Freshmen are not allowed to do interviews of the celebrities." "Okay, so who's going to do her?" Well, nobody knew who she was, and nobody was going to do her. So I had a Wollensak, an old Wollensak tape recorder, and I contacted her. And I made arrangements to meet her in the dining room of the, the room where they had the banquets and brought my new tape recorder, and she did this interview with me. And I used to work--one of my jobs is working in the catering department. So they're back there setting up table and clanking silverware and stuff and dishes, and I'm trying to get this interview in, and I was so nervous. I remember asking her was it Makeba or (pronunciation) Makeba? And the minute she answers me I couldn't remember what she said. That's how nervous I was (laughter). But that was my first-- Speaker 1: But that, that-- Speaker 2: --professional interview. Speaker 1: --launched you. Speaker 2: That was my first professional interview. And then I realized that there were all of these professors in the music department, and nobody was giving them any play. So I set up a little show, and I invited different professors to come and perform on my show and talk about their careers, so that they became more than just the professor, you know, who's teaching you violin. They had a life. They had a, they had a performance level that they did. And that got me out of a lot of classes (laughter), so. Speaker 1: It also gave you a since of the power of the media, didn't it? Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes it did, it did. Then, as the television thing came along, I had two professors who were at the exact opposite end. One was a professor. There was another white woman named Hope Parker. We became friends. And we're the only two women taking the radio-television classes. And one professor felt that we didn't belong there, so he would actually announce in class that women did not--oh, women--his thing was women belong in the kitchen and in the bedroom. Speaker 1: He said this? Speaker 2: He said this, more than once. And then we-- Speaker 1: And what were your years at this school? Speaker 2: Sixty [1960] to '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He--I actually remember going by a room a couple of times, and you glance in the window and there are all of the guys in the class around a camera. He would teach them the technical stuff outside of the classroom to make sure that he avoided having any women learning to do that. At the opposite end of that scale was another professor, who thought my work was excellent, loved my work. I had aced every class until there was nothing else left to take, because their television department was new. So he arranged for me to take the two grad- only two graduate classes that they had. And I aced those, and then there was nothing else, you know, to take in the radio, radio-television division. Story_ID: 672172 Speaker 1: I wanna stick with the writing. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You've wrote your--that first book of poetry ['From the Windows of My Mind,' S. Pearl Sharp]. What did you write after that? Speaker 2: Another book of poetry (laughter). Speaker 1: And, and how were-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --how were you getting them published? Speaker 2: Self publishing them myself. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: That was the period in New York [New York], [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni, [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez, Felipe Luciano, we were all running around. We put a couple of printers out of business, 'cause we were getting these--we were doing our books. We'd go, you know, try to make these deals and thinking we were gonna sell all of them, you know, right away, and we'd come back with the money. And of course it doesn't happen that fast (laughter), you know. But that's all of us, we're, we're--David Nelson [ph.]--I have a lot of those books on my shelf, our very first books that we printed ourselves. Speaker 1: So you would-- Speaker 2: Because there was no black publisher then. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Broadside Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan] hadn't started yet. There was no Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois], you know. Speaker 1: This is around what years now? Speaker 2: This is, this is from '65 [1965] on. I, I went to New York in '64 [1964], yeah. Speaker 1: And so all of you were-- Speaker 2: We're out there-- Speaker 1: --writing your poetry-- Speaker 2: We're writing-- Speaker 1: --finding a printer and then-- Speaker 2: Right. We were doing-- Speaker 1: How were you-- Speaker 2: --our stuff. Speaker 1: --how were you selling it? Speaker 2: Out of our purses and our bags and our, our bicycles and (laughter), you know, and readings. LeRoi Jones, then, Imamu [Amiri Baraka]--who's sister was Kimako Baraka. She opened a little coffee shop-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --at one point. That's the first place I ever saw Toni Morrison read. She was reading from 'The Bluest Eye' [Toni Morrison]. So we would read there. We read at the--underneath the Y there was a room. Speaker 1: Which Y? Speaker 2: The, the Harlem Y [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York]. There was-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh, (unclear) 35th Street. Speaker 2: --a room where they would have readings. That's the first place I ever saw Langston Hughes read. When I went I hadn't been in New York very long, and I saw a flier he was reading. That's the first time I ever saw him in person. We'd do readings there, wherever, people's houses, wherever we'd read. Speaker 1: So this is the beginning of the Black Arts Movement. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --are you aware of what you're in, 'cause-- Speaker 2: No, no. They would roll out a flatbed on Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard] on Saturday mornings, one of those things where they drop down, you know, big--wa- didn't even--they didn't even have--it wasn't even a stage with size. It was a flatbed they would roll out on a truck, and they'd put up a microphone. And we--the, The Last Poets, Sonia, Nikki, all of us, we would be out there. Speaker 1: So this was-- Speaker 2: Fetz Fatimah [ph.]-- Speaker 1: --open mic (laughter). Speaker 2: This was a, this was the first open mic for us, yes (laughter). And whoever show up got up on there and read. And we rotated and-- Speaker 1: And it's primarily poets at this point. Speaker 2: It was primarily poets, yes. Speaker 1: What about the civil rights activists? Where were they in the midst of this? Because we know Malcolm would be up there too. Did--were you ever cross-pollinating with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] or Malcolm X or any of the people from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]? Speaker 2: There was the bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] on the corner of 125th [Street] and Lenox. Speaker 1: Was that Liberation Bookstore [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Liberation--no, not Liberation. Speaker 1: No, that was a little higher. Speaker 2: That was Una Mulzac's show. It was-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Professor Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux]. We called him Michaux-- Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: --Michaux. And so that's, that's where they would put out the soapboxes and Malcolm and, and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --all the other, you know, speakers--it was Kwame Ture would come and when he was would speak. We would do some--we would go there and get material and order books and buy them. But there were other books like Liberation Bookstore when opened that where we would read. It was wherever-- Speaker 1: Was that opened around that time? Speaker 2: I think a little later than that-- Speaker 1: Little bit later-- Speaker 2: --little later. Speaker 1: --not, not much though, right? Speaker 2: Right. But see, we considered that we were part of the Civil Rights Movement, absolutely. And at that time, in terms of--and the, the poetry and the theater were merging because Baraka, who was a poet, was also doing street theater around Harlem [New York, New York]. And then the--when the poverty programs started and HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York], we were doing street theater around programs. So very often we would be leaving; they'd be coming in, or, or we would be passing them, or they would be in the same place the next night. Again, you know, they roll in a, a thing, turned it into a stage. We turned a swimming pool into a theater. They, they-- Speaker 1: In Harlem? Speaker 2: In Harlem. They, they built Lasker swimming pool [Lasker Pool] in-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Harlem. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they didn't put any water in it for two years. (Laughter) So, we went in one weekend, with permission, and created a theater, went in there and, and did a show for a weekend. Story_ID: 672173 Speaker 1: In, in the midst of all of this, Baraka [Amiri Baraka] writes the 'Dutchman'-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --which has a tremendous impact. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What do you remember about the 'Dutchman'? Speaker 2: That I didn't understand it. I really didn't. I, I knew there was something in there I was supposed to get, but I felt I wasn't politically developed enough, you know. But of course I wouldn't say that 'cause everybody had to act like they knew exactly what was going on here (laughter), you know. But then he also did 'Slave Ship' ['Slave Ship: A Historical Pageant']. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So I had, at that time, I had developed a group called Poets and Performers. And we would take each other's poems and interact. So I might read two lines of yours and four of mine, and you would take a line of mine. And we were doing our poems, and we were doing it in a theater style. [HistoryMaker] Bill Duke was a member, Jackie Earley, Donald Green, Norman Matlock, were some of the performers. When Baraka started auditioning for 'Slave Ship,' Jackie Earley and Bill Duke were two of the people who got cast in it. So they come back to the Poets and Performers, saying, "Baraka said we don't need to rehearse anymore. We don't need to rehearse because our, our, our acting talent is natural." I'm like, "Oh, really? If four of us are getting on the stage at the same time we're rehearsing." So they left the group (laughter). So, so it's interesting the way the politics and the art are always, they're always inseparable. Speaker 1: And did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --interact much with Baraka? Speaker 2: Not a lot. I interacted with him more when he was doing the groundwork to get [HistoryMaker] Kenneth Gibson elected as mayor of Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Because the publicist was Bill Cherry [ph.], and Bill Cherry and I were going together then. And so we were making all of these trips to Newark, almost every weekend we were in Newark for something. He was bringing over the celebrities who would help raise the funds. Sammy Davis, Jr. came into the concert. Stevie Wonder came over and went to supermarkets with us to get people to come and sign up and register to vote at supermarkets. James Brown brought his old--whole entourage in and, and did a concert. And at that time, Baraka's people were into wearing the, either the uniforms or what I call the, the kind of the burlap bag, you know, look. And they only ate one meal a day. And I'd be, like, sneaking my little food, you know, have my little sandwich on the side 'cause I didn't eat just one meal a day. I had, you know, blood sugar problems (laughter), it was like--so I, I really interacted more with him in that campaign, which was a lot of work (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Well, that was historic because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Kenneth Gibson became the first-- Speaker 2: The first black mayor. Speaker 1: --black mayor of a major city. Speaker 2: No, I know-- Speaker 1: Well, no. Speaker 2: --no, Stokes-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: He was the second. Speaker 2: He was the second. Speaker 1: He was the second. That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, Carl Stokes in Cleveland. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. And my family had worked very hard on that campaign. Speaker 1: Right, because that's where you're from. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Had you worked on it as well? Speaker 2: I wasn't there. I think I was--I don't think I was there. I think I was in New York [New York] by that time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you interact at all with [HistoryMaker] Amina Baraka? Speaker 2: No, very, very briefly, but-- Speaker 1: 'Cause she's also a poet. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And you know, it was interesting I didn't discover until later that she also wrote, because all the focus was on Baraka and Baraka's poetry. And once I discovered her poetry I loved it, and then the fact that his sister [Kimako Baraka] would open a place, a venue for--you know, a literary coffee shop. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 672174 Speaker 1: What were the dynamics between black men and black women in the Black Arts Movement at that time? Because, like, with, with Baraka, for example, they were first nationalist, and, and there was a lot of hierarchical stuff going on between men and women. I'm just curious how--was there in, in your group the sense of empowerment for women? Was there a struggle between black men and black women in terms of place? Speaker 2: There was. And I do remember [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez having that struggle, and, and I'm sure she talked about it because she was a black Muslim at the time. And they didn't want their women out, you know, on the stage performing. And she's like, this is what I do, you know. But she and Malcolm [Malcolm X] had a close relationship. So, you know, there was, there were, there were all--there was always what was happening on the larger scale. And then there was always what was happening in the interrelational--relationships. But there was very often, and I remember being in some of these arguments, the thing that sisters were supposed to be making babies for the revolution, you know. And we're like, "I ain't making no babies" (laughter). And then somebody would get pregnant and like, okay, you know, here we go. But that making babies for the revolution became a kind of a, a chant that sister poets began to write either for or against. And-- Speaker 1: So was that in part why you thought, no, I'm not gonna have kids? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Completely different-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --completely different reasons, no. But that became-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That became part of the dynamic of, of the, of the movement, this, you know--there was nationalist movement and there was the arts movement, and they were very much married. So the nationalists were saying, you know, "Sisters need to be making babies for the revolution." And the, and the artists are saying, "No, we have a role as women to get these messages out, to, to, to uplift and help heal women through our work." And, and so there was a bit of, sometimes a joining and very often a conflict on that. Speaker 1: And, and at that--during this period, was there awareness of the women who were lesbian and the men who were gay? Were they--in the arts community, were they out, so to speak? Speaker 2: Personally, I did not have that awareness. The first time I ever really was near people that I knew were gay was the--when we went into rehearsals for 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart]. And of course, most of the dancers, most of the--most of the male dancers, some of the male singers were gay. And that was my first time having those kind of relationships and having those kind of observations. When I went to New York [New York], girlfriend, I didn't even--I'd heard about junkies. I had been so sheltered, I didn't even know what a junkie was. And one day I saw somebody doing a nod, and I'm like, that must be what they talk about when (laughter), you know. I had been totally sheltered. So, yeah. Speaker 1: And you grew up in Cleveland [Ohio], which is way more conservative than New York-- Speaker 2: Way. Speaker 1: --so you wouldn't have-- Speaker 2: Way more conservative, yeah. Speaker 1: If you saw it, you might not even have known what it was. Speaker 2: Right. I'd probably--obviously I saw it. I just didn't know. But it was much more out in the open in, you know, in New York and in Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 672175 Speaker 1: Don L. Lee, [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, was he a presence in New York [New York] during the time that you were-- Speaker 2: No. He was in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right. I know, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was wondering--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, we knew his work, right. We knew his work, along with, you know, Gwendolyn's [Gwendolyn Brooks]-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --and the poets. See, there was a lot of poetry exchange because there would be conferences, people, you know, traveling would, you know, "Come on, well, you know, you, you're gonna be in town. We'll set up a reading." And that's how we all got to know each other and know each other's work (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And Eugene Redmond [Eugene B. Redmond], did you know him? Speaker 2: Eugene Redmond, yes. I'm trying to think who else I got to know that way--Lucille Clifton-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --who is, yeah, my most high priestess of (laughter)--Nina Simone, I got to see Nina Simone perform several times in New York and hear her work. Speaker 1: To be in the midst of all of these people, what, what did that do for you as you're coming into yourself as a woman and, and offering your creativity and building your career? Speaker 2: I think it kept me grounded, particularly in the career thing because there was uptown and downtown. And it's almost as if the two were trying very hard not to meet. So, uptown we had [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer, Black-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --Theatre Network [Black Theatre Network], Baba Orda--Babatunde Olatunji had his drum center [Olatunji Center for African Culture, New York, New York]. And I was a friend of Babatunde's and, and worked for him for a while. Roger Furman had the Roger Furman theater [New Heritage Repertory Theatre, New York, New York]. And then downtown you had American Place and you had Joe Papp [Public Theater, New York, New York] and, and you had Henry Street Settlement [New York, New York]. And there were only-- Speaker 1: And even Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]-- Speaker 2: And Negro Ensemble. Speaker 1: --was downtown. Speaker 2: Right. There were only a handful of actors who did both. So very often when I was 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart], I'd be inviting people up to something of what's happening in Harlem [New York, New York], and they'd have to ask where it was or what, you know, or how do you get there, because they rarely came to Harlem. Their life was mostly, you know, on the downtown side of theater. There was an incredibly difficult situation when one of the play--plays that Barbara Ann Teer had done was brought--it was very successful. I'm trying to remember what the name of it was. And it was brought downtown to be done at the American Place Theatre [New York, New York]. And Barbara was trying to bring her rules and her style of working into this situation. Esther Rolle was part of the cast, and--Esther Rolle was a part of the original cast. And then when Barbara--Barbara Ann Teer's technique was, not everybody plays the same part all the time. So for pros like Esther Rolle, this drove her crazy 'cause she never knew who was playing the son tonight, you know. She never knew who was playing this other part. And the friction around that production was, like, really rough. It was really rough. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So that was, you know, uptown, downtown meeting, but not really meeting on equal terms and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --still trying to do theater, still trying to create art. Story_ID: 672176 Speaker 1: I actually wanted to ask you, one of the, one of the pieces of conflict, I guess, that Baraka [Amiri Baraka] experienced, you know, he had been downtown with the beatnik movement and then came uptown. And that--he, he, he self- Speaker 2: Recreated himself. Speaker 1: --recreated himself and, and rejected the downtown. Wa- was it difficult for people to be able to be part of those two worlds? Speaker 2: I don't know. I mean, I found it easy to be part of it. You might have conflict scheduling, but I found it-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --easy. But I don't, I don't know. I think--I often wondered why some of the downtown folks didn't participate more uptown. Uptown was certainly more challenging. It was certainly more interesting, but it was really a family, a sense of family, you know, being at Roger Furman's [New Heritage Repertory Theatre, New York, New York]. You weren't making the money, but you were, you were creating new things. That's when AUDELCO [Audience Development Committee, Inc.] was formed, the organization that began to give awards to black theater. They're still, you know, they're still functioning-- Speaker 1: Did you ever-- Speaker 2: --so. Speaker 1: --work with Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: I was in 'Black Girl' [J.E. Franklin]. Speaker 1: Oh, right-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of course, that's is-- Speaker 2: Yes, Woodie King--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --that's right. Speaker 2: --produced 'Black Girl.' Speaker 1: And that was early on. Speaker 2: Yeah, early on, yeah. Story_ID: 672177 Speaker 1: Tell me about the poem you, you were just mentioning. Speaker 2: There was a poem I wrote for Bob Law called 'It's the Law' ['It's the Law: A Rap Poem,' S. Pearl Sharp]. And Bob was almost seven feet. He was a radio journalist on WWRL [WWRL Radio, New York, New York]. We became friends. He was very much an activist in the community. He was very much about encouraging young people. He organized young people. He'd mentored. They had their whole little, you know, movement going. And sometimes when he had to do something else I would sit in for him and host his radio show. So I wrote a poem for him called 'It's the Law.' And it was presented at something that--it was program that was honoring him. And the poem is about the laws that are written, are written because of the laws that--what we do to each other makes us have to write laws about it. And that poem was picked up by the--give me a moment now. I should have thought of this first (laughter) before I started this story. The poem was picked up by McMillan Pub- Macmillan Publishing Company. And it's in two textbooks that are used about poets--poetry in America. And it's been in about nine or ten audit- it's been in about nine or--pick up--it's been in about nine or ten editions-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --of these two books. And so very often, students who are using the poem in class will go online and find me. And I might get a, you know, an email or a note from them. They want to talk about the poem more. They want to share their own comments. And I've even gotten poems that some students have written in response to the poem. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So that's been kind of fun. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 672178 Speaker 1: Tell me about your relationship with Frances E. Williams. Speaker 2: Frances E. Williams was in Cleveland, Ohio, my mother's acting teacher at the Gilpin Players. And I didn't know her, although she knew me as a child. When I first went to California to work, to do some work, I kept hearing, "You know, have you met Frances? Did you find Frances? Frances Williams is out there. So you know, find her and you know, say hello." And I'm like, who is this Frances person? So when I moved out here, I finally met her. And I have a wonderful photograph when my mother [Faythe McIntyre Sharp] came out to visit of them coming across the room toward each other. They hadn't seen each other in forty years. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Right. So Frances became like my other grandmother. And Frances was almost an institution in her own right. She was an activist. She was an artist. She was an actor, a writer, theater producer. She was the first black woman to run for city council in Los Angeles [California] before I knew her. She turned her garage into a little theater, the Corner Theater [Los Angeles, California]. And people would come and do their productions there. She worked with a lot of these--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Where did she live? What neighborhood? Speaker 2: She lived in the Jefferson district [Jefferson Park] of Los Angeles. And she had a house and a rather large house, and one story, and then there were two little cottages on the front of her property that different people would live in at different times. She had lived in Russia, had gone to Moscow [Russia] to study, study art, acting. She had lived in Mazatlan, Mexico. She had lived in Ghana. You know, she had lived in different parts of the United States. And so she introduced me to the first black Russians that I ever met. She introduced me to [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou. She introduced me to Beah Richards. She introduced me to the people who founded the Paul Robeson center [Paul Robeson Community Center, Los Angeles, California]. She was one of--we have a Paul Robeson--had a Paul Robeson Center until recently. She was one of the co-founders of that. So, being part of Fran- and she had a, a place in Mexico in a little--what do you call them? A trailer camp. There was, up until about ten or twelve years ago, Americans could not purchase property in-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Mexico, so they had these little trailer camps. And her best friend was Geri Branton [Geraldine Pate Branton]. Geri Branton was married to Leo Branton [HistoryMaker Leo Branton, Jr.], the attorney who was the head attorney for [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis's case (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Geri Branton's first husband had been one of the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas]. So you have all of these arts and politics, you know, and law interacting. They also had a trailer in Mexico. So we would go to Mexico for weekends. And people would, you know, talk politics and talk art and eat food. Speaker 1: In which part of Mexico was this? Speaker 2: This was in, just past Rosarito Beach-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Mexico. Speaker 1: And around what time were you doing this? Speaker 2: We did this for a bunch of years, a bunch of years, until she-- Speaker 1: Starting around when? Speaker 2: I came out here in--I, I moved to Los Angeles in '75 [1975], so maybe '76 [1976], '77 [1977] started doing that. And then she would call you say, "Dear, what are you doing Wednesday?" "What do we do--what are we doing Wednesday (laughter), Frances?" "Well, there's someone I want you to meet." And then she told me about James Patterson [James Lloydovich Patterson], who is a black Russian, who was on a state department [U.S. Department of State] tour. And they were going to be out at the Watts Towers [Los Angeles, California], and we should go out there and meet him personally. And we did, and I became pen pals for the next thirteen years with James Patterson, who was a poet, established poet. Under the Communism system, if you had an art and you were recognized by the Communist Party, then they gave you whatever you needed to do your work. And so he traveled around the country representing the Communist Party but representing, you know, Russia, basically, as a poet. And we developed that relationship. And then some place it would be, "Dear, what are you doing on so and so?" And we'd be off on the next adventure, you know, and the next person (simultaneous). Story_ID: 672179 Speaker 1: Talk about the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --black Russians. You know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the, you know, the image of Russians then and now is, you know, like the big bad wolf, in a sense. You know, peop- the--there has been a lot of fear around-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who Russians are and what they mean for democracy. What was your understanding of meeting these people and getting to know James Patterson [James Lloydovich Patterson] and building a relationship? Speaker 2: What was most interesting about getting to know James Patterson was how much he was in tune with the Civil Rights Movement here and how many of his poems--he had poems about Malcolm X. He had poems about Langston Hughes. Because of Pushkin [Alexander Pushkin], he had done a lot of research about Pushkin. And he wrote about Pushkin, and so we got to learn about--more about Pushkin through him and through his writing. So there was this intercontinental thing happening through poetry and you know, and also through ballet and some of the other arts that, that the black Russians are in. Some of them went to Russia with Langston Hughes on a trip that he went. They were gonna make a film that never got made. Some went because the Communist Party was making an appeal to black people. We won't treat you as badly over here as you're being treated over there. And so people went there, and they found, you know, that to be so. And very often they married someone who was a white Russian. In this particular situation, Patterson's, he and his brother, their mother [Vera Ippolitovna Aralova] was a va- visual artist. So you had an artist and a poet who are being recognized by the party and being supported, you know, for their work. And then the brother was a cameraman with Moscow television [MTK]. So, I had a wonderful situation where there was a, a event being planned in San Diego [California] that Frances [Frances E. Williams] knew about around Russia. And she said, "There are these black Russians. We must bring them." And then she set about, you know, helping them to raise the money and making these plans and making these arrangements. And now we've got five black Russians coming from Moscow [Russia]--well, four of them. One already lived here, ye, ye--Yelena Khanga the journalist was already here, and she was doing some work with Essence. But we have four--still had five people coming in. I think Yelena was the sixth. And they're going to go to San Diego, and they're going to participate in this weekend. And what happened was, their plane got delayed. And there things are, are supposed to start in San Diego at nine o'clock the next morning. I have a goddaughter who lives in New York [New York] who worked at that time in security. Her name is Jackie Wall [ph.]. She worked in security for TWA [Trans World Airlines]. I called her up. I said, "Jackie, I need you. I said I got five people coming in. They have no American money. Only one of them speaks a little English. Three of them don't speak (laughter) any English. We got--I need you to rescue them." So she does. She goes out to the airport in her uniform. She snatches them out of customs and gets them onto a plane. She calls me, says, "They're on this plane. It's arriving." There are people in San Diego standing by to come and get them. We can't get them into San Diego. They're coming to Los Angeles [California]. So people get in vans and they roll up at like, two o'clock in the morning. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And they pick up the Russians, and they get them back to San Diego. One of the stories is that one of the women was the first black ballerina with the Russian ballet. I'm sorry I'm not forgetting her name right--I'm forgetting her name right at the moment. Her sisters were part of the Essence team. Essence had done a program about blacks in Russia. And somebody's sitting there watching it, and one of their grandchildren says, "Mommy, look behind the lady, that picture, that looks--isn't that grandfather's picture?" These--there--these three women hear the, the black Russian. He'd gone--the black man had gone to Russia and married a woman, had this daughter, came back to the United States, and had three daughters. They knew they had a sister in Russia. They didn't know how to find her. So she's one of the ones that we bring over, and this Russian woman meets her black American sisters in somebody's kitchen at five o'clock in the morning in San Diego (laughter). Speaker 1: What a story. Speaker 2: So that's living with Frances, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: That's living with Frances. Every year she put on a tribute to Paul Robeson, every year, for about ten or twelve years. Speaker 1: And did you help her with that? Speaker 2: I helped her with some of them, yes, yeah. There was, no, there was a community that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, Frances called, you act, you respond. Story_ID: 672180 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it's interesting, when you speak about these people, her in particular, you know, who become part of your family out here-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --because many people come to L.A. to pursue work, and it's quite isolated, especially New York [New York]--people who have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --had the New York experience 'cause it's very spread out here; the black community is not in a particular place here. Where did you live when you first came here and, and, and you, you've mentioned Frances and, Frances Williams [Frances E. Williams] and Beah Richards, but who were--who became your community? Speaker 2: I've, I've always had a couple of communities, so other--the actors who came out around the same time that I did, Vernee Watson [Vernee Watson-Johnson], [HistoryMaker] Adam Wade, Lawrence Hilton-Jacobs, Tamu [Tamu Blackwell], we were all in touch with other. We were all--we would all--if one of us got a, a show on one of the, the sitcoms, we would all go; you know, we'd be--all be in the audience, you know, cheering them on. And then there was the political community. When I was in New York I had been supporting the Wilmington Ten case and trying to do fundraisers for them. When I came out here to Los Angeles [California], very few people knew what I was talking about when I said the Wilmington Ten. So I realized I had to do some educating as well as supporting. So I did things like throwing a roller skating party to raise money for the Wilmington Ten and having a bingo party in my apartment (laughter), you know, and things like that so that the awareness increased along with them the, the support, you know, that was needed for that. So those families always--you know, there was an intermingling. And because Frances was both activist and artist, the people she called on, her close friends were--not Raymond St. Jacques, the other one. Give me a moment--short, stocky--(clears throat)--bald hair in the front--[HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Brown. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: I'll start that sentence over again (laughter). Her short friend--her, Frances's close friends included Roscoe Lee Brown. You could meet prob- Langston Hughes might come by. When--before I, I came out here, I have pictures where W.E.B. Du Bois had a book signing at her house. I mean, these were the kind of people who came in and out of her house and all--and also in and out of the Brantons' house. I would go over to the Brantons' house for brunch just to listen and because politics was being discussed all the time. And when it was time for an election, I called them to find out who to vote for because you knew the top people, but they knew every judge. They knew every councilperson. They knew everybody's history (laughter), you know. So, the connections were made that way. Whatever you--whatever feeding I needed, I knew there was a place I could go and get fed, in terms of information, in terms of-- Speaker 1: And you were-- Speaker 2: --support. Speaker 1: --all--were, were you always consciously an activist as well as an actor? Speaker 2: I guess I was, coming out of my family, yeah, I guess. I was, because actors have to make decisions all the time about-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --whether you're going to take a part or not. And I turned down stuff-- Speaker 1: Like, what kinds of things--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --very often. Speaker 1: --did you turn down? Speaker 2: I turned down a role in 'Roots' because I knew I couldn't kiss John Boyne [ph.] more than once (laughter). I'm sorry. And everybody thought I had lost my mind. But I, I said, "I can't do this. I can't do this." And there was another--there was a commercial that Marilyn Coleman and I were doing for Betty Crocker. And in the commercial we were talking about our husband. And the absolute reference in the line was, you know, "They think we're making real frosting, but we're using Betty Crocker frosting." And you know, they're basically too dumb to know the difference, and the last line, "You know, even my Henry can't tell the difference." So Marilyn and I get together back in dressing room, like, we don't really wanna, you know, make the husband look dumb like that, so we'll work--okay, got it, got it, girl. "Even my husband can't"--"even my husband can't"--"look"--cut. "I'm not getting the line reading that, that you did in the audition." "You're not? Oh, I'm sorry. I'll, I'll try to do it better." And we held our ground through the whole commercial, until the director literally gave up getting the reading he wanted, because we were not gonna have another dumb black man, you know, referenced on television--so little things like that that you do and then you go and you know, you forget about them, but when you're doing it you're constantly aware of the impact this is gonna have. I stopped. I basically kind of phased myself out of doing commercials because I stopped doing drug commercials, because it reached the point that 50 percent of the auditions were for drug commercials. And I didn't want to be the person that my community knew who was telling them to use something that was going to be pulled off the market in six months because it was dangerous. So that meant I--you know, there was a lot of work I never auditioned for. Story_ID: 672181 Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: How did you supplement your income? Speaker 1: I supplemented it through writing, a little bit, you know, not making a lot of money. Speaker 2: But what kind of writing at that point? Speaker 1: I wrote for--Candida Mobley [Candida Mobley-Wright] had a company called Voices Incorporated. I was her head writer for ten and a half years, and we wrote radio infomercials. So, the infomercial might be, it might be a McDonald's might do a campaign. We did campaigns on getting your car fixed. We did campaigns on places for black people to travel. We did campaigns on heart health, whatever, Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut], the cancer society [American Cancer Society], whatever. That's what I--so I, I, I supported myself writing that way. I supported myself coaching actors in voiceover, whatever I could. I, I had freelanced, basically, since I left school in--since I left. I, I went to New York [New York]. I wrote for TV Guide, and then I worked for one of the broadcasting stations. And once I got fired from that job, I freelanced ever since then, ever since, yeah. Speaker 2: And were you not the waitress or bartender? Did you ever do any of those classic jobs that people do as actors? Speaker 1: I was--I, I, I worked for the catering company when I was in school at Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio]. And usually I-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: When I was at Bowling Green I worked for the catering company, and mostly I did catering. One day they asked me to come in to the coffee shop on the campus and do grill cook. And somebody asked for pancakes, and I said, "Pancakes," said, "where are the pancakes?" And they said, "Oh, they're down there." And I opened the cupboard, and there was like, all of these boxes of Uncle Ben's (unclear)--and I turned around. I said, "I'm sorry. We are fresh out of pancakes today." And so we never cooked pancakes when I was there because I refused to cook the Uncle Ben's pancake mix (laughter). Speaker 2: So that political, that, that, that's just in your DNA. Speaker 1: I guess it is. I never thought of it that way, but I guess it (laughter) is, yeah. Another job I had in New York, the poets, we did a lot of stuff in Harlem [New York, New York]. And there were--there was a white nun who used to come to our poetry meetings. And she started coming more and more often. And we began to, you know--she--we almost expected her. And then she came up one day to me and she said, "Would you consider coming to my class?" She said, "I know how to--I know how to teach them the math and the English. I don't know how to teach them the arts. And I would love you to come and teach poetry, and I will pay you." And so, within about a couple of months, this whole network had been set up where myself and one or two other poets, for ten dollars a class, we would go in and we were teaching, we were teaching their students. Because then there was another nun and then there was another nun, so we had his little circuits of white nuns that we were working for-- Speaker 2: At which school was this? Speaker 1: Different elementary schools that they were-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --teaching in, in Harlem, right (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: And then eventually there was a black nun. And she and I became very friends for many year--very good friends for many years. And then she moved to New Jersey, and I didn't see her as often. Yeah, but that was also, that was a little bit of supplemental money. Speaker 2: And-- Story_ID: 672182 Speaker 1: In Los Angeles [California]--what I'm curious about is making a living-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --as an actor. You're also a writer. But breaking into either field is not-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --easy to do. Now you came having established yourself as an actor, but how are you managing? How are, how are you taking care of yourself as you're building your career out here? Speaker 2: I made most of my money in acting as a commercial. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Vernee Watson [Vernee Watson-Johnson] and I were probably the two top commercial, commercial spokespersons. So I made a lot of money doing commercials. Speaker 1: And starting in the '70s [1970s], what, what, what kind of money could you make in a commercial? Speaker 2: You could make--I have made as much as $20 thousand in one commercial. It's coming in little bits at a time, yeah. Speaker 1: And then do you get residuals from commercials? Speaker 2: Those are the residuals. Speaker 1: Ah, okay. Speaker 2: I'm not talking about shooting. I'm talking about the residuals. Yeah, so you get paid for shooting it. And then if it goes on the air, you get the residuals. So it might dribble in a little bit at a time. I remember one of the first commercials I did was for Puff Kleenex [Puffs Facial Tissue; Puffs], and we didn't have Puff Kleenex in New York [New York]. And years--a couple of years later I was in Detroit [Michigan], and I went into a supermarket. And I came around the corner and went "Ah." It was Puff tissues. I had never seen them before. Like, they really do exist (laughter), you know, and I, I kind of bumped into the, into the sign--into the display. So that was, that was the moneymaker for me, was the commercials and voiceover (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And because of residuals-- Speaker 2: Because of residuals-- Speaker 1: --you're making money-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --all the time. Speaker 2: You're making--you're sitting home doing--you know, studying your part or doing your laundry and a check is coming in, yeah. That--and so, that's how I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And you're, you were a member of SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] or AFTRA [American Federation of Television and Radio Artists; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] or both? Speaker 2: Both. Speaker 1: Both. Speaker 2: Both. That's how I supported my filmmaking. Story_ID: 672183 Speaker 1: When I went back to school and started making films, I supported my filmmaking through the money I was making as an actress doing commercials-- Speaker 2: When did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: --go back to school, and where did you go? Speaker 1: I went back in 1980 to Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California]. It was my intention to just kind of brush up, because when I had been at Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio], they were talking about, color television is going to be great. You know, we were still in black and white television. And now it's all these years later, and I said, "Let me just, you know, brush up and catch up." And then I got in and I realized, okay, a lot of the news is being done on film. Documentaries are being done on film 'cause this is '80 [1980]. We're not all digital-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --yet. So, let me just kind of go down the hall to the film department and see what that's about, and I fell in love. So then my agents were calling up saying, "You have an audition." I'm like, "I can't go an audition. I, I, I, I got a class. You know, I got a film class (laughter), you know. Can, can it be later or something?" And then-- Speaker 2: Did that ever work? Speaker 1: Sometimes it did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sometimes it did, yeah. So then, when I started making films, I needed money to do that. The commercials and the acting, things like--and I did a 'Knots Landing,' which was now a few things. Those things paid for me being able to go ahead and do my art and not have to stop and wait for a grant or you know, raise a lot of money. I could take that money and-- Story_ID: 672184 Speaker 1: You mentioned voiceovers-- Speaker 2: --do it. Speaker 1: --'cause that, that can be lucrative as well. Was it for you? Speaker 2: It was in New York [New York]. It never really was very much out here. But it was in New York, yeah. Speaker 1: At the time when you were doing voiceovers, were--was there competition like there is now, with celebrities doing it as well as actors? Or was it-- Speaker 2: Not as-- Speaker 1: --it was mainly actors? Speaker 2: Not as much. It was mainly actors. As a matter of fact, Norman Matlock and I did the voiceover for the very first Trojan's radio commercial (laughter). Speaker 1: And when was that? Speaker 2: That would had to have been, I think it was around 1970. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I did another commercial that had a very interesting history. It was in a television commercial introducing women on how to check their breast for breast exam, how to do their own self breast exam. And it was myself, a white woman, and an Asian woman. We had on leotards up to here, okay. Nothing is showing. Nobody would air that commercial. Nobody would air that commercial. Finally, after about two, two and half years, it started coming up around two or three o'clock in the morning you might see it. They'd say, "I saw your commercial." "What were you watching?" "Well, I was up late and--," and then it started coming on after Johnny Carson ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] went off. And then it started coming on. And finally after about five years, it finally began to reach the market it was intended for, which was the soap opera market, just to teach women how to do their own breast self exam. Speaker 1: And this is in the '80s [1980s] now? Speaker 2: No. This is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This is in '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: This is '70s [1970s]. Yeah, I'm still-- Speaker 1: The '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: --in New York, yeah. Story_ID: 672185 Speaker 1: The films that you were making, what--what were the films that you started making after you were in film school? Speaker 2: The first film that I made was 'Back Inside Herself,' which was a film based on one of my poems. So, it's my final-- Speaker 1: It's a short film? Speaker 2: It's a short film. It's four and a half minutes. It's my final project. I was doing something completely different. I was gonna do a, a trailer for a documentary that I wanted to do on the high--the con- the kind of money that we spend protecting ourselves, on fire alarms and security systems and all this stuff. And I had it lined up, and I get the equipment and I get my car loaded up. And I just go to the pay phone--still pay phones--to check, and the whole shoot fell apart. The gun guy said I couldn't come in his shop. He changed his mind. The security lock guy said he had a death in his family. He was closing in an hour. The such and such--the whole shoot just fell apart. And I just sat there in the lobby all by myself of the, of the, the school, Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California]. And my brain said, "Why don't you work on that poem that you've been trying to finish?" And I reached into my bag and I had a poem called 'Back Inside Herself' I had been trying to finish. And I pulled it out, and I was like--I'm sitting there working on it and then brain says this is what you should be shooting, 'cause you know, part of the brain is doing the poem. And the other part of the brain is, your car is full of equipment, and you're supposed to be shooting your (laughter), your--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --final exam, you know, piece. What are you going to do? And then the two came together, and I called my dear friend, Barbara O. [Barbara O. Jones]. People will know Barbara O. from [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash's film, 'Daughters of the Dust.' She played Yellow Mary. And she was in several of Haile Gerima's films. I called Barbara O. and I said, "I need to ask a big favor." 'Cause I knew what she was doing, I said, "I need to come out and just shoot you for a minute." She said very calmly, "You do know that I am leaving for Africa in the morning." I said "Uh-huh. You won't even know I'm there," which is the biggest lie that filmmakers always tell, "You won't even know that I'm there." Roll out to Altadena [California]. I'm hauling this stuff in by myself, you know, the, the, the light, the camera. I can't take the sound in without--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you have no crew. Speaker 2: I have--no, I have no crew. Speaker 1: It's you. Speaker 2: It's just me. It's just me, and she's on the second floor. And I get there, she's in her bathroom braiding her hair. I said, "Keep doing that." And that became part of the, the film, 'Back Inside Herself.' Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: It won--it was selected by the professors as one of the best films--student films, of the year. The next year I took a sound class. And I decided to clean up the sound and add something--sound to it. I did that. That was in 1982 I think. The film is still in distribution. It's being distributed by Women Make Movies [New York, New York]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And what's it about? Speaker 2: It's a poem about women going back inside themselves to claim their own identity and not accept what Hollywood expects from them, but to--(clears throat)--to be their own--find their own beauty. And so she is, she--you see her take--stand in the window and take her wig off, and then she's braiding her natural hair. And then I had some pictures of her daughter, who has natural hair. Story_ID: 672186 Speaker 1: And what did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --make after that? Speaker 2: The next thing I made was 'Life Is a Saxophone,' which is a film on the poet Kamau Daaood. I won a prize for 'Back Inside Herself' of a thousand dollars from the Black American Cinema Society. And I was naive enough to think that I could now make a documentary (laughter) with a thousand dollars. And everybody had been saying to come Kamau Daaood, "When are you going to record? When are you going to record?" So I went to some of them and I said, "I'm gonna do this film. Would you, you know, give me some financial support?" And Masai Minters and Jacob Abubakari [ph.] and my play brother in Cleveland [Ohio], John Addison, who's never even seen Kamau--people start sending checks and sending money. And we did a two-day film on Kamau Daaood. And a couple of years ago we released the twenty-eighth anniversary edition because the young people now know Kamau. They know his work, and they, they chant his lines and things, so he's still very active. And the fil- this film is now in its thirtieth year. Speaker 1: And you, you had the thousand dollar seed money. How much money did you raise on top of that in order to make the film? Speaker 2: I think I raised about another four thousand or so dollars, but then I put a lot of my own money into it as well. Speaker 1: And are you renting equipment? How are you-- Speaker 2: I'm renting and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --how are you funding this? Speaker 2: --renting and borrowing equipment. I'm renting equipment, usually renting it. Speaker 1: And are you working by yourself, or do you have a crew yet? Speaker 2: Oh, I have a crew. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I definitely have, because I stopped doing camera at a certain point. There--two things scare me. One was sound scares me. I'm gonna push the wrong button and erase everything (laughter), so. I tried to stay away from sound. But yes, Steve Farrier [Stephen Farrier] was my camera and--Steve Farrier and [HistoryMaker] Orlando Bagwell. Orlando Bagwell went on, of course, to do 'Eyes on the Prize' and become, you know, one of the heads of all kinds of stuff. Those were part of my crew. Russell Williams [HistoryMaker Russell Williams, II] was on my crew. He went on to win an Oscar [Academy Award] for sound mixer for-- Speaker 1: For, for-- Speaker 2: --two films. Speaker 1: --what films? Speaker 2: He won for 'Glory' and for 'Dancing with Wolves,' [sic. 'Dances with Wolves'] yes. So I worked with-- Speaker 1: Now these are black people? Speaker 2: These are all black. Yes, my, my crews were all black. Speaker 1: And how did you find them? Speaker 2: I guess I kind of met them in the film community, and I would--I have been very blessed to always have the best possible people working with me. So when I--the first shot we did in 'Life Is a Saxophone,' Kamau is running down the street. And you'll see he gets out of a car. And he was driving his car, and it was a raggedy car and it literally stopped. And I said, "Keep rolling, keep rolling." And then they--I sent one of the crew members over to help him push the car. We're rolling (laughter)--keep rolling. But when we set up, I said, "I want Kamau running down the street." And Orlando said, "Not in that direction." And I'm like, "Well why not, I wanna--." "Because your light is coming from so and so, and you need to turn around and have--." I went, "Oh." Working with people like that who're gonna pull your coat and tell you, you know, is, is so important, it's just invaluable. When I was in school [at Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California], and we had a lighting assignment, I just didn't guess at the assignment. I called one of those guys. I called the brother who got out of the film business and became one of our chief--fire chiefs. I called him, and I did my assignment with him--said, "No, this is how you do--this is how you do that." So I was learning from my pros-- Speaker 1: Excellent. Speaker 2: --you know, all of the time. Story_ID: 672187 Speaker 1: I always try to give the appearance of being, you know, competent when I'm filmmaking. But there was a moment we were shooting Kamau's film ['Life Is a Saxophone'], and this was the first time we were shooting inside of Watts Towers [Los Angeles, California]. And Kamau [Kamau Daaood] was at the piano. And I think that--no, I think this was--that was the first shoot we did. And I said, "Okay, you ready on sound?" "Um-hm." "Ready camera?" "Um-hm." And then I realized they're waiting for me to say action. And I--like, all of the fear just kind of like rises up me, and I hear myself going (voice breaks) "Action." Russell [HistoryMaker Russell Williams, II] falls over that, "Now, girl--," he's laughing so hard, you know. And I'm like, "Who said that," you know (laughter), you know? (Laughter) Where did that voice come from? But then, once I said it, things began to happen. I was like, "Oh, oh, okay, I can do this," you know. But it was that kind of, you know, learning process, learning on, learning on the set kind of process, yeah. Story_ID: 672188 Speaker 1: As a woman making this film ['Life Is a Saxophone'], because it's your film, you're directing it, were you ever challenged by any of the members of your team or crew? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I wasn't; I wasn't. The women who had those challenges were the women who were working inside the industry. I'm, I'm an independent filmmaker. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I'm doing--(clears throat)--I see something I want to do, I raise the money, I get the (unclear)--I do it. We formed a group called Reel Black Women, R-E-E-L, Black Women. And it was literally a support group for women working in the industry. We got together. We met once a month. Speaker 1: And who's we? Speaker 2: Some twenty-five, thirty black women, women who were the first ADs [assistant directors] in the writers guild [Writers Guild of America], women who were the, the first women in the directors guild [Directors Guild of America], women who were trying to get into the producers guild [Producers Guild of America], women who were working for independent companies. I'll go little batty if I tried to--Carol Mundy Lawrence. I think Neema Barnette might have been there. I'm trying to remember the--who was the, was literally the first black woman in the, in the directors guild. I'm sorry I'm--Kat--no. Get, I'm getting my filmmakers mixed up. I'll try to think of that name. But we came together, and the first thing we did was to celebrate victories. What victories did you have since last month? And the second thing was, what problems did you encounter? And then we sat around and was like black women in the act of being themselves. You know, we kicked off our shoes. We ate a lot of food. But if somebody had a problem once in a while we had to write a letter as an organization to let somebody in the industry know that this woman had some backup, because they were fa- they were facing the, "You're a woman and you're black; you can't tell me nothing," you know, situations on the set. Speaker 1: What year did you form this group? Speaker 2: I'm gonna ballpark say around maybe '81 [1981], ballpark, I'm not sure. Yeah, Auzaar Lawrence [ph.], she was a production manager. She was in it, yeah. But we literally supported each other. And it also meant that if you were on a set and you had a question or you had something coming up or you were you were trying to deal with a contract, you knew there was somebody that you could call, 'cause there were set designers, and there were sound ladies, and there were--and we, we, we came together 'cause we needed each other. Story_ID: 672189 Speaker 1: And when did you make the book that compiled all the people who--the black people-- Speaker 2: That was 1980. That was 1980, the 1980 directory of black film, TV and techni- 1980 directory of black film and TV technicians and artists, comma, West Coast ['1980 Directory of Black Film/TV: Technicians, West Coast,' S. Pearl Sharp] (laughter) is the whole title. Speaker 1: And this is over three hundred people, right? Speaker 2: Yes. I had almost 350 people. I got a lot of support from Alex Haley, because he loaned it--he gave us money and he loaned us money. And then he said, "Has Chu-" Chuck--Motown [Motown Records], Gordon--"Has [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy given--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Berry Gordy, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --you any money?" I said no. He said, "Call me Monday. I'm gonna call his office." Charles Floyd Johnson [HistoryMaker Charles F. Johnson] gave me money. Hal Williams, the actor, was working on a show on one of the lots. He said, "Give me all of the applications for them. I'm, I'll make sure everybody on this set fills this out and gives it back to me." Some people did not want to be associated with anything that was all black. So they didn't want to be in the book. Other people were like, "We can't wait for this to come out." So I had all kinds of support. Speaker 1: Why, why did you think it was important to make this directory? Speaker 2: Because people were saying, "Well, we would have hired somebody black, but we didn't know there was a black cameraman." "We didn't know there was a black wrangler." "We didn't know there was a black this," or, "We didn't know where to find them," or, "Nobody applied." Well, nobody got the app- (laughter)--you know. So that's why I thought it was important. And my dear friend, Arabella Chavers Julien worked with me, you know, hand--the late Ron Daniels [ph.], the late Arnold Dankston [ph.]. I had a team of about five people, and we put it together. We, we literally--Arabella is an actress, so if we got an acting call, we had the forms. We went and we did our audition, and then we started branching out on different parts of whatever lot we were on, Warner Bros. [Warner Bros. Studios, Burbank, California], Universal [Universal Studios Lot, Universal City, California], looking for black people--"Hi, what do you do here? We're doing this. Would you mind filling this out and getting it back to us? I, I--if you want to fill it out now I'll wait." And then, I said, "I have to have the key people to legitimize this." And I made a list of the fifteen people who had to be in the book. Charles Floyd Johnson had to be in the book. Sidney Poitier had to be in the book, you know, those kind of people. Speaker 1: And was he supportive? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, because when-- Speaker 1: Because in the early days, I mean, he was--he helped to make it so that there would be any stunts--stuntmen-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who were-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --black and things like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks had to be in the book. These-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --people had to be in the book, because then that brought the level of the book up, and it made it legit--la, la--legitimized it. And I said I'm going A to Z. What's the closest to Z? Wrangler. We--are there black people who are wranglers? Yes. I found a black wrangler. Good, you're in the--I'm good. So, we worked for more than a year on it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And who's we? Speaker 2: My team of five people, Arabella, Arnold, Ron, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, those people, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Story_ID: 672190 Speaker 1: After the book ['1980 Directory of Black Film/TV: Technicians, West Coast,' S. Pearl Sharp] was compiled, did you give it to the studios? Did you sell it? How--what did you-- Speaker 2: We sold it. We sold it. We went around with it. I remember taking it in to a black--one of the top ranking black executive's office and saying, you know, "This is the book, and we have done it." And he kept pushing it a little further away from him until it literally fell off the edge of his desk, and I caught it just before it hit the floor. But then we were in the hall someplace, and I was just wandering. You know, I found my way onto a lot, and I'm going in and out of doors. And people are looking at me ugly and you know, kind of, get out of here. And I bumped into the Fonz [Henry Winkler]. And I said, "Excuse me. I know this isn't what you do, but we have this book." He says, "Oh, this is wonderful. Hey, come, come, come here." He takes me down the hall. "Charlie [ph.], look, you gotta buy this. In fact, buy two." And he takes me into three and four rooms up and down the hall and makes people buy the book. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So we had pro and con, you know, experiences like-- Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: --that. Speaker 1: --after the book is now available and people have bought it, did you see a change in hiring practices? Speaker 2: I don't know. I wasn't able to measure that. We had a fabulous launch party for the book. I got some people who had camera setups and they set up three or four different camera setups. And I asked people to give me their work, and so people's work was running. And then when you'd signed in, instead of getting a name tag, you got a tag that had your page number if you were in the book. So we'd be like, "Oh, you're on forty-seven." "Oh, okay. Yeah, I'm fif-," you know, fabulous party. And then, you know, we ended up selling all the--I don't remember how many we had (simultaneous). Speaker 1: So you did it once. Speaker 2: Just once. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Holly--Bever- Beverly Wood--the Beverly Hills Hollywood chapter of NAA--try this again (laughter). The Beverly Hills/Hollywood chapter of the NAACP [Beverly Hills/Hollywood NAACP, Los Angeles, California] came to me and said they wanted to do a new edition about two years later. And I gave them all of the stuff and the budget and everything, and they were all, you know, pressured and tightened. Then, they just disappeared. So there was never another edition. I said I would help somebody do it, but I wouldn't do it myself. But the one story I want to share about this, Alex Haley contributed. He got some other people to contribute. And then at a certain point we were ready to go printing, but we were out of money. And so I went back to him, and I took a loan from him. He gave me a loan. And when the book was out, and we--when the book was out and we'd sold a lot of copies, I went back and I paid him back. And he said, "I'm stunned." I said, "Why?" He said, "I never expected to see this." I said, "But we said it was a loan." He said, "You have no idea how many people have borrowed money from me, and I never see them again." And I was almost in tears, just the thought that, you know, people would do that because they thought, you know, he had whatever he had, yeah. Story_ID: 672191 Speaker 1: Did you ever collaborate on, on--other times with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or any other civil rights organizations? Speaker 2: We tried to collaborate sometimes when we had the Black Anti-Defamation Coalition. We did collaborate with some organizations, particularly organizations in the other part of the city. The Beverly Hills/Hollywood NAACP [Los Angeles, California] became our, our most difficult problem rather than our ally. So, their leader, for example, was supporting the television series, 'Webster,' when we were saying 'Webster'--the last thing we needed, after having 'Diff'rent Strokes,' was another black child being raised by a white family. That, that was unacceptable. The NAACP was trying to support getting black writers on that show. So we kept bumping heads in situations like that. Speaker 1: Were they open to hearing your position? Speaker 2: Apparently not. We ne- I don't remember ever having any meetings with them. But, and they were getting our newsletters and, you know. I think at various times we would contact them and say, "This is the position we're taking." And I would find out from, you know, underground what, what they were doing. And it was, it was difficult. Speaker 1: It--so this is interesting because on the hand, here are black actors getting work. Shows are big. 'Webster' was a big show. 'Diff'rent Strokes' was a big show. There are those who, I'm sure, argued, "Well, they're getting work. What's the problem?" You--your organization stood up and said what? Speaker 2: We said that the image of the black family is one of our children being taken care of by other than us. And the industry is creating that, and this has to stop. It has to stop with 'Diff'rent Strokes.' And so that's why we were trying to get 'Webster' to not come on the air, to not, you know, materialize at all. We had a similar situation we dealt with, with the same actor, Gary Coleman. He was doing a movie of the week in which he was dreaming about all of his heroes. I was supposed to play his mother, and so I had a copy of the script. My father [Clarence Sharp] died, so--the, the weekend before I was supposed to start work, and so I didn't do the part. But before we got to that actual shooting, we realized that, in the script, all of his heroes were white. He didn't have any black heroes he was dreaming about, and we said this is unacceptable. So we had learned by that time to go to the top. [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume was one of the producers. So, I call up my friend, Robert Guillaume, and I say, "Yo, you're doing this show. And I'm with this group, and we would like to have--this is our position. Can you do anything about it?" And he said he didn't see any problem with it. So now we got to go to the next thing. So within about a week and a half, they are now paying to have one of [HistoryMaker] Mayme Clayton's huge posters of Deadwood Dick, the first black cowboy, rushed over to the studio and put up on the wall so they can re-film part of that scene, so at least he has one black hero. And I think they got some black basketball posters in there, so-- Speaker 1: So it worked. Speaker 2: Yeah, it worked. But of the residuals of things working, that happened also with 'Beulah Land.' People see the finished product. They don't know what we did, so they say, "Well, what were y'all complaining about? It looked good to me." Because you didn't know what they were going to do before we got them to reshoot something or change something. And that was one of the difficult things about maintaining support and keeping going with the blad- with the BAD-C, is that sometimes you couldn't see what we had changed, what we had done. Speaker 1: How difficult was it for Bill Cosby to get the 'The Cosby Show' on the air? I'm asking just in the sense of, these other shows are, are not rounded black family. 'The Cosby Show' was. It was, it became this incredible, iconic image of what black family life could be. Was it--be, because of his celebrity, was it easy for him to get it tapped? Speaker 2: I don't know how difficult it was for Cosby to get that show on the air. I do know that all of the writers on the pilot were white. So, for our position, that meant that the next show who cames along--who comes along, they're gonna go to those white writers first because they are now the experts on creating a black family show. Black writers came in later. But all of the, the writers, I was--understood, and tried to kind of verify that through my sources, were white on the pilot. So, that may have been one of the sacrifices he had to make to get the show on the air. I don't know. It may have been a game plan move. I, I don't know. I wasn't behind the scenes on that at all, so. Story_ID: 672192 Speaker 1: When 'The Cosby Show' came out, your organization, how, how did--apart from the writers, how did your organization view the content of the show? Speaker 2: We didn't deal with 'The Cosby Show,' I don't think, unless it was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --something affirmative coming out. Like, I remember when he was using Varnette Honeywood's artwork. And so, you know, to have the black art on-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --on the air was good. We focused primarily--excuse me--we focused primarily with the BAD-C [Black Anti-Defamation Coalition] on things that were going to be a problem. We focused on the--what, at that time, was going to be another attempt to do the Malcolm X story with Richard Pryor shortly after he had set his hair on fire and shot up his wife's [Deborah McGuire] tires and, and was doing drugs and all of that. And we said, "Mm, you know, maybe not," and, and with a white director and a white composer and-- Speaker 1: And he was to play Malcolm X? Speaker 2: And he was to play Malcolm X, yeah. We did a national campaign on that one. Speaker 1: And that worked. He didn't play. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right. But then again, interesting, go to the source. We went to the Shabazz family. And they said that Marvin Worth, the white producer who had done the very excellent documentary on Malcolm ['Malcolm X'], was a family friend, and he had full right to do whatever he wanted to do. So then we have to say okay. We do--the Shabazz family is supporting the project. We want to make that clear. And this is why we're not supporting it. Speaker 1: 'Cause you didn't think that Richard Pryor was befitting the role. Speaker 2: At that time, because of what he was doing in his pers- and I loved his acting. I wish he had done more acting. I wish he had been clean enough at that time, you know, in his life to take that on 'cause he would have done it beautifully. And many don't know that Marvin Worth was involved in the script that Spike Lee ended up doing, yeah. Speaker 1: So that-- Speaker 2: That thread-- Speaker 1: --became part-- Speaker 2: --that thread-- Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: --that thread continued, yeah. Speaker 1: What year are we talking about now? Speaker 2: We're--the BAD-C existed from 1980 to '85 [1985]. Story_ID: 672193 Speaker 1: Tell me, how did HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] affect the black theatrical community here in Los Angeles [California] and-- Speaker 2: I don't know how to answer that other than people dying. You know, one of my closest friends, yeah, died early. And--(clears throat)--so that was-- Speaker 1: 'Cause I remember-- Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: --in New York [New York], where I guess it was even more the center, just suddenly there were so many people leaving. You work with somebody one day, and the next day they were gone or they were sick and--so did--was the black community very heavily affected in those early years? Speaker 2: Really, I can't answer that. I only know my personal friends, you know, that were going through something and us trying to, you know, be as supportive as possible. I remember my friend, Arnold [ph.], being in the hospital. But he had gotten a call--he'd gotten, he'd gotten a, a small role on one of the soap operas. And so he's negotiating with the nurses that he's got to get out of the hospital just long enough to go and get his wardrobe fitting, because if he doesn't get his wardrobe fitting he won't be--you know, they'll, gonna cancel (laughter) the part. And so we're, we're standing by. And they let him go, and we get him, and he goes and he does his ward--he gets his wardrobe fitting, and he goes back to the hospital 'cause he's supposed to get out in a couple of days. And then he goes and does the part, you know (laughter) so. Speaker 1: So he was able to do that anyhow. Speaker 2: He was able to do that, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And then eventually, you know, eventually he was in hospice, and that was--my introduction to hospice was his being in the hospice, yeah. Speaker 1: How old was he? Speaker 2: He was in his, around forty, late thirties, around forty, yeah. And he was a triple threat, pro- producer, writer, director, who had a lot of independent things and was just passionate, you know, about the art and his work. Story_ID: 672194 Speaker 1: Tell me about Mildred P. Walter. Speaker 2: Okay, one second. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm a member of the Aquarian Spiritual Center [Los Angeles, California] and blasnot--I'm a member of the Aquarian Spiritual Center and black gnostic studies. And one of our members was Lloyd Walter [Earl Lloyd Walter, Jr.]. And through him I met his mother, Mildred Pitts Walter, who is a children's author, is the author of twenty-one children's books-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --and several short stories and numerous political essays. And so we kind of became friends. I would go to her book signings. And then she moved to Denver [Colorado]. And I was doing something in Denver, and I got to meet her again. We reconnected, and we kind of became more friends. And she at that time was working on her autobiography. And then a few years ago she moved--about ten years ago she moved to Northern California. And every once in a while she'd send me some pages, and I, I'd send some notes back and we'd be talking. And, and I'd be, you know, reading her books and, and supporting her. And then last year she asked me to really work with her and to edit the draft of the autobiography. And so we finished that last December, and it's now being submitted to publishing houses. And she is an absolute delight. She's ninety-five years old now. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And she is still acutely political and aware. She is on a campaign for reconciliation. She feels that until we have reconciliation around race in this country, we will not be able to move forward. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And what--how would she define reconciliation? Speaker 2: She feels, first of all, that we need to be sitting down and talking with each other, that we need to have some plans, that reparations about passing out money, it's not that kind of reparations. And she can speak, you know, to this much more clearly than I can. I feel badly (unclear) you know, speaking for her. But she feels that some of the programs that are in progress now are not going to solve the problem. And she has traveled all over the world, had the one whole chapter in her book on her travels. And her participation in things like the first--her obs- observations of the Negro Writers Conferences [National Black Writers Conference] that used to happen in Paris [France] and other countries where writers--black writers from all over the world would come together. And she shared her notes on that. She went to the fir bay- first Fest Pokoff--not Fest Pokoff--FESTAC, the very first FESTAC in African, in Nigeria [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture]. She attended that. She has been to Morocco with Randy Weston and (clears throat) had some personal engagement, you know, with Moroccans and been in their homes. So, her perspectives from being a world traveler, she brings that back to the situation here. And many people who were trying to work on this situation, when you don't have that, that world view, you see it a little differently. So I, I appreciate her perspective from the people she's met and the struggles she's observed. And she particularly always wants to know what's happening with the children. How are the children being taught? What are you doing with the children in the community? 'Cause she was a, a, a child teacher. She taught children here in the Los Angeles system [Los Angeles Unified School District], so. Speaker 1: There seems to be a thread here for you being attracted to these elder stateswomen. Speaker 2: Elder state- yes. I have Frances [Frances E. Williams] in my life. I have Mildred in my life-- Speaker 1: Beah Richards. Speaker 2: --Beah Richards in my life, yes, and they have strongly shaped me and my--in the last half of my life, because they're at that--I, I'm at a point now where I say I'm clearly aware that I no longer have unlimited time. And so they're twenty years even further toward that and the difficulties of aging, the things that you have to confront when you're aging so that you keep doing what you want to do, the challenges that come up, the way the community perceives you. I, I often saying that everybody wants to honor the queen mothers, but nobody wants to tell how old they are. So--you know (laughter), you know. So, that's kind of--which, which one are we doing here? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So yes, they have been a true gift because they're--working with Mildred on her autobiography, working with Beah on her collection of essays ['There's A Brown Girl in the Ring,' Beah Richards and S. Pearl Sharp], working with Frances on her archives, I'm looking at--back at the paths that they carved, the decisions that they made, and how they managed to keep doing what they were doing up until the very end. Story_ID: 672195 Speaker 1: Tell me about Margaret Prescod. Speaker 2: Margaret Prescod is a radio journalist and a women's activist. Margaret know--every women's activism thing that's happening in Los Angeles [California], Margaret is in there somewhere, whether it's trying to help women whose children have been taken by the, the children's welfare department, whether it's on the wage and income--income, whether it's on the murders of black women in Los Angeles, which we're currently working on a project on. She's involved in it, and she has a show on KPFK [KPFK Radio, Los Angeles, California] and Pacifica Radio, which airs in five Pacifica cities around the country and many other smaller cities, called 'Sojourner Truth' ['Sojourner Truth with Margaret Prescod']. And so--Sojourner Truth is the hero, and she tries to bring truth about women's issues but all political issues. She asked me a few years ago if I would do a series for her on something. Every once in a while I would do an essay or a commentary, and I would ask to have it, you know, put on KPFK. And so, I did. And working with her, I got introduced to many of the heroines of the women's movement whose names I had just heard, such as Dolores Huerta, who worked with the Chicano-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --leader. Help me out here. Speaker 1: Chegro-- Speaker 2: Chesay--Cesar-- Speaker 1: --Ch- Cesar Chavez. Speaker 2: Cesar Cha- yes. Speaker 1: Yes. And she's eighty-six-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or--yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Still going strong. Speaker 2: Still going strong, right, and they're on the phone, you know. She--"Well, let me call Dolores and see," you know. So a lot of these, these women who have been involved in these movements for decades-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I've been able to meet in person and, and talk to. And then, because she gave me the mic, I was able to interview women. So I did a series called 'Sojourner Goes to the Movies.' So when 'Belle' came out, I was able to talk to the sister who wrote 'Belle' [Misan Sagay]. And when something else came out, I talked to [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash. And when Sonia's documentary ['BaddDDD Sonia Sanchez'] came out, I interviewed Sonia [HistoryMaker Sonia Sanchez]. And then she did an hour interview with Sonia. And I brought Mildred Pitts Walter in. She did an hour interview with Mildred Pitts Walter. So that connection has been very nourishing for me because I'm able to get other people's stories out and, and their political activism and their involvement. Speaker 1: So it's her show, 'Sojourner Truth'--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's her show--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --but you sometimes are what a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm a segment--I'm a--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: A segment--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I'm a freelance volunteer segment producer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, 'cause Pacifica Radio Network, is that public radio? Speaker 2: That is listener sponsored. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We do not receive--we're listener-sponsored radio. We don't receive any PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] money-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --so. Speaker 1: --let's talk about that, that-- Speaker 2: Which means we're in--which we're in pledge drive like four or five times a year (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. And-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I know in New York [New York], that, like, there's WBAI [WBAI Radio], which is I think similar. Speaker 2: Right. So Margaret's show is heard on WBAI in New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's heard in Washington, D.C., on the Pacifica station [WPFW Radio]. And those are the three Pacifica stations it's heard on. Then it's heard in about twenty or thirty other stations on that tune into Pacifica programming. Speaker 1: And, in terms of the business model, yes, it's the drive. But again, in New York--I don't know whether it's true here--everybody's a volunteer. Is that, is that true? Speaker 2: No. There are staff members. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There are staff members. So she's a staff member because she's producing a show-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --four days a week. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she's a staff member. But when they ran into financial crisis two years ago-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --here in Los Angeles, everybody who stayed took a ha- a 50 percent cut in their salary for about two years. I think they're back now, but I'm not sure. It was, it was that rough. Speaker 1: Well, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I know that with--now we're speaking about the present, but with the current administration [of President Donald John Trump], in the federal government, the dollars have been cut for public radio and public television. What's happening? Do you know what's happening now? Speaker 2: They--I don't know that I'm at liberty to discuss this, but the network itself has been on the edge of doing a bankruptcy thing and trying to pull back from that, which is not the first time that has happened, it's, you know, in the many, many years that Pacifica has existed. It's just when you have an alternate voice out there, you're gonna be challenged, either individually or, or collectively, and, and that's what it is. So, KPFK and Pacifica is where you go when you want to find out where the rallies are. Of course, Amy Goodman's program-- Speaker 1: Sure, 'Democracy Now!'--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --'Democracy Now!' is where I go to learn the behind the scenes truth about the voting ballots or the voting machines or who wrote this or who said that. You're gonna be challenged, yeah, financially and in every other way. Story_ID: 672196 Speaker 1: Let's go back to Mildred P. Walter. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. You were telling me about her. She was also an activist. Speaker 2: Mildred Pitts Walter was also an activist. She and her husband [Earl Lloyd Walter, Sr.] ran the chapter of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] here in Los Angeles [California] in the '60s [1960s]. And then her husband went to the March on Washington, and she stayed here to put something else that they were doing here at the same time. So, and they did a lot of support of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party. And they supported the families who were being put off their land and losing their jobs because of the politi- political activity that was happening then in the South. So yes, she has always been an activist as well. Story_ID: 672197 Speaker 1: Sandra Evers-Manly. Speaker 2: Ah, yes, one of my other--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Tell-- Speaker 2: --diva heroes (laughter). Speaker 1: And she founded the Black Education--wa- wa- Speaker 2: Sandra Evers Manly founded the black Hollywood education resource center [Black Hollywood Education and Resource Center, Los Angeles, California], which is known as BHERC-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --for short. And again, the activist, she is part of the Medgar Evers family. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And the B--what BHERC does is support filmmakers by showing their shorts. They have a shorts festival every year of women, black women's films, one of black men's films. They have a three-day festival every year, and they honor some component of the industry. Like, one year they honored all of the older dancers who had been dancers, you know, back in the day. One year they honored all of the animators, black animators, one year all of the cinematographers. So she celebrates black filmmakers. They make cameras available to filmmakers. They run a teenage--a program for teens and animation in conjunction with the science center [California Science Center, Los Angeles, California]. So that's all that she does in the arts. In the community side, she--first, did I forget to say that she is a vice president of Northrop Grumman, is the on--the only, I think, black woman vice president of the Northrop Grumman Corporation. So she's able to use that influence to do community activities. And one of the things she does is working with women who have lost their children to gangs. So every Mother's Day she gives a luncheon for mothers who lost their children to gangs. And then she came to me one day and she said, "I want to do something with filmmakers and gangs." And we developed a project called BHERC Fights Back with Film [Fights Back with Film Media Project]. And we commissioned five filmmakers to do a film addressing gang violence. And I was a supervising producer on that project. And so those, those films have been made available for free to any organizations and people that are working on the gang situation. Speaker 1: Was--and what's her last name? Valerie [Valerie Goodloe]--what's the photographer, she'd--whose daughter's in a gang (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: I know who you mean. She was interviewed I think in one of the films. Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --because--and I can't think--that's terrible. She was a photographer for Ebony, Jet for many, many years. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And her daughter--I don't--she might still be in the gang. I'm not sure. Speaker 2: I think, I think one of the women interviewed her and the daughter. But I remember, definitely remember the mother and yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so what, what does Sandra do at Northrop Grumman, do you know? Speaker 2: She is the vice president of I think ethics and something else. So when they had the weather damage of the coast of Louisiana, with the big hurricanes--I forget which name it was--part of her job was to make sure that she--they found all of their people and make sure their people got their payroll and, and try to help them get housing and help--and because Northrop Grumman was one of the largest employers on the coast, on the ships, and so they had a lot of people down there. So that's some of the, the-- Speaker 1: So it's an internal role. Speaker 2: It's an internal role, but publicly what she does is she, she promotes and funds a lot of events and organizations in the community. And you'll see, you know, courtesy of Northrop Grumman. She's the one-- Speaker 1: She's the one who's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --one behind that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --spearheading that. Speaker 2: Yeah, but just for, sometimes for a cameraman to be able to go and--I think they still have them, but at one point they had two cameras that, if you were shooting something, you know, you could borrow it, if you were shooting a piece that was, you know, not, not a shoot your mama piece, but a-- Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: --(laughter) you know. Story_ID: 672198 Speaker 1: Do you know when she founded BHERC [Black Hollywood Education and Resource Center, Los Angeles, California], how long ago? Speaker 2: It's been a long time. One of the things they have is the First Weekend Club, and it's a national club that you sign on by email. And the idea is to go out and support-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --black films on the first weekend because the first weekend determines the box office for the rest of the run. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I know they've had First Weekend Club for maybe fifteen, at least fifteen years, maybe longer. Speaker 1: I'm asking because one of the things that commonly happens with mature organizations, especially mature activist organizations, is that there can be a sort of weathering of them, dwindling of the impact. But you're describing something different. I'm curious-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what she has done to keep it--you know, to keep the fire burning, so to speak, so that it still is very active in the community. Speaker 2: I think what Sandra [Sandra Evers-Manly] has done is she has a core of about six or seven people. And they're in there tight. So there's not a whole lot of people running things. You'll see the same people at the table when you come into the film festivals. You know, you'll be dealing with the same people if you're entering your film. You'll see the same people at the events, at award events, so, that core, John Forbes, who runs the offices now because Northrop Grumman [Northrop Grumman Corporation] moved from Los Angeles [California] to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. So she had to, actually had to relocate, but she still, you know, she's back and forth. And Billie Green, who works for one of our councilmen, is always there all the time. So there's that, that tight core of people. And she knows that they have access to whatever they need, and they can--they know the deal. They know the program. Speaker 1: And are there young people also working with the organization? Speaker 2: I'm not sure in terms of the planning and structure, but, but the young filmmakers, you know, come through. And every event there's always food, so there's always time to socialize; filmmakers get to know each other. She also works with one of the high schools where the kids have a video program. And so they get to have their film screened at Raleigh Studios [Los Angeles, California] and bring their families and, and get feedback and you know, get the applause for their work. And a lot of those young people are working on the issues that are around them, the housing situation, the gang situation, the, the drug situation, the, the murders of their family members. It's--you get a whole different perspective when you let--give young people a camera and let them go do whatever they want to do. That's when you-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --you get another kind of truth coming back at you. Story_ID: 672199 Speaker 1: The Black Collectors Project [ph.], what is that? Speaker 2: The Black Collectors Project was one of those ideas that artists get and you say, "Oh, this is a fabulous idea, and it must be done." And then you start doing it (laughter), and it doesn't get finished. But I was around a number of collectors like [HistoryMaker] Mayme Clayton, and I said, "We need to capture the stories of the black collectors because so much black memorabilia is in the hands of white collectors. And I'll talk to some of them, but I want to talk to black collectors." And so every opportunity that I got to travel someplace or could make an opportunity, in that city, I would find out where the black collectors were and start interviewing them, people who are book collectors, who collected--there's a museum in Denver [Colorado] on the black cowboy [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center]. I got to meet with them. Somebody else, I met a woman who, they were clearing out their parents' trunk, their parents' house, and there were these two trunks. And her brothers were throwing everything away, and she stopped them. And in it were uniforms from the Civil War period and older photographs of their grandparents who were in the military, people who were collecting these things and preserving them. And the story is about how they came to find them. And I thought, you know, this would be wonderful, and it would be a book. And I did all this research, and I took pictures. And then people--the industry kind of said, "Well, what is--what are the pricing? What's, what's the--what are they charging for this and that?" I said, "That's--it's not that kind of book." And that was the only kind of book they wanted, was another book that told you what the value was of this or the value wasn't that. And I said, "That's not the book I'm doing." So I never finished it, but I'm hoping to do something with it, with the Mayme Clayton Library [Mayme A. Clayton Library and Museum] because I still have the stories and, and the-- Speaker 1: And where-- Speaker 2: --photographs. Speaker 1: --will--does the library exist now? Speaker 2: The Mayme Clayton Library is-- Speaker 1: Where is that? Speaker 2: That's in Culver City [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mayme Clayton is another of my divas. I'm sorry. I should have put her on the list (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, let's--please tell who she is. Speaker 2: Mayme Clayton was raised in the South, in a segregated environment. She became a librarian, and she collected the, what is considered one of the largest collections of black history memorabilia on the West Coast. And for many years we whispered about it because it was in her garage. So she has a first edition Phillis Wheatley poetry book. She has--(unclear)--a prime condition 35mm print of 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]. She has all this kind of stuff, and it was in the garage (laughter). So her, one of her brothers--one of her sons is the artist Avery Clayton. And he started, started a movement to get a building. And so the County of Los Angeles [Los Angeles County, California] gave us one of their old buildings, and that's where the library has been for about the last ten years, I think. Speaker 1: Great. Speaker 2: And she passed, but she got to have the keys in her hand a few weeks before she passed-- Speaker 1: Oh, wonderful. Speaker 2: --so that she knew that there was a place for the collection. So it's, it's not all that we want it to be yet, but it is a place where people can come and see some exhibits. They show a lot of black films there. They, they have a lot of jazz music there. The black American documentary filmmakers that I belong to, BADWest [Black Association of Documentary Filmmakers - West], once a month we show a film for free to the community, a documentary film, and have a discussion about it. Speaker 1: Great. Speaker 2: So it's very much being used. Prior to the library itself being established, Mayme Clayton established the Black American Cinema Socie- the Black Talkies, first of all. She had a connection with Eastman Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company], Rochester [New York], in which she could take some of the films that were in the--earliest films of black people that were in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] and get them restored--she worked with--and to get them restored. And she would show them in the Black Talkies. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So, before video, before VHS videos, we were able to see a lot of these films in the festivals. Out of that festival, we created the Black American Cinema Society. And I say we because me, J.P. Hall [ph.], and Jeffrey [ph.]--a photographer named, who just went under Jeffrey, I think, and a couple of other people were in the first meetings to form the Black American Cinema Society. And that society gave grants to filmmakers for their films. So, and it's, it was like, it was a check. I mean, I--first time I got it, it's just a check with your name on it. It doesn't say you have to spend it on film or any--you can pay the rent, you know (laughter). You can get--buy food, whatever you ever you need to do with it. And people like Charles Burnett, [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash, so many, many filmmakers have been winners and got their first acknowledgement. My first acknowledgement that I'm officially a filmmaker came from that grant and the Black American Cinema Society. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And Mayme just, she was very active, and she just, that's what she loved doing. Speaker 1: And what was her work? Speaker 2: She'd been a librarian. Speaker 1: Oh, so that was, that was-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --right, okay. Speaker 2: --and--but she retired. And she has sheet music. She has albums and you know, films. They have the films from all of the competitions, the films like, you know, I said 'Porgy and Bess' that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --she showed, the relationship that she had with the Library of Congress and with Kodak that allowed so many things to happen in terms of preserving that part of our history. And she talks about when she was little, having to sit in the balcony to watch the films in the segregated movie theater. Speaker 1: And now she had the films. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes. Story_ID: 672200 Speaker 1: Tell me about ABLAC. Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) ABLAC. Speaker 1: ABLAC, yes, ABLAC. Speaker 2: ABLAC, or doesn't (laughter)--it's the Alfred and Bernice Ligon Aquarian Collection. Alfred [Alfred Ligon] and Bernice Ligon [Bernice Goodwin Ligon] owned the Aquarian bookstore [Aquarian Book Shop, Los Angeles, California], which when was--in 1992, when we had the riots [Watts riots], the store was burned down. It was in its fifty-first year and at that time was the longest running, not the first, but the longest running black bookstore still running in America. So that was a tremendous, tremendous loss. Speaker 1: Where was it located? Speaker 2: It was located at that time on the corner of Western [Avenue] and King Boulevard [Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard]. But they had a, they also had an Aquarian Spiritual Center [Los Angeles, California]. And Dr. Ligon was a metaphysician, so was his, his wife, Bernice. And they had started the store originally in the 1930s, and it had grown through all of those years. And he had started teaching metaphysics in those years. He had studied with Manly P. Hall. He had studied with the Rosicrucians. And he developed a program called the black gnostic studies, which is a twenty-year-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --study program. And so once you're a member of the Aquarian you're always a member of the Aquarian. So they had a building where the, the store had been at some point in their home. And then down the street on the corner they had a, a apartment building where the store had moved. And at one point we had the store on the, on the first floor and the center on the second floor. And so you would see people come in, and they'd have their stuff in their arms. They say, "Hello," and then they rush up the steps, you know. And we opened a section just with the Aquarian books up there. Then when they opened the mall at the Baldwin Hills Crenshaw Mall [Baldwin Hills Crenshaw Plaza, Los Angeles, California], he kind of got mall fever. And he wanted to move in there, but it got to be too complicated. But he had to move some place, so he moved down to Western and King. When the riots happened, I understand that brothers came in said, you know, "We respect what you're doing. And we're letting you know we're burning down this sucker tonight because there's a car--Ace car when you get your car supplies--on the corner. And when it's--because the way it's built, this whole corner's gonna go." And-- Speaker 1: Police had told you I guess. Speaker 2: They told him, but he didn't, he didn't move. He--if he had made one phone call to one of us, we'd come there and had it cleared out. For some reason he didn't do that. And so, not only did all the, the books that were burn down, but people like Varnette Honeywood and Bernard Hoyes and people had their original art. So, you know, that went and other things went, people who were doing their greeting card lines. And that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that was the one place where he would accept them. You know, they could be selling-- Speaker 1: On consignment or whatever. Speaker 2: The great artist Charles White [Charles Wilbert White] sold his very first work in the store, yeah, in back in--before I, and before I knew them. So in--I came out-- Speaker 1: So these are riots after Rodney King? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And we went--the next day, one of the teachers at the center, D.C. Sanyeke [ph.] and I converged at the same time on the parking lot. And there was only part of one book that were pages that we could actually pick up. And ironically, it was a book of essays about revolution. And we were able gather up about twenty or thirty pages, and we divided them among, you know, some of the members. Yeah, so I had mine framed on the wall. Speaker 1: And did he ever remake the store? Speaker 2: They, they did open briefly in another place, but it, it never really worked because they were, they were up in there, you know, eighties and-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --at that time. And--but the studies continued. The studies are still ongoing. There were chapters in seven cities, so there are people all of the country who are, at various times, are involved in the studies. And it's--though it's interesting because in around the '90s [1990s], there began to be discussions about how do we continue the studies in the digital age. A lot of this could be digitized, and we don't have to have a building. You know, we don't have to have that. And so, so there was a debate ongoing. And then fate kind of stepped in. The new store burned down. The building for the old store, he left to one of his relatives, so we had to move everything out of it, including his amazing collection. So we carried this stuff around for twelve years, paying for vaults and putting in people's garages and this garage. And finally, in a conversation that lasted about twenty minutes, our current leader, Orlando--Or- Orland Bag- I'm getting my peop- my filmmakers and my--Orland Bishop, our current leader, Orland Bishop, had a conversation at Cal State University, Dominguez Hills [California State University, Dominguez Hills, Carson, California], and in twenty minutes it was all decided. So, two years ago the collection of more than five thousand pieces, books, films, photos, charts, art, fine art, was moved into that collection. So it has a happy home. Speaker 1: That's great. Speaker 2: There are professors who are developing academic programs around the collection. And it's like (makes sound) (laughter). Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was a lot. Story_ID: 672201 Speaker 1: In 1993, you put together a book, 'Black Women For Beginners' [S. Pearl Sharp and Beverly Hawkins Hall]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell me what that book is about? Speaker 2: There is a documentary comic book series, adult comic book series called 'For Beginners.' And it was started by Glenn Thompson, who is a black publisher, who started his company in London [England] when he lived there and then came back to the United States. And we had met about him publishing my poetry book, 'Typing in the Dark' [S. Pearl Sharp]. And we were on a trip to Alex Haley's farm. And on the way back he said, I--he was talking about the books he was going to do next. And I said, quite sarcastically, "You ought to do 'Black Women For Beginners.'" And he said, "That's a great idea." I said, "No, no, I was just joking, (laughter) no, really I was joking." And he kept, "No, that's a great idea, and you should do it." No, no, no, everybody knows everything about black women, you know. And I kept saying that and kept saying that, and then the other part of my brain is like (gesture). So we get to the point we were changing planes. He's going back to New York. I'm going back to California. And by the time I get off the plane in Los Angeles, I had actually worked out an outline of the thirteen chapters of the book that I'm not, absolutely not going to write. The joy of doing the black beginners seri--the 'For Beginners' series is that they have a lot of art and visuals in them, and you can be a bit sassy, you know. You don't have--it is not an academic kind of thing, so I was able to have fun with it. But one of the things I knew immediately is I did not want it to be black women parenthesis in the United States. I wanted it to be international. So, I was introduced to a book called 'Farbe bekennen' [Katharina Oguntoye], a German book about black women in Germany, and found out that in about six months it was going to be coming out in English. So I was like, you know, pantingly waiting for that to happen. And black women who, like Jews, some of them were, were being sought after and sterilized because they were black. There are women who actually went through that or who had got doctors to give them papers that were forged that said that they had been sterilized so that they, you know, would not be taken. And there were women who grew up in, in Germany, and I found out that Audre Lorde, through her going there and teaching, was the one who got them to coin the, the phrase Afro German. They had never thought of themselves as being Afro German before. I met with a woman in, in Trini- Trinidad who worked with women trying to change the thought process around abuse in a marriage because Trinidadian women accepted that as part of the marriage contract. So, I met with--again, I went back to my black Russians again. So I was trying to keep it as international as I possibly could. And I did a lot of research on it before I started the writing. And the book came out in '93 [1993]. It stayed in print until Glenn died around 2000, maybe. It was out of print about six or seven years while they figured out what was going to happen 'cause he had not left clear instructions. And then someone bought the company. A number of companies have been trying to get the series. My book is I think number fifty-four in the 'For Beginners' series. There are about sixty books in the series now. So Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House] picked twenty titles. Fortunately, one is 'Black Women For Beginners.' One was Herb's, the journalist in New York [New York], Herb [Herb Boyd]--not Her- Herb Jeffries. Herb--[clearing throat]--he wrote, he wrote the book on Harlem [New York, New York], wrote the book on Langston [sic. 'Baldwin's Harlem: A Biography of James Baldwin']. Why am I forgetting Herb's last name. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: This is so embarrassing. He's on WBAI [WBAI Radio, New York, New York] or was. Speaker 1: Lowe? Speaker 2: No, not Herb Lowe [ph.]. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Not Herb Jeffries the actor. This is terrible--(unclear)--his book and another brother's book on the black Holocaust ['The Black Holocaust For Beginners'], Sam [S.E. Anderson]--(unclear) gonna be a name day--Rose Mary Amelia's [ph.] husband. Speaker 1: I don't know him. Speaker 2: Sam, extremely political brother, Rasta brother. Anyway, those three books are part of the twenty that--you're gonna obviously have to edit this--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And so, 'For Beginners'--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --'cause I can't think of the name. Story_ID: 672202 Speaker 1: What is, what's the concept behind the book ['Black Women For Beginners,' S. Pearl Sharp and Beverly Hawkins Hall]? Speaker 2: The concept is, here's all the information you need to know about this subject. So in addition to our books, there is the 'U.S. Constitution For Beginners' [Steve Bachmann], there is 'Elvis Presley For Beginners' [ph.], there's 'Psychology For Beginners' [ph.], there's 'Marxism For Beginners' [ph.], 'Trotsky For Beginners,' because he was very much into the Marxism, Trotsky [Leon Trotsky] stuff, so he started with those kind of titles. Those were the first titles that he did with writers in London [England] when he opened the company. And then when he came here, he started, you know, looking for some of the black writers and, and doing those-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --those titles. Speaker 1: --in yours, were there thirteen women writers? Is that how-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: --it was broken-- Speaker 2: No, there were-- Speaker 1: How was it broken out? Speaker 2: --I had come up with thirteen chapters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So one of my chapters is "Names By Which She is Known." And I started trying to find all the names that they call black women and their definition, so it's like a little-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --chapter dictionary. Another chapter is "Madonna or--or Whore," because we're looked at in both ways, "Madonna or Madam" [sic. "Madonnas or Madams"]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I look at--I have images and talk about how the woman is both revered and looked at as, you know, the favorite slut of the world. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, so each chapter tackles a different subject-- Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: --talk about women who are successful in business, the first women in banking, first women in politics, or, or not necessarily the first, but women who are doing something in politics. So I was able to look at different chapters like that. Speaker 1: And how long did it take you to do the book? Speaker 2: I think I worked on it for about--I made myself do, like, eight weeks of research by even--before I would even let myself start writing, 'cause I knew once I started writing, I'd be, you know, be crazy. I think I worked on it about a year, actually. And the artist in my book is Beverly Hawkins Hall here in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: So it's line artists, not photographs. Speaker 2: It's a combination. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But in, in--I created three characters for the book, Mohee--Mohenjo-Daro, who is like an ancient figure, and then the choir master who's our, like the religious choir lady. And then--who's my main lady? I forget her name, but she's like the reporter, journalist, you know, the modern-day women. So the drawings of them come throughout the book. And they've got little things that they're saying, you know, so they might be saying something next to a picture. So (laughter)--so it was a lot fun. It was a lot of work, but it was a lot of fun to do. Story_ID: 672203 Speaker 1: And in keeping with books, you were senior editor for the Juneteenth Audio Books-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: This was a dream project by a man named Steve Williams, who is a, one of the leading sound engineers. He's currently working for NBC, running I think their sound department. And he always wanted to do the audio books. There were other audio book companies out that were doing things independently. This was the first company to have a contract with a major company, and then he made a contract with Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.]. And the first project we did, it was Susan L. Taylor [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] from Essence, her book, 'Living'-- Speaker 1: 'In the Spirit' ['In the Spirit: The Inspirational Writings,' Susan L. Taylor]. Speaker 2: 'In the Spirit,' right. And then we did [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell's 'Your Blues Ain't Like Mine' ['Your Blues Ain't Like Mine: A Novel'], which I had the, the stress of, of doing the abridgement on because you can't--they were--we weren't doing the whole book on the longer pieces. You're doing the abridged version. Speaker 1: So how does that work, to do an abridged version of a book that's so popular? Speaker 2: It's, it's painful. It's painful because you have to decide in each chapter what sections can be dropped, what actual literary stuff can be dropped without destroying the story, to get it down to X number of words, which represents X number of minutes. So (laughter)-- Speaker 1: And did she have final say over this? Speaker 2: I think Bebe Moore had passed at that time. Speaker 1: Ah, okay. Speaker 2: You know, she passed so young. Speaker 1: Yes, she did. Speaker 2: She passed so young, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Susan did her own reading. Susan was in the studio with us. So, my job was to help determine which pieces we were going to work on, as, as senior editor, and then also to be one of the in-studio directors. So I got to work-- Speaker 1: And in her case-- Speaker 2: --with Susan-- Speaker 1: --because 'In the Spirit' was pretty compact, it was just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which ones as opposed to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't-- Speaker 1: --editing them. Speaker 2: --we did most of hers. I think-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we were able to fit most of hers in, yeah. But again, at that time, we were working on audio cassette. You know, there's only so much, even if on a ninety-minute audio cassette-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --or 120. And then you have to get into it gets flipped over here and all the technical stuff that we went through. The, the delivery--the first night, and they give you a delivery date. That's not option. And this was something I learned about the industry. When they give you a delivery date, they've gone all the way to--they, they have negotiated shelf space-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in a store. And that shelf space is going to be occupied by your product starting on a certain date, which means it has to be delivered to--which means it has to be--and it dominoes backwards. So when they give you a delivery date, they're not playing. And we were literally up all night. It got to the point we're like, "Okay, I'm gonna sit for a while, and, and you work, and then, then I'll work," you know, trying to keep each other awake. And we finished at seven o'clock in the morning-- Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness. Speaker 2: --and drove directly to wherever it had to be shipped to (laughter)-- Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: --so. Speaker 1: --for Susan, who obviously is a pro, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --she was not a, she wasn't a broadcaster. Speaker 2: No, she wasn't. Speaker 1: So how was the process of having her record her work? Speaker 2: A lot of editing. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: A lot of editing, literally. Speaker 1: Well, because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --if that's not what you do-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there were something she was doing with her mouth. I don't remember what it is now, but that all had to be, had, all had to be edited. And the whole Pro Tools thing was kind of-- Speaker 1: New (laughter). Speaker 2: --new then, you know. And we had a brother who had Pro Tools, but he had been doing music. He hadn't been doing this thing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Audio--voice (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --where every comma, you can hear. You know what I'm saying? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It was whole 'nother thing. It was a, it was a learning experience every day. Speaker 1: I bet. Speaker 2: Was a learning experience every day, but I was very proud of, of the products that we, that we put out there. Speaker 1: And how long did that company stay in business? Speaker 2: We got the first four products, and then Time Warner, we were working on--we had contracts for another four--six I think. But Time Warner did not renew the contract, which was very weird because we had just, we'd only delivered one product. So they--it couldn't--it wasn't like they said, "Well, you know, you're not delivering well." We'd only delivered Susan's product, and we were in the process of the next three. Speaker 1: So Bebe's never came out? Speaker 2: It came out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They came out, but we didn't get to--we had a contract with [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni-- Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: --to do hers. You know, she never got to, to do it. So we kind of put a monkey wrench in a number of writers who had held off to do their audio book with us. Speaker 1: 'Cause, 'cause you were a black publisher. Speaker 2: Because we were a black company, right. And then Time Warner, you know, terminated it, and we, we couldn't do it. So, yeah, it was, it was very--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --very painful. Story_ID: 672204 Speaker 1: You worked for many years on your passion project, the, the, 'The Healing Passage,' right? Speaker 2: 'The Healing Passage: Voices from the Water,' yes-- Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: --yeah. A friend of mine, Riua Akinshegun, was a visual artist. Speaker 1: Can you spell it? Speaker 2: Riua, R-I-U-A, Akinshegun, A-K-I-N-S-H-E-G-U-N. And I put a photo of her on the list. Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: So it's on there. So I'll start over. A friend of mine, Akia (laughter)--yeah, I'll start over, right (laughter). A friend of mine, Riua Akinshegun, who is a visual artist, was doing an art installation on--called 'The Most Mutinous Leapt Overboard.' And it was an invitation for people to come in and address the subject of slavery, the idea that it wasn't something that we participated in willingly, and that the most mutinous, you know, leapt overboard. And there were physical things that you could do in this installation. And I was fascinated by it, and I was fascinated by the emotional response that people were having. There were place where you could, you could get a doll when you came in, and you could decorate your doll, and to watch men, you know, who looked like they'd be too hip and you know, cool to be doing that, to be intensely working on these dolls, you know, or writing a letter to an ancestor. I, I said, I--"This is has to be documented." And she said, "Well, okay, but I'm getting ready to move to Suriname," like in a, in a few weeks--like, ah (laughter). So I borrowed some money from some place real quick, and we went to the California African American Museum [Los Angeles, California], and somebody set up for me to go in and kind of recreate her exhibit, open it to the public, have people come in and film it. When I looked at the footage, the emotional tenor that I had seen before wasn't there. And I was like, you know, there's something missing here. I, I don't know quite how to fix this. I'm gonna have to think about this for a while. And while I was thinking about it other things began to happen, and so the film ended up having twelve artists rather than one. [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr. is in the film; Ysaye Barnwell from Sweet Honey in the Rock; the photojournalist, [HistoryMaker] Chester Higgins, Jr.; the filmmaker-- Speaker 1: Sure-- Speaker 2: --Haile Gerima; a white filmmaker, Katrina Browne, whose family was very involved in the slave trade, and she invited them to go back and trace their steps through the slave trade and talk about-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --their responsibility there; the photo--the journalist, Gil Noble; Dr. ben-Jochannan [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan]; and I--Reverend, Reverend Youngblood [Johnny Ray Youngblood], who created--help create the MAAFA program. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so, it was a journey of, of twelve years. In the process, I got to go to Senegal and sprinkle my godfather's ashes and put that in the film. None of the artists that I mentioned, Dadisi Sanyika, Lola Kemp, (unclear), nobody said, "Call my agent," or anything like--they all said, "What do you need me to do?" I was able to get Ysaye Barnwell and Babatunde Olatunji together, you know, at (unclear). And at a certain point, I just realized that the film was not in my control, that the ancestors were taking over this, and I just needed to stay tuned and be ready. So things happened in the most amazing ways I could never have planned on, that, you know, brought elements into the film. And for about two, two and a half years, in my living room were these big boards and all of these three by five filer--file cards. And I was literally making a quilt between the artists that I had and the subjects that I wanted to cover and who was talking about what and who really talked a lot about this, and they talked a little bit about that. And I kept moving around, and, and anybody who came in had to, like, climb over it or move around (laughter) because I just--you know, that was it. That was-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it was--that was it. Speaker 1: How did you fund it? Speaker 2: I funded it through every possible means (laughter). Speaker 1: Because it's twelve years. Speaker 2: By any means necessary. I, I went back to work acting, and I, and I literally said to my agents, "I'm coming back in. I'm making a film and coming back in." And you know, that's--I would get work. Speaker 1: And they got you work. Speaker 2: And then, again, Sandra Evers-Manly, through BHERC [Black Hollywood Education and Resource Center, Los Angeles, California], she was extremely supportive. She gave me a--got me a big chunk of money. I sent out--I did the letters and the mailers. I had, I had screenings of the work in progress in Oakland [California], in Denver [Colorado], in San Diego [California], where I--in New York [New York], wherever I can have a screening of the work in progress. And then, you know, would send checks. It was a by any means necessary. I got a lot in-kind services. Somebody let me--my, my post-production director, Joy Rencher, the only female post-production director probably in the country with her own office, who helped Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company] develop the transition between film and digital literally-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --she helped them do that. She let me store the things in her apartment--in her studio for free. Somebody else-- Speaker 1: That's great. Speaker 2: --we know would help get plane tickets, would--you know, whatever, yeah. Speaker 1: And you completed it in '04 [2004]? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 672205 Speaker 1: And so, it--you, you complete it ['The Healing Passage: Voices from the Water'] in 2004. Where do you show it? Speaker 2: I show it wherever (laughter), anybody who'll--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But do you submit it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --show it. Speaker 1: --to any of the film festivals? Speaker 2: Oh, it was submitted to a lot of fi- festivals in the first year or so. Usually, they only want fest--films that have come out in that year. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But it won seven festivals, and I was, you know, thrilled about that. We won the audience favorite in documentary from the Pan African Film Festival here. We won the Denver Pan African Film Festival [Denver, Colorado]. We won the African Film Festival [African Film Festival, Inc.] in New York [New York African Film Festival, New York, New York], won best director, won a film festival in South Carolina; won the Henry Hampton award from the Roxbury Film Festival in Boston [Massachusetts] for excellence in filmmaking [Henry Hampton Award for Excellence in Documentary Filmmaking]. So I knew it would do that. I knew it would, I knew it would do that. What was most important is, to me, is the discussions that happened after the film, when--or, or when I stand in the back of the theater and I see people responding. Like, I was standing behind the, the audience once when the ash ceremony came up. And there were two sisters in the African attire and their gala. And one just kind of broke down and started crying, and, and the other just put her arm around over and, and you know, and they held each other. So I know that then--that's when I know the film is working, when people--when something in the film touches them. And that's what you--that's what every filmmaker wants to have happen-- Speaker 1: Did it-- Speaker 2: --with their film. Speaker 1: --reach any level of commercial success? Speaker 2: It did, finally. It took a while, but seven years after the film came out, the gentlemen who at that time owned the Documentary Channel, decided that he would like to do something around black documentaries. And he came to the two black documentary filmmaking groups, the one in, here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and the one in New York [New York]. And here in L.A.-- Speaker 1: New York is Black Filmmakers Foundation [sic. Black Filmmaker Foundation]? Speaker 2: No. New York is Black Docs Collective [Black Documentary Collective], I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They're Black, Black Docs Collective. I think that's the right-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --name, BDC, yes, Black Docs Collective. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was founded by St. Clair Bourne. And ours-- Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, sure. Speaker 2: --out here was founded by St. Clair Bourne. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They functioned as a collective. We functioned more as a more organized committee kind of thing. But I was the only person in the group who had a film ready to go at that time. And then LisaGay Hamilton had been finished a piece ['Beah: A Black Woman Speaks'] on Beah [Beah Richards]. So he decided to use my film to kick off the series. And it was an absolute blessing because not only was it showing a lot on cable now, but they had a store. And they sold more copies of the DVD in the first-- Speaker 1: Oh, great. Speaker 2: --six weeks than I had been selling since the film came out, literally (laughter). They kept calling back, changing the order and raising it 'cause people were calling up ordering it. So that was, yeah, that was the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And when was that? Speaker 2: That was, it was on in 2011 and '12 [2012]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I was finally able to get the film out of debt because of that, yeah. Speaker 1: For a documentary, that says a lot because--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It says a lot--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --they're often just passion-funded and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 672206 Speaker 1: You worked for a number of years, from 2003 to 2010, on NPR [National Public Radio]. What were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you doing for NPR? Speaker 2: There's a wonderful producer, Roy Hurst, who I had worked with at KPFK [KPFK Radio, Los Angeles, California]--(clears throat). He had done a number of really seminal projects. And he went to NPR and was working on [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley's show ['The Tavis Smiley Show'] and suggested that they have essays and commentators come in. And he reached out to three of us, Mary Donkua [ph.], the author, was one, and myself, and the brother whose name is escaping me right now; I'm sorry. And so the three of us were invited to submit commentaries, and that's how I got on, on NPR. Speaker 1: So it was through being on Tavis' show, for starters? Speaker 2: No. It was, it was through being--working with Roy at KPFK. And then when he went to work on Tavis' show and presented the idea and asked us to present, then through then I ended up being on Tavis' show. Speaker 1: I got it. Speaker 2: Then when Tavis left NPR and start to doing his show independently through PRI [Public Radio International], Roy stayed at NPR, and the show became 'News and Notes.' So I did-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that. And then I had met Michele [Michele Martin], Michele, Michele-- Speaker 1: I know, oh, my gosh. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Are we gonna do this? Speaker 1: No, the--we, no, we can't-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)--wait, wait, wait-- Speaker 1: --do this. Speaker 2: We can't do this. Speaker 1: We can't do this. Speaker 2: We can't do this. Speaker 1: Mich- (laughter)--so is it-- Speaker 2: Michele-- Speaker 1: --(unclear)--Norris? Michele-- Speaker 2: Michele Norris, Michele Mitchell. Speaker 1: Michele Nor- Speaker 2: (Unclear)--Norris, Norris. Speaker 1: Because there are two. Speaker 2: I know. She does--she's still on NPR. She's the only one left. Speaker 1: It's the Michele Norris is who I think it is. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) We're gonna check. Speaker 2: Okay. I'll just say-- Speaker 1: Because there are two Micheles. Speaker 2: --I'll say, and then I went to--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And so what were you doing? Speaker 2: I was, initially I was doing commentaries. And then Roy pitched the idea of having longer essay pieces. And he asked me if I would like to do it. I said yes, because for commentaries we were limited to two and a half to three minutes. With the essay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's hard (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --we could stretch out to five to six minutes, maybe six and a half, maybe even seven. So the first piece I did was about going back to Fort Scott, Kansas, where we shot 'The Learning Tree,' and looking at what was happening in Fort Scott now and comparing it to what was happening when we shot 'The Learning Tree.' Speaker 1: And so you literally went there. Speaker 2: I had done that already, and I had it--I had come back recently, and so that was the first essay that I did. And it was the first--I think the first essay that they ran when he started using es- Scott--Tavis had started using essays on the show. Speaker 1: And so-- Story_ID: 672207 Speaker 1: Tell me about your process, because this is not just going on the air talking. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You, you're-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you're creating a formal piece that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --fits into these-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --time frames. Speaker 2: You try to find a subject that you know is in keeping, first of all, with, you know, the show, something that's timely. Submit the idea. If they agree with the idea, then you write the piece. You send in the piece. And if they say yes, then they give you a time to go in and record it, and you're done. And then with the essay, because it was a longer piece, sometimes I would be getting my own sound clips. Like, I might say, "I need this and that or the other." Sometimes I would be getting my own sound clips. They would then takeover. They'd put the music, you know, that kind of thing like that. So I loved, I loved the essay form. That was-- Speaker 1: And, and how long did you typically work on that, any given essay? Speaker 2: I'm not sure, all--always longer than I thought I was going to. I know that, always longer than I thought I was going to (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And did you have an editor? Speaker 2: Roy [Roy Hurst] would be editing, Roy-- Speaker 1: He would be editing. Speaker 2: I mean he would, he would--once I finished it, the final piece, the written piece, he would look at it. And usually he was good. When we were in the studio he might say, "Can we drop part of this line," or can you change this to that? His, his changes were very minimal, you know, for me, and I appreciated that. I, I think the three of us that he selected to start doing that, he knew our work, and he knew that, you know, he could work with us. And-- Speaker 1: In a two and a half to three-minute commentary is about how many words? Speaker 2: About 700--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay. So the-- Speaker 2: --five hundred--500, 700, yeah. Speaker 1: --essay is a little more than double that. Speaker 2: Yeah. I would always do it by time, not so much--I mean I kind of look at the words and the pages. But it would also depend. Like, I did one piece about seeing a homeless guy downtown. But I wanted to put in the 'Oh, What a Beautiful Morning,' sung by Ray Charles. So I'm leaving--I'm allowing some time, you know, for the music. And I did another piece where I was actually downtown in that same piece getting some clips in the homeless community, getting that sound, getting that sound, so that we would have a real sound from Los Angeles [California] homeless, as opposed to going to, you know, some previously recorded track. So that kind of thing would take much longer 'cause I would be out in the field trying to-- Speaker 1: And your--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --hook it up. Speaker 1: --background as filmmaker is supporting the way that you are producing this. Speaker 2: Right. Plus, you know, I started in radio. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That's where I started, in radio, so I was literally coming back home to radio. So that made it easier for me to stop acting on camera, because I'm, I'm coming back home to radio. And, and it was a perfect venue because the--both Tavis's [HistoryMaker Tavis Smiley] show ['The Tavis Smiley Show'] and 'News and Notes,' they were geared toward a black audience, although everybody was listening. So the subjects were, you know, I could come up if I pitched subjects. Very often they said yes to all three, you know, often at least two, two of them. And you got the calendar there what's coming up, what's coming up that might be timely. So, when the Paul Robeson stamp came out, I did a piece, you know, on that, or when the Malcolm X stamp came out, because when the Malcolm X stamp came out--when the Paul Robeson stamp came out, it was actually supposed to be the Malcolm X stamp. They were just weren't ready yet or vice versa. I can't remember now. It was vice versa. They still weren't--hundred years after Paul Robeson's death they still were not ready. After his birth, they still were not ready to let him be that kind of figure. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So, yeah. Story_ID: 672208 Speaker 1: Tell me about 'The Evening News.' That's a book that you created, right, is it-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of--is it essays based upon the NPR show ['News and Notes']? Speaker 2: It is essays that I actually did on NPR [National Public Radio] and commentaries and then some I did on KPFK [KPFK Radio, Los Angeles, California], and then a few pieces that were never broadcast, a couple of pieces that I wrote just for the book. I wrote about three or four new pieces for the book. So it is a collection. It's 'The Evening News - Essays and Commentaries from NPR and Other Clouds' [S. Pearl Sharp]. Speaker 1: Yes, and other clouds. So let's talk about that because this book now comes out in 2015. And now we are in the space where--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Cloud (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --we have clouds. Speaker 2: Clouds, right, right. Speaker 1: We're beginning to know what clouds are. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Why did you choose that title? Speaker 2: Because, first of all, I'm avoiding clouds intentionally (laughter). And I had my artist, we came up with this idea for the cover of--to do faces with the cans and the string between them, because that's how we used to communicate when we--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --were children. And you know, I was so excited about it, and then I ran out the test. And what I was getting back was, well, "I remember them, but I don't know if people are gonna know what that means, you know, to see the faces." And so I was just about to pull it, and I had my artists working on another cover, and I was really kind of depressed about it, when the soup commercials came out, the Progresso soup commercials came out, where they've got the can and the string. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And my, my godson said to me, "Well, you know it's gonna be like the soup commercials." And I was like, "Oh, you're right. You're right. They will know. They will know." So, title--cloud's in the title but the soup and the string on the cupboards (laughter). Speaker 1: And what made you decide to put those commentaries and essays in a book? Speaker 2: Because a couple of reasons. One, I wanted to gather some of my writing together in one book. Two, many of the programs were never heard by most of the nation. Speaker 1: Right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: 'Tell Me More' in Michel's program was not heard in California at all. Speaker 1: Michel Martin? Speaker 2: Michel Martin's show. Speaker 1: Right. I knew it's not Norris. It's Michel-- Speaker 2: We'll do that-- Speaker 1: --Martin, good. Speaker 2: 'Tell Me More,' Michel Martin's show, was never heard in California until the very end it went--was heard in San Francisco [California]. When Tavis [HistoryMaker Tavis Smiley] stopped being on NPR, and the show became 'News and Notes,' it took so long for them to make that transition that a lot of stations had already filled it with some other programming, and they weren't changing. So a lot of stations, it wasn't being heard on. It was being heard in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but it wasn't being heard anywhere in Los Angeles [California]. So I'm in Los Angeles, and my stuff is not being heard. So that was the main reason that I decided to do the book, so that the work would get out there in another format that had been already broadcast. Speaker 1: And, and who published the book? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: So we're back to that original model. Speaker 2: Back to that original model, yeah. Speaker 1: And did you have it printed in Los Angeles, or did you-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't. I had it printed by Paul Coates' company. Paul Coates is Ta-Nehisi Coates' father. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We've been, you know, friends for a long time. And he has--he is the publisher of Black Classic Press [Baltimore, Maryland], which--whose specialty is putting out black books that have gone out of print that should be back in print again. But he also has a digital print on demand company. And so I went to Paul, and he is the one who printed the book. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: So I am ha- very happy about that connection, and I have a, a black printer, publisher- not printer--black printer, yes. Speaker 1: Printer. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 672209 Speaker 1: And then you've been--you have something called The Gate is Open, creativity coaching--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that you've been doing since 2013. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: I have always been--had a good eye for seeing what people are trying to do and how they can get there to do it, particularly if it's something creative. And I've been giving it away for years, so I decided to stop giving it away and turned it into a business. So I do creativity coaching. I've been working primarily with writers. But I have one client who had a new product. They were--a physical product they were developing. And it's been, it's been perfect. I love the work. It's flexible. I see the results. I've had people who are coming back, so that, you know, that's--we have return customers and you, you know, you, you're on the, you're on the right track. And it's kind of like my final step here at--you know, I'm seventy-five now, and I'm letting go of things, letting of things. But this is, this is very passionate, and I'm prepared to do it. And it feels good; it feels right, so the gate is open (laughter). Speaker 1: Great title. As you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 672210 Speaker 1: Thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: As you think of your--about your career and your life over these seventy-five years. How do you want to be remembered? Speaker 1: It's been a very blessed, very blessed career. And I want to be remembered as somebody who stood up for some things and held her ground on some things and created some products that people could use in their li- created some art that people can use in their lives. Story_ID: 672211 Speaker 1: If you think about legacy, what do you think the legacy is that you will be leaving? Speaker 2: I think my work. I think my work is my legacy. I'm not gonna have a funeral. I'm not having none of that. There ain't memorials. That's gonna be in the, the contract. No, you're not doing none of that. Go buy the--go, go find the work and read it and look at it and share it. Story_ID: 672212 Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Do you have any regrets? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, of course, of course (laughter). Speaker 2: Any you'd like to mention (laughter)? Speaker 1: I regret that I didn't stay more focused on one of my crafts. I came on the planet to dance, to be a dancer. Someone in my family interfered with that, and then they sent me in all these, you know, singing classes and, and modeling, da-da-blah. And so I kind of got like that spread out, and I kind of stayed spread out. And I, I think my work would be stronger if I had been more focused on one or those things or two, probably on, on the writing. My spiritual counselor says that is the blessing that comes with the wound, because had I not had that wound, I would not have had the blessing of focusing on the writing as I did. But that, that's probably the major regret. Story_ID: 672213 Speaker 1: What advice would you give to young African American hopefuls who are interested in this world of entertainment? You know, do--because you've, you've been in different parts with writing, acting, directing. Someone who might be interested in following in--along those lines, what advice could you give them now, as they're looking to the future? Speaker 2: Find out what you're passionate about. I went back to film school [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California] when I was the oldest person in the class, you know. And I figured out that I really could direct and that I should not be doing sound and that I hate doing budgets, so I, so I produce if I needed to, but you know, that had to be part of it. At that point--up until that point, acting had been my main thing. I didn't realize how uncomfortable I was as an actress until I went back, until I went back into filmmaking. And then I knew I had hit my stride, and so it was easier-- Speaker 1: And how old were you then? Speaker 2: I was forty. I was over forty, yeah, yeah. So find out what you're passionate about, open yourself up to all the possibilities, be willing to pull somebody's cables or fix, you know, somebody's coffee, or stay up all night, whatever you have to do, and then find your tribe. Finding your tribe is really important. Find your tribe. Who thinks like you do? Who, who's headed in the same direction you are? Who's willing to make the same sacrifices? Who do you bounce your stuff off of? You need to have somebody or some bodies who are gonna tell you the truth. You know, I have a friend who's camping on my living room floor right now, and we were talking about a project--she's like, "I don't know. You need to give this to me differently, you know. I hear what you're saying, but that's not what I'm reading." You need that. You need people who are gonna do that for you. And the one quote that I hope they will put on, on the quote page and HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] is action over words. Action over words (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Action over words. Speaker 2: Everybody got words. What are they doing? What are you doing to support what you're, what you're saying out there? Story_ID: 672214 Speaker 1: And to the point of activism, because it's been very important in your life from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the beginning, when you're talking to young folks about building a, any career really, and being an activist, what advice do you give? Speaker 2: I always told this to actresses, to actor, women actors: you need--and it, and it applies for males for too--you need to know where the line is, okay. So, if they're asking you to do something that you're not feeling right about, you need to be so solid in your personal thing, that you can say no, that you can turn a job down, if necessary, or that you can ask for a meeting to change some things. I was doing 'Knots Landing,' and they handed me this script. And I said--I was supposed to say, "Well, you know, I, I'm, I'm, I'm poor and I'm broke, and I didn't have any education and you know, and I'm a former drug--," and I was like, "Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, do I need to be all of these?" You know. So I kind of, kind of wanted to bring it up in rehearsal. And one of the white stars, woman, heard what I was saying, and she came to me. She said, "Wait until we get into the floor rehearsal, and then say it because they won't have much time then, but you'll--they'll have your full attention." I said okay. So we get onto the floor the very last rehearsal before taping, and I said, "And I'm black." I said, "Excuse me, but do I have to be all of these? Can be, just be like poor and"--and they were like, "What? what? Well--what, well, what is it you want to say?" So what if I just say so and so. And as I was talking, I felt her step forward from where she was and stand right behind me, behind the couch. She didn't say a word. She just stepped right behind me. We changed it. Speaker 1: She literally had your back. Speaker 2: She had, literally had my back. They said, "Well, what do you say?" I said, "I want to say so and so and so." We taped it, problem done. So you have to be able to--you have to be--you have to know--be grounded in who you are and what you will and will not do, so that when those moments come up, you, you know how to, you know how to behave, you know what, what decisions to make, what to do, yeah. You're not gonna win all of the battles, but you're gonna win some of them. Story_ID: 672215 Speaker 1: I'd like for you to talk about how you take care of yourself, health? Speaker 2: Ah, I do some yoga. You will not find me much in yoga classes, but you will find me on my floor in my bedroom (laughter) trying to keep that body together. I walk. About when [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory's book, 'Cooking With Mother Nature: A Diet for Folks Who Eat,' [sic. 'Dick Gregory's Natural Diet for Folks Who Eat: Cookin' with Mother Nature'] I'm one of the people who then got off of raw--flesh meat. I do fish and chicken, vegetables, fruits. I cook a lot. I, I cook all the time. And, and I make sure that sometimes I just do down time. I call it--(clears throat)--going underground or something where there are one or two days where I'm not going out. I might answer the phone, I might not. If I do it's gonna be a short conversation--(unclear)--gonna tell you, "I'm doing something right now, so I don't want to stay on the phone too long," because I just to like, (makes sound). No television. Sometimes when I'm trying to finish a project, there's no, no television, not even the evening news. Until I get to this point, it's just me and this project. I have the luxury of being able to say that because I don't have children. You know, I don't have a husband. People who have other people in their household, they've got to find another way to, to structure that. But that's one luxury I have. I can do that. And I have a spiritual life. I don't--I'm one of those five-minute meditators. I'm not the--I can't sit for an hour and do that (laughter), you know. But I can go outside and cut some roses and water the rosebush and, and calm myself. I can go for a walk in the evening. I can go out to, fortunately, the ocean and sit there in my car and look at the ocean at sunset. And that's my meditation. That's my, where are you? That's my calming. That's, you really acted like an asshole and so and so. You need to call up and apologize, you know, to them and clear that, so that constant clearing if you messed up something, and you--and there's a way to clean it up, clean it up and then let that be done, forgiveness, you know. Forgiveness is major, yeah-- Speaker 1: Is there any-- Speaker 2: --of myself and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and, and other-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Yeah, and other people. Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked? Speaker 2: I think you have covered it, girl (laughter). I--thank you. It's--I've loved talking with you. Thank you--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Same here. Thank you so much. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you...