 Story_ID: 72099 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm int, interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Dr. Cheryl Saunders, Cheryl, C-H-E-R-Y-L, S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S. Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth, please? Speaker 2: I was born May 7, 1955 in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm currently the director of the University Learning Center here at the University of North Dakota [Grand Forks, North Dakota]. In essence, I am an university administrator. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 13, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, North Dakota. Story_ID: 72100 Speaker 1: Okay, and before we get into any kind of depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you, and the first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Whoa, my favorite food. Super-Links. Super-Links or vegetarian hot dogs by Worthington. That's my favorite, okay. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color is brown. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, I would say the period between, or season, or time? Speaker 1: Well, time of the year. It could be season. Speaker 2: The season from Thanksgiving to Christmas my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Europe. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Okay, which one gives me-"To thine own self be true." Story_ID: 72101 Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk a little bit about your background. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us the names of your parents and spell them for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's name Lula Roberts, L-U-L-A, Roberts, R-O-B-E-R-T-S. My father's name Reverend Isaac London, I-S-A-A-C, L-O-N-D-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay and where was your father born and when? Speaker 2: My father was born in Mississippi. I am not sure of the exact city; however, he was born May 19, 1931. Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother? Speaker 2: My mother was born in Wayne County, Mississippi, and she was born May 5, 1932. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you ever--did, did you hear stories about your family or do you know stories about your ancestors and what they were doing during the slavery period or, or, or during reconstruction? Speaker 2: I heard stories more from my grandmother's twin sister. My grandmother unfortunately died when I was four, but her twin sister lived several years, many years, after and so her twin sister, we called her big mama, which is kinda typical in the family, would share stories about her mother, but more so her grandmother who was a slave and who was an African and she was saying that her grandmother was very particular about things being put in order and the sheets should be just pearly white and that was something Big Mama would say and also that she loved gardening. Her grandmother loved gardening, and really they kind of referred to her as the mean African in a way, because she was very stern and you know just very firm in her demeanor and in her disciplinary procedures. Speaker 1: Okay, any, anything else? Speaker 2: Well, my father--my grand--my uncle I would say would talk more about his father who died when my mother was six months old, so thus my mother doesn't remember her father, but about the fact that he would always want the children to eat before he would eat, that the children's needs were more important. They were much above his needs, and there were 11 children total, so my mother was the baby girl. And my uncle would talk about how the, you know, his father and the mother got along and how the mother was really the mainstay person because his father would go and work in the northern part of Mississippi to, to provide for his family and unfortunately he died from malaria working in the rice paddies up in the north part of Mississippi. So, those are some of the things that my family would talk about. They would also talk about just the fa--the--how the family would come together as one or help each other out as a community, not only the immediate family, but the extended family, and holidays were pretty tough. It was hard. Talked about the Depression and during the Depression my aunt--I remember one of my aunts saying that they were so poor they really didn't feel the effects of the depression as people in the north 'cause they were already poor and they lived off of the land, which could have been indicative of people in the south, in the rural section of the South. So, those were some of the, the things that my family talked about. Story_ID: 72102 Speaker 1: Do you have a--do you remember your grandmother's name, the one who was an African? Do you remember? Speaker 2: That's what, we're in the process of kind of going back into our family history. In fact, I've gone back on the Roberts' side and I've just gone back to 1870 and I'm almost stuck there in a way. The person's name was Wisdom Roberts, and that's my--through my grandfather's lineage. But, my grandmother's grandmother we, we haven't been able to find out that name. We've been trying to use different persons old--some of the obituaries, old papers that how some of the older people would keep papers; still haven't found anything. We just know that they refer to her as that old African and, and the way it was said it was with much affection, not with disdain, that they affectionately, they had a lot of affection for her. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there any idea of where she might have been from in Africa. Speaker 2: No, no. I have--(unclear)--have a--I have a pretty good memory because I loved the stories of growing up, and Big Mama never said where she was from. I just know that she was from Africa, and I don't even know if they knew where in Africa she was from. Speaker 1: She might not even have known how to tell them where she was from. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah. Story_ID: 72103 Speaker 1: Did your parents ever relate to you how they met? Speaker 2: Not really. I know that my father and my mother are from the same neighborhood. My father lived across the tracks, so he--they were in a nicer house in a way. My mother, I think, they went to the same high school, but they never married. My mother was a single parent, so they never married. My father was a student at Tougaloo College [Utica, Mississippi]. He graduated from there. My mother was a student at Oakwood College in Huntsville, Alabama, and she did not graduate from there. She got pregnant with me, had a choice of abortion or having me, and she had me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And Tougaloo is about ten miles north of Jackson? Speaker 2: Right, Tougaloo is in Utica, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have much contact with your father when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, I did, but I didn't know who he was. I knew that he was a person who was a friend of my mom's who seem to have a lot of interest in my welfare, my schooling, and things, extracurricular activities. He didn't live in our town when I was growing up. He lived in Crestview, Florida. He was a social worker there, but when he would visit, he would always drop by. I didn't know who he--my relationship to him until I was, let's see, I think sixth grade or seventh grade, so preadolescent. Speaker 1: So, and your father was a minister as well as a social worker? Speaker 2: At that particular time, he was a social worker. He became a minister later on. Speaker 1: Okay, what denomination? Speaker 2: He's Baptist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think he was a Missionary Baptist, to distinguish between the two. Speaker 1: So, what did your mother do? Speaker 2: My mother at one point was a maid and later on became a preschool teacher with the Head Start Program, when that program was initiated in Hattiesburg [Mississippi], and as a part of their professional development she went back and got some more college and really just needed student teaching to be, become, to get her degree and that's where she stopped. She was ill at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now how many people comprised your household when you were growing up? Speaker 2: The first four years of my life I would say there was five of us, because we lived with my grandmother. But, after my grandmother died, there were still remained-- there was a fifth person, my sister came along. My mother and my aunt, who was her oldest sister, lived together along with my aunt's daughter, who was eight years older than I, and her name is Betty. Betty is more like a big sister. She is sorta like my big sister, so aunt Chris and my mother, my sister who was ten years younger, and, and me. Speaker 1: It was an all female household? Speaker 2: All female household. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so that, that can be difficult in, in male relationships because we learned to almost do it all. I mean, you don't wait for somebody to come and put in your window, you do it yourself kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, we had to learn dependency. Speaker 1: Self-sufficiency rather--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, because of that self-sufficiency-- Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --for subsequent relationships with males we had to learn dependency. Speaker 1: Did you have to learn dependency? Speaker 2: I chose to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for me. I chose to learn. We're not, where I am not totally dependent, but to let male, my husband, lead. I know I can lead, but I don't have to if I don't want to. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: You see what I'm saying? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Does that make sense? Speaker 1: Well, it makes sense--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, because we, we had to do a lot of things. There were no males around as such. We had family members who were cousins and sometimes waiting for them to come do things, we just had to do it ourselves. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Those things that could be taken care of. Speaker 1: I guess that's what you had to do. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 72104 Speaker 1: Can, can you think back and--now, now you grew up in Hattiesburg? Speaker 2: In Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, now can, can you think back and, and sort of, you know, take your time now and, and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Hattiesburg? Speaker 2: Okay. In Hattiesburg, I grew up in the Newman Quarters, which was a very poor neighborhood by the, by the term quarters. And Newman Quarters was down by the city dump, so when I think of some of the smells I have dual smells. One is the city dump that doesn't smell so friendly on windy days when the wind blows your, blows your way. And then I have another smell is when, when it rains because we didn't have asphalt, we didn't have pavement, it was a dusty road. But when it rained, that dusty smell. I still get a warm fuzzy when I smell that because-- Speaker 1: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 2: It, it was indicative of home and sitting on the porch and seeing the rain come down, and we had a tin roof and hearing the rain come I still love rain, and I think it's because of that. Another thing even though Newman Quarters was a poor neighborhood, we were poor economically, but not poor in spirit. There were the ball games on Sunday afternoon in Mr. Fell's [ph.] pasture. There were--the children ride up and down the street on their bikes, the racing. We jumped rope, did little fun things, the, the pretend, the loud music, the laughter. It wasn't--even though we were poor from an outsider's point of view, they would think that our existence was dismal, I learned lot that, that was part of my education. I also learned about not only surviving, but thriving in the midst of adversity. So, when I think of growing up in Hattiesburg in Newman Quarters even though we were all economically poor we--there was a wealth of resources in our own little community. And by the way, we still get together once every three years, Newman Quarters community. And I, I was in Hattiesburg in July for that reunion and we--it's wonderful to see how far we've come, but still the humility is there. We haven't forgotten where we've come from. There are some other things I, when I think of Hattiesburg, and on Friday's, of course, everybody had fish, hello, so you know, I mean, that's one of the, some of the sounds and the smells and, and warm fuzzies I get about my, my town, especially my community. Speaker 1: Was there a major body of water in Hattiesburg? Speaker 2: Yes, the, I think it's the Leaf River. That would flood every so often and even though the community was together we were even more so together. And I, I will never forget one particular flood where the water was just, just rushed in so quickly and the men, most of them, worked for the city and they got a dump truck, one of these open trucks and hauled us out, but they also knocked on the doors of the white neighbors who were on the other side of the, the city dump and they knocked on their doors to let them know that the water was coming, and they reluctantly climbed aboard. One of the interesting--the reason why I'm bringing that out is it is interesting that we were all poor people. The powers that be, I don't know if there was a siring system, but they didn't even sound the alarms. But, I think the white people at one point, at that particular point, realized that the city government really classed them with the rest of the black people 'cause they were poor whites and so they weren't above us at all. In some ways, they were considered on the same level or beneath us. So that's--that river in some ways caused us problems, but in some ways helped us to see the fragility of life and also to see that as human beings we're all the same. It really taught, especially I think on that particular flood, taught a lot of the, the whites an important lesson. I just noticed the attitudes of them toward us after that flood, after we had recovered. So, the river in some ways has a way of cleansing, yeah. Speaker 1: The idea that there's something bigger than their-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --ideas-- Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 72105 Speaker 1: What, what kind of a little girl were you when you were growing up? I mean, what were you interested in and what did you like to do? Speaker 2: Okay, I loved old black and white movies. I loved to read because in reading I escaped Newman Quarters, okay. And I always say my mother gave us three things, God, books, and music, and music also helped me to escape that. I loved playing pretend. And I think part of that not having a father present, knowing who my father was, I--it helped me to become very creative 'cause I had all these wonderful stories about my dad, I made them up, and in some ways I missed having a dad, at least knowing who my dad was like some of my playmates. So, I created my own dad. I wasn't that far off either when I found out who my dad was. But, also I enjoyed going to church. I was kind of bossy. I would say I exhibited leadership skills. They said I was bossy. I wanted to have my way, who doesn't. But, I just enjoyed being around people, but I also enjoyed being by myself, so. I loved jumped rope. I loved playing with the boys. I liked playing with the girls. It didn't bother me as much. You know how some people, especially when 9, 9 year olds they only want to play with girls. I didn't care as long as I had a playmate. And I learned about life because our neighborhood was as it was. I knew that I wanted to go to college. I knew that was part of my way of getting out of Newman Quarters. I also knew that I wanted to be in a meaningful relationship. I didn't want to have an abusive relationship, so-- Speaker 1: Did you witness a lot of abuse in relationships? Speaker 2: Well from--yeah I--neighbors because remember my, my mother wasn't married, but neighbors would fight and I just thought people would drink on the weekends, I didn't even know. I was so naive until I moved to California and realized that folks do get drunk during the middle of the week in Cali--in, in Mississippi they only got drunk on the weekends, and they would fight and I would see that. You know you look out the, out of the window and you see your next door neighbor and his wife fighting and that was every week and--or you see somebody else who's fighting or pulling a gun on somebody or cutting each other up, so I knew that I did not want that for me. That was, that was one thing, I just didn't want that, to always have that looking over my shoulder. It also taught me how to be street smart though in a way. I had to learn to be tough. However, that abuse and the verbal abuse I was not--the profanity--I'm not surprised by the profanity today because I heard so much of it when I was growing up, and I knew I did not want that for me and neither for my children. Speaker 1: So, you are not surprised by it, but you, but you guard against it, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you, you don't want to bring it into your life? Speaker 2: No, we don't use it at all in our family, because I just saw it as a way of pulling each other down and in witnessing that abuse and hearing it, folks said and did things that were very hurtful, very, very hurtful to each other and I just didn't want that for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And these were people I respected. They were adults you, you respect them and you see the good in them, but I couldn't see how could they do that to each other. Story_ID: 72106 Speaker 1: Now you grew up--when you were growing up the Civil Rights Movement had kicked off in the south and you were a little girl when, when voters are being registered in 1964 all over the state of Mississippi then and do, do, do you remember any of that and, and what the adults were, were thinking about that? Speaker 2: Do you know-- Speaker 1: Hattiesburg was one of the towns--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: I, I remembered my mother paying poll tax, but I don't remember my mother studying, you know, because there was a particularl test that black people had to take as a way of weeding out or getting those people away from voting. I do remember people picketing downtown, especially on Saturday mornings. My mother--I think Martin Luther King [Jr.] was coming to my town, my mother wanted to go to that meeting and was going to take me. My aunt begged her not to go, and we didn't go because they thought, you know, the threat of a bombing or some type of terrorist attack. However, my mother was not the type of person to go out and, and march. She wasn't that type of a picketer. She was what I would call a silent protestor, so we boycotted a lot of things. I do remember that there was a cross burned across the street in front of our house. I have never been so frightened in my life, and I've gone through a lot of things since, nothing like that. And, and instead of frightening us, well initially we were frightened, but instead of frightening us overall we were angered, okay, and so my mom voted; voted until she died. That was the thing, as children we were aware of what was going on politically, I know I was, and that helped me in just noticing who was in my neighborhood because we'd heard stories of folk disappearing and very, what would I say, we were very much a part of the struggle because even going to school we would have to fight our way to school. We had to walk through a white neighborhood to get to a black school. So, every morning, every afternoon throwing rocks. White kids threw rocks at us, and we tried different ways. So, even the children were a part of that movement. My husband will tell you I can hit my target. I learned to throw back. At one point, it was--we were told not to fight back and at one point we just couldn't. How much abuse can one take, and so we used to fight, going back and forth, back and forth. So, even as children, we were a part of that. We were unwillingly thrown into it. So, part of our childhood was affected, of course, by the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 72107 Speaker 1: I, I think you said before we started that your mother knew Vernon Dahmer--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: And knew his sister very well. Speaker 1: D-A-H-M-E-R. Speaker 2: And knew Mrs. Beard they were good friends. And I'm thinking over the years as, as when I do think about these things and what has happened, what happened to Mr. Dahmer you know he was killed. The KKK [Ku Klux Klan] bombed his house. He and his mother were killed. His wife and daughter were injured. I think my mother may have paid poll tax through Mr. Dahmer's store because I was trying to figure where did she pay poll tax. There were none of the stores around us who would do that because they were all white owners, so I know that they wouldn't have allowed it, so it had to be through Mr. Dahmer's store. And she was just very, she was very faithful in that, did not take it lightly and really began to encourage other people, because there were people on our street who were very afraid. Not everybody voted initially. It took them over a period of time to vote, because they were afraid. They were fearful. Speaker 1: The had good reason to be afraid Speaker 2: Yes, yes fearful not only of losing their jobs, but losing their lives. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is something that--and to ask people to register to vote this was to, to ask them to put themselves at risk-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --which was--but you know something that I guess it had to be done ultimately. Speaker 1: Right, and I remember when the students came to town, the Freedom Riders who were in town. Mr. Fairley who lived in an adjacent quarters, they call 'em East Jerusalem Quarters, was very active in the NAACP and the voters registration, so he would encourage people. Speaker 2: Did he survive the, the backlash and all that? Speaker 1: Yeah, Mr., Mr. Fairley and Mrs. Fairley were--stood together as a united front, which helped, and their children and, and, and I were good friends and so that sort of helped with the families and there were a few other families who here or there scattered throughout the communities who would stand up for what was right. Speaker 2: Okay, now did you attend church in Hattiesburg? Speaker 1: Yes, Seventh-Day Adventist Church. I'm still Seventh-Day Adventist. Story_ID: 72108 Speaker 1: Okay, I went to Grace Love Elementary School, wh, which was a predominantly black school, and it served two communities, Newman Quarters and East Jerusalem Quarters. Speaker 2: Was it predominantly black or all black? Speaker 1: All black, I'm sorry. All black, sorry, thank you. All black school. And Grace Love School, I enjoyed Grace Love School. It was wonderful. The principal was a much older principal who had been my mother's teacher. But just helping us kids to soar like eagles, it was wonderful. And, and it's funny I can still remember the discipline we had at Grace Love School. And discipline I'm not talking about spankings and all that, of course we had those, but even the programming such, such things as there were school closing programs, there were--of course there was a Maypole, there were assemblies, and we had opportunities to help plan things. It was great. I enjoyed Grace Love School. And when I taught years later in England, the school where I taught, reminded me very much of Grace Love Elementary School. Teachers knew that the books that they had given us were, were behind and they made every effort to give us, you know, keep the kids up to date on things. I remember when new math was introduced in the white schools before the black school, my math teacher I overheard her just, just in tears because she couldn't give us the same thing, you know, but I enjoyed Grace Love School. Kept us abreast of current events. I think our education was hands on, but we were challenged, those of us who rose to the challenge were really--we weren't as far behind as we thought we were, okay. And then I, I went on to Lillie Burney Junior High School, the first year of integration. I really wanted to go to the integrated school. My mother was afraid, and so sent me on to the black school. I think she wished she would have sent me on to the integrated school. My math, math got behind. An older teacher--our math teacher was an old man who was about to retire and his health wasn't that good, so in the afternoon he slept and unfortunately we were very, very much behind. A good thing happened we had a student teacher, a black student teacher came who was really the daughter of my elementary school principal, and she in all, all her power tried to get us caught up. We had to start from the beginning. So, the eighth grade I went to the integrated school, Hawkins Junior High School, and I made a D in math. I don't make Ds in math. I didn't know the material, and so my mother said--she went to my teacher and she says, my teacher says, well she just doesn't know the math and she can't do it, and she was very patronizing and all that and very degrading and my mother says in her white uniform, because maids wore white uniforms, she says I will pay you to tutor her. And just, I mean, I knew we didn't have any money and so the teacher was just, she was speechless, and so she paid--my mother--she tutored me, but my mother didn't have to pay her. I don't have any tissues, I'm sorry. Thanks. I, I forget I get emotional on this part, because I know that she didn't have the money anyway. Tutored for the next 9 weeks, the next 9 weeks, made an A and from then on I did okay in school. Story_ID: 72109 Speaker 1: I was in band, loved music, and most of my classes as I progressed to high school I took college prep classes. I usually was the only black kid in there, and that could be lonely for me. Tenth grade, I remembered my tenth grade geometry teacher saying she wanted all the kids to stay after school except Cheryl Roberts, Roberts was my maiden name, so I told my mother about it and my mother was just angry. She says why and you know just--(unclear)--I said because they were all talking and I didn't have anybody to talk to, and she realized how lonely I was, but, however, just persevered. The eleventh grade I did go to a black school. That was tough for me actually. The black school was actually tougher for me than the white school. Speaker 2: Where, where was the black school located? Speaker 1: The black school was still in Hattiesburg. They were going to this zoning type of process for some reason. I think it was a way of trying to keep people where-- Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--by, by creating schools--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yes, and so I went to the black school. That wasn't easy. That was very difficult for me because that's when I picked up the nickname Oreo, where I was black on the inside and white on--black on the outside and white on the inside. And it was tough because even if I disagreed with a procedure, the kids would say well you're just an Oreo, you know. So, that was, that was really hard for me. Speaker 2: Were you accused of talking, talking proper? Speaker 1: Definitely and because I made A's in math and I made all A's really. I loved school. I loved learning and that--it was just interesting to me. And wonderful English teacher, just wonderful. I seemed to get all of the harder teachers, but I'm glad I did because they just opened up writing and the literature to us in such a way which was wonderful and some of the students just gave me a hard time. I had a harder time with the black students than with the white students. So twelfth grade we were all--eleventh and twelfth graders were sent to the mixed school which was predominantly white and I must admit I was glad to be back at my old high school because I had acquired, gotten some friends, some white friends, and it's not that they were my friends because they were white we just had shared interests, shared values, and I enjoyed my twelfth grade year. It was really a nice year. Story_ID: 72110 Speaker 1: And I went to the local university, not my choice. My choice was to go to Oakwood College in Huntsville, Alabama, predominantly black, historically black college. I had no money, so I rejected scholarship offers from different places hoping and praying for Oakwood [College] to come through and sure enough on May 30th, 1972, my mother came to my room and said you either apply to Oakwood, to University of Southern Mississippi [Hattiesburg, Mississippi], and she called it Southern, that's what they call it, or you go and work in somebody's kitchen. I just couldn't see myself working in somebody's kitchen the rest of my life. I hated washing dishes anyway, so I applied to the University of Southern Mississippi, and I majored in music there because I liked it. I listened to this report, which was wrong. It's an erroneous report that by 1980 there will be an abundance of math and science teachers. So, I decided to major in music instead of math. That wasn't a good choice, okay, but I wanted to do something that was fun. So, I majored in music and graduated in '77 [1977]. Speaker 2: Now were you involved in music in high school in, in a band? Speaker 1: Yes, I was in a band and choir. I played clarinet in band, and I really didn't discover that I was a real good singer until, I think it was twelfth grade. I went to an audition with a friend, and they needed a soprano and I said oh yeah I guess I'm a soprano, you know just nonchalant, typical teenager. Well, I was a teenager I should say, and the teacher said you know you really have a nice voice, and I joined choir. It did not conflict with band. I was planning to be an instrumentalist as opposed to a vocalist, but when I got my degree, it was as a vocalist. So, most people know me as a vocalist as opposed to an instrumentalist, and graduated from the University of Southern Mississippi. Speaker 2: Before you go past, much past that, what happened there? How did you find the University of Southern Mississippi and did you have any teachers that stood out there or, or administrators or people that helped you along the way? Speaker 1: I would say my voice teachers were good, Ms. [Susan Faust] Straley [ph.] especially. She had been Miss Louisiana and Ms. Straley was a very good teacher, very--she encouraged me. I never had any black voice teachers. Speaker 2: Were there any black instructors there? Speaker 1: Later on, but I never had a class with them. The one was, I think his name was Raymond Williams. He was a black singer, but they did not pair me with him. I was a soprano. I think they tried to put the male singers with the male teachers, most of them. However, it was interesting that at one point I took a hiatus from, from music. I had a piano teacher who didn't like girls. Anyway, so, I decided to change my major to medical technology, and I found that the math teachers and the science teachers were cruel to black students. They didn't want to see you in those fields, most of 'em. You had the one rare one who didn't mind, and that was tough. That was hard, because I remember having a trig [trigonometry] teacher who cheated me out of a grade, and he says who do you think they're gonna believe? I must admit I wanted him--you know I had to ask for forgiveness, but I wanted him to fall down the stairs and break his neck. I really did. He says who do you think they're gonna believe, they're gonna believe you or me. So, I changed back to music and because one thing that, that music, that piano teacher had retired and I changed back to music. Voice was my emphasis, but I had to have a proficiency in piano because it was music ed [education], so I have 2-1/2 years or three years of college piano. And I found that music teachers were a bit more open. Most of them in those days weren't southerners. And for some reason it, it didn't, it didn't seem to matter to them what my color, or our color. The fact is that we had the voice and we had the--we could deliver the goods; that was important. So, I would say Ms. [Susan Faust] Straley really stood up for me and Mr. [Luigi] Zaninelli who is still there. As a choral person, Mr. Zaninelli, even though he's a composer, really showed me that you know you can do this thing if you want to. You can be anything you wanna be. There was this professor who came down from Julliard [School] and I can't remember his name, I see his face, and he, he really thought--he says, "You know you really have a great voice. You ought to come to Julliard." Well, I wasn't interested in Julliard, but the fact that he said it, so it just reaffirmed something that I knew. Story_ID: 72111 Speaker 1: What, what kind of music do you enjoy singing? Speaker 2: I enjoy singing classical music, but I, I also enjoy singing Negro spirituals, and I sing more spirituals because most people aren't singing them as much anymore. Speaker 1: Now, now Negro spirituals do you think they're important too? Speaker 2: Well, Negro spirituals are part of our heritage, and I find that some of the contemporary music has, has gotten more airtime than the Negro spirituals. Not that I'm against contemporary music, I think it's good, but I think it really gets back into the soul of who our ancestors were and who we are and I tried to take advantage of every opportunity I have if I am performing somewhere to sing Negro spirituals, not that I want to be labeled as a person who can only sing spirituals, no and I know that I'm not. However, I want to make sure that our story doesn't get buried in the midst of a heavy orchestration; that our story is told with clarity. So, I, I love spirituals. I sing classical music, Christian music, primarily, I sing that. My Master's Degree is in church music, so I sing a little bit of it all. Currently, I'm a member of the Grand Forks Master Chorale. We are a semi-professional group. I'm the only one, but I don't sing just spirituals in that group. I sing some of the other classical stuff with them. Speaker 1: Okay, I know there's been a, been a lot of literature on spirituals in the past few years. I know Cain Hope Felder had a book on black, many black spirituals and do you--are, are those spirituals still song down south in, in the churches and peoples--are pe, people still sing, singing some of the songs that, that they created during slavery? Speaker 2: Well, you know some of the spirituals, you know, the performed spiritual that we would think of when we, if we were to hear Jessye Norman or Leontyne Price in her--when she was more active in performing. Those were what we would call the Fisk Jubilee Singers. Those were more of your performed spiritual, but your, your old stuff, old time music, you hear it in some churches, but not everywhere. I find that as the older people are dying out that music is dying with them. Some of the meters music, you know, where it's lined out, the person sings it and you know how they sing it in such a slow tempo, that music is kind of dying out. That's a dying art form, and it's a bit sad to me. I, I do miss hearing it sometimes. Speaker 1: Yeah, some--(unclear)--music and it reminded me of a movie that was out a couple of years ago called O Brother, Where Art Thou included a lot of-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --black spiritual--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Some--I find that music though--it's interesting in the black community it is not as prevalent, but because of that movie, and I'm glad you mentioned that, because of that movie we are seeing a resurgence of that movie maybe in the white community. Speaker 1: Now when I lived in England, I heard more of the spirituals and the quartet singing, you know, like the Blind Boys. They just loved it. Speaker 2: Did they sing it in England? Speaker 1: Oh, the English loved it, I mean-- Speaker 2: Do, do the English sing it themselves? Speaker 1: Some of them do. I--in fact when I was a part of the Liverpool Philharmonic Urban, Urban, what was called the Urban Gospel Project, I was a chorale director for that. We did, not really spirituals, more gospel pieces, but I had a choir in, a couple of choirs in England, and I was a consultant for another choir, the London Advent Chorale, and they were Sainsbury's Choir of the Year winners and sang primarily spirituals, that was their repertoire. Very much, very much appreciated, very much accepted. And there are choirs who sing spirituals, white choirs, English choirs. English meaning white in England. Some okay, some need to go back to the practice room. Sorry about that, but at least I can appreciate that they try. And, and you hear that here, even with the choirs here singing spirituals and some of the gospel pieces, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 72112 Speaker 1: All right so what did you do when you graduated from the University of Southern Mississippi [Hattiesburg, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: The first time I had moved to California after a year of working with a radiologist. I couldn't find a job in my field, so I got this job as a billing clerk. It's good you can always type. And so I went to, moved to San Diego [California]. My uncle lived there and I worked at, at a Seventh-Day Adventist Hospital for a few months, and then I became a church Bible worker. Church Bible worker, youth Bible studies works with the ministry, the, the church staff, member of staff, and I was a church Bible worker until I got married in 1980 and moved to Arizona, and I worked there for a short time as a Bible worker. But, just to make money I always could type, work in the emergency room. The good thing of growing up in Mississippi in the neighborhood I lived in witnessing all of the abuse and, and the fights I wasn't afraid, so I was easy. It was easy for me to work in the emergency rooms, okay, and so that's what I did. That, that sort of trained me for that. One of the questions the, the interviewer asked, can you stand to see a lot of blood? I said how much blood do you want me to see, and she says well blood, cuts over the eyes. Oh yeah that's easy. I said can you stand to see a man's stomach open, and, and, and she turned beet red, because I had seen that as a kid. I had seen that, you know, somebody driving down the road too quickly, hit, hit one of the poles and just threw the body out right at my feet. So, I saw that as a six year old. You see what I'm saying, so that kind of prepared me for some possible future jobs with my acquired skills and also because I was accustomed to that type of environment, so I worked, in, in those types of places. That--I could always do that if necessary. And after Arizona we moved to Florida. I went back to, to school, went to graduate school at the University of Southern Mississippi [Hattiesburg, Mississippi], got a Master's in church music. In the meantime, unfortunately, my dad died at the beginning of my Master's program in '82 [1982], and my mom died really near the end of it, right after the end of my program, the completion of it in January of '84 [1984], so that was tough for me. Speaker 1: Okay, you said at one point we moved--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: My husband. Speaker 1: You got married? Speaker 2: I got married in 1980. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 1980 I got married, sorry. Yeah, so we got married. My husband was military at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, now whe, where did you meet him? Speaker 2: I met him in Tucson, Arizona, a place that I said I would never live in because I first--that was the first time I experienced sunburn, okay, and so I met him at church. I went over there under duress to play for my pastor's wife. My pastor was holding a weekend seminar. His wife normally sang for him, and so I went and I played, and that's where I met my husband. My first impression that he was a nice man. My impression twenty-two years later, twenty-four years later, I would say, he is still a very nice man, so that was a good trip. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 72113 Speaker 1: All right, So you went back to school at the University of Southern Mississippi-- Speaker 2: I got a Master's in church music, emphasis voice. Very--I enjoyed the program. I very much enjoyed the program. I enjoyed being back in school, but I enjoyed learning about church music, which I was much involved in. When I graduated, did I have a job, no, no job. In my church, not all the churches hire ministers of music. We're called music coordinators, and it should be a voluntary position. So, I chose not to work in other churches because I wouldn't have a life. Seventh-Day Adventist go to church on Saturday. If I were to work in a church that primarily worshiped on Sunday, I wouldn't have a weekend at all, so I decided I wanted to have a family life and chose not to work in that field. So, I just got little odd jobs here and there or teaching some students or tutoring here and there in math and writing. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me know how did you become a Seventh-Day Adventist? Was it something your family had been involved in for a long time? Speaker 2: My mother. My mother was Seventh-Day Adventist. Oakwood College is a historically black Seventh-Day Adventist school, okay, but my mother was Seventh-Day Adventist and I joined the church at seven, and at fifteen I started to leave the church, and I'm still here. Speaker 1: Okay. I hear the Seventh-Day Adventist requires you to do one thing you just mentioned go to church on Saturday-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but also isn't there, I mean, do you have to become a vegetarian if you're a Seventh-Day Adventist? Speaker 2: No, we don't eat pork. Speaker 1: But, okay, but many Seventh-Day Adventist are vegetarian? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I just wondered in a-- Speaker 2: It's not a requirement at all. Speaker 1: --culture like black culture in the south, there's plenty of pork to eat all the time, maybe not as much as people want 'cause--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but, but a lot what you do have to eat is pork- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --how, how, how did that culture, I mean, effect,--I mean were you teased about it or did you--(simultaneous)--situation? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we were teased--I was teased a lot and I was very meticulous. I wanted to know what do you have in that? The ladies in the cafeteria just, I think half the time they hated to see me coming. Speaker 1: You'd ask 'em what was in there, meat substitute. Speaker 2: Yes, what was in the meat--what was in the--especially the vegetables because a lot of blacks, you know, a lot of the, the workers were black people and a lot of blacks use pork to season, so I asked what's in it and ah man one lady told me I was just uppity. She said you so uppity you just take what you get, and I said no I just don't eat anything. Would you eat buzzard? I don't think so. And she was just so, I mean, I think she would have spanked me if she could have gotten away with it, but she didn't. But it was, it was difficult, but I tried over the years one learns not to make a big issue of it, and I don't make a big issue of it even when I've gone to things down south. I don't make a big issue of it. This is my choice. People, some people where they are, some people want it, some people may not know any better, but I've chosen to, to this lifestyle, and I don't try to impose it upon anyone. I would like for people to respect it, the same way I respect if they eat chicken. It doesn't, it doesn't bother me. I don't call them carnivores, they're people. So, growing up at home we did a lot of things. We ate at home a lot or we went to church members. Well, church members you normally don't have to worry about that. If we ate out, that was very rare, because of course, eating out in Mississippi where you gonna eat out, McDonald's was segregated. Kentucky Fried Chicken only the blacks who went there were the people who worked there, so what's eating out kind of thing. So, that was an issue for me. Mo, mo mostly in the cafeteria and usually when, when there were--when folk were selling dinners, you know how folks sell dinners for fund raisers, there was always chicken. I mean, we aren't vegetarians we eat meat, so there was always chicken. And I found that a lot of people did fry their chicken in vegetable oil because of the longevity. You can use it more as opposed to using lard it burned quicker, okay, so we were safe in that way. It wasn't a big issue for us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, you can always find some chicken somewhere. Now being vegetarian is a different story and I've chosen not to use dairy because I cough if I have dairy. I'm finding the older I get I'm seemingly, seeming that I'm lactose intolerant. However, that's much more of a challenge nowadays because milk is everywhere. It's, it's in everything. I even have a saying, "It's even in the water." If you just pay attention you'll probably see it, but that's much more difficult now. But, I didn't make a big deal out of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 72114 Speaker 1: --Master's Degree at the University of Southern Mississippi, where did you--what, what did you do next? Speaker 2: After that my mother died and so I existed for awhile. That was hard losing parents within a year and a half of each other 'cause my dad died in September of '82 [1982], and my mom died January of '84 [1984]. We lived in Florida, Fort Walton Beach, Florida. We were at Eglin Air Force Base and what was interesting, I just sort of really just existed. My husband had to literally just help me along. I was depressed, very depressed. In fact, I didn't sing for months and it's interesting how a person can be very depressed and function well according to the outside world. I went to church every week, I played, I smiled, but my heart was just aching. And I remember a guy from Pensacola calling, Pensacola, Florida, calling asking me to play for their crusade, and I loved playing for crusades, and I told my husband and I used the usual Christian rhetoric, I'll pray about it. Well, I was gonna say no anyway, but I thought he's a minister I won't say no to him I'll just say I'll pray about it, he'll understand, and so when he called back he says, well have you made your decision? I said I told him in my mind I was saying no and when I hung up my husband said I thought you said you weren't gonna do it. I said I did tell the guy I wasn't gonna do it. He said no you just told him yes. I was too embarrassed to let him know that I wasn't all there, so I just kind of fell into it, and it was the best thing that happened to me because I found when I was giving to other people, it helped me to cope with my own grief, my own loss, and I worked with a church up in Atmore, Alabama, a little small town. In fact, you have to look on the map to find it. I would drive from Fort Walton Beach [Florida] to Atmore, Alabama, for a few years just working with the people there. Story_ID: 72115 Speaker 1: And we had a child. My Jasmine came along after that a few years afterward and then we moved on to England in 1988 and that's when life really got more interesting because in England I decided that I was not going to have a choir. I'd had one Atmore [Alabama] area, Atmore, Pensacola [Florida] area choir, and I decided in England I'm not going to have a choir, I'm just going to enjoy myself, travel around the country, travel around Europe, collect all the collectibles that Americans normally do, and--but God had another plan. And so when I got to England I shied away from music for awhile, but you just can't run away from it forever, I know I can't, and so I helped a little choir out. They needed somebody just to listen to them and help them get in shape, and that was my start of getting very busy in that country. I taught at Coley Primary School, which is a multicultural English school. I had my own students. I also had the Reading Youth Choir, and I was the founder and director of the Reading Community Gospel Choir; we were in Reading, England. And I worked with London Advent Chorale as, as a consultant and as a tutor to help them really find their sound. They were singing--they were anglicizing some Negro spirituals, which I, I must admit which literally drove me crazy, so to help them get to that point and I think my crowning act was when they won Sainsbury's Choir of the Year. The first year they were--they came in second and the jury's out whether or not they won it. I don't think they did. The soprano was flat on the B flat, so I wouldn't give it to them, but that was my crowning act because the Sainbury's Choir, Choir of the Year award is a very prestigious award in England, and basically in the UK because choirs come from all over, and not just any choir gets to that stage. So to me that, that was something that I say you know you've got something girl. And I've worked with other areas just giving workshops, seminars, and my last major project was with the Liverpool Philharmonic Society, and that was the Urban Gospel Project. And what they wanted to do was to put together a gospel choir to be accompanied by the orchestra. Isaiah Jackson was the conductor, and so my job was-- Speaker 2: Was he black? Speaker 1: Yeah, Isaiah Jackson is black. Speaker 2: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 1: I think he's from Ohio area. He used to be based in the Ohio area. Story_ID: 72116 Speaker 1: But, my job was to put the choir together and so what we did I gave a series of seminars on African American church music, and an analysis, you know, comparative analysis of African American church music and western church music, so I had to approach it from that standpoint. And I also worked with choirs, and they were trying to get their gospel sound because people, I found in England, people loved gospel music, but they didn't like the screaming kind. They wanted just--they loved the gospel sound, okay. Speaker 2: They didn't want the screaming? Speaker 1: They didn't want you to scream. They didn't want to lose the voice. They wanted to sing correctly because, you know--(unclear)--we can't do that. Speaker 2: So, was that a major adjustment that had to be made--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: The, the major--I think the major adjustment to me that they had to make that they couldn't sing this from just the chest, just superficial singing. Gospel music to me is, is, as with Negro spirituals that's a deep down, that's soul. That's in the depths of one's soul, and it is a matter of exposing yourself to your audience. And a lot of people are so reserved they don't want to expose themselves, where in the black culture the African--an African American expose themselves, my hurt. If I'm hurting, it went through my song, you know that this girl has been though something. When the other culture it was said, well that's good, okay I let you see my, feel my pain, see it and almost feel my pain because you have some pain somewhere you know, so really helping them to let go and really let, let their emotions come forth. Speaker 2: Could they do it? Speaker 1: Yes, some people were very good. It was, it was an old theater trick, you know, feel the atmosphere. You close your eyes and you feel the atmosphere. I learned that in theater, opera theater workshop. You feel the atmosphere and you become this and I would give them different scenarios just to help them to let go of those emotions and we ended up with a 300 voice choir. I don't think ten percent were even people of color. Speaker 2: But they could sing Negro spirituals? Speaker 1: Primarily we were doing gospel on that particular one. Speaker 2: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 1: There were some people that I was very surprised and you know what I discovered some folk only listened to black singers, so that's what they've tuned their ear and their voices too, interesting. I, I auditioned folk to hear, especially for soloist, to hear that and I was shocked. Speaker 2: Really. Speaker 1: Isaiah Jackson was shocked too. Speaker 2: Now, there's a history of that appreciation over there that goes all the way back to the pre-Beatle days. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Listening to the old blues singers. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: The Beatles got there. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And they--that, that's what they say. Speaker 1: And see I was in Liverpool, Beatle town, Beatle City and it was very well received. The Phil, I understand the Philharmonic had been having some problems of attendance and also they were in the process of refurbishing their auditorium, so this particular concert had to be held in the Anglican Cathedral, which held about 2000 people. I understand that they had to turn people away. That was the first time the Phil had ever had any type of function, a concert where they literally had to turn people away and because that particular concert brought in Liverpool, not just the elite, but different classes. It transcended all classes. And even in our choir, I had bankers, I had homeless people, you know, but everybody in the choir from my standpoint they were on the same level, okay, and that's how we treated them with the same respect. There were people who normally wouldn't have even talked to each other, let alone stand together and sing together and so we saw that as a positive, as a positive project for Liverpool. They offered me a job to stay on and do this thing full time, but the military said no and made us come back to America, which I--we miss the place. Story_ID: 72117 Speaker 1: So, you, you really liked England? Speaker 2: I loved England, I loved England. I loved England's appreciation of the arts. My goal was to get gospel music considered as an art form where it's, you know where it's appreciated to that level and where they would be funding for gospel music, and I think by some of the, not only my efforts, but other efforts, collaborative efforts, the British, the British Art Council does fund some gospel efforts and to me that was, that was just, that was reward. That was an accomplishment for me. And I would go back in a heartbeat 'cause I loved it. Speaker 1: And did you had in the choir mostly Englishmen--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: In, in the Liverpool choir I had mostly English people. Speaker 1: But did you have some that were West Indians in there? Speaker 2: More so in Liverpool they're more Africans than West Indians. In my other choirs, the other choirs were mostly West Indian, maybe one or two Africans here or there and maybe an English person, but on the, on the, I would say the southeastern part of the country, there were more of the West Indians, but when we were out in Liverpool, I found it was more African. That was interesting to me, yeah. Speaker 1: Now where were they from primarily, do you know? Speaker 2: I had some people from Ghana, Nigeria, just depend. One of my soloists, fabulous, fabulous soprano, was from South Africa. She had fled the county, and her goal was to go back to South Africa to open up a nursery school. She could have gone back and been an opera singer. She could have been an opera singer in, in England. Just this voice, just wow, just beautiful voice. She was an African lady. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--this is just a personal observation, it seems as though the South Africans are particularly gifted in terms of harmony and vocal music--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Well, the church I attended in Reading [England] had--our church was predominantly West Indian and African with a few English people and the Americans bringing up the rear, okay, my husband, my family and I, okay, but what was interesting when we had hymn singing, it was wonderful. The African, especially the African men, were so beautiful. One day it was just so nice I had to turn around because normally it's rude to kind of turn around and sees who is behind you, but it was just so great. There were--there was this lady sitting beside me, an African lady, who sang alto and the man--the two men behind her, there was a tenor and a bass, we made a wonderful quartet, I must admit, and I had to say wow you guys are just really singing. Just this kind of singing where you just feel it, and just feel it in your body, and when I became the music director in the church sometimes I just had a capella singing because I don't think the people could hear above the organ what I heard and sometimes I just had the organist to just stop and let's hear and that Afri--I don't know something about that African voice is just so soulful, just beautiful. Yeah, they can pick up the harmony here or there, everywhere. So, I enjoyed myself. Story_ID: 72118 Speaker 1: Okay now, now when you came back what did you, what did you do? Where were you stationed? Speaker 2: We came back here. We came back to the United States and they sent us to Grand Forks in North Dakota. Speaker 1: Were you thrilled about coming to Grand Forks? Speaker 2: Grand Forks, North Dakota--North Dakota was a place that you studied in geography and in history. Maybe a place one drives through, but never stops in my book. So, when I got to Grand Forks [North Dakota] as we were landing I asked my husband I said Lee where have you taken me this time, and people laughed. We came in September. And as we drove to the base, I said oh the mountains are lovely and the man said ma'am those are not mountains, those are clouds. I said, oh. Grand Forks was a very flat place for me, and it took some adjustment. When I saw my first black person, I was so thrilled to see a black person. We honked our horns, and we waved. When in England we'd gotten accustomed to not honking your horn, because you only honk your horn if there's, you know, eminent danger, or somebody is about to back into you or whatever. But, we honked our horn, we waved, we were so thrilled to see black people downtown. On the base, we knew it was a given, but downtown. Going to church was--the church was predominantly white. That wasn't so bad. We had experienced that before being a military family and moving about. It was different. It was a calm down for me. We'd been so active in England, and my friends, my friends called me--I had a friend that probably called me almost every day, different ones just to encourage me. It was tough coming here, very lonely, but I decided we're thrivers, we're not survivors, so I decided after we get in a house I'll find something to do. Story_ID: 72119 Speaker 1: And I decided to apply to teach and when I looked at the pay and I calculated the pay, the drive, all these things, the child care for my second child, I wasn't gonna make much, so I decided to take a class and I took one class and I enjoyed school and then in the fall I applied and I was accepted and I applied for their specialist program, because I hadn't been in the American education system for a long time. It had been thirteen years and I had been away from it. And then I applied for the Ph.D. program after that, and they refused me. They said you have to go EDD and not Ph.D. I said really. Speaker 2: What is the--tell me what's the difference so--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: EDD is more of a practitioner's degree. Ph.D. if one wants to become faculty or become a policy maker, that type of person, it's more of a theoretical degree. Well, what I found that was interesting was that I knew that I did not want the stay in Grand Forks [North Carolina] forever, okay, and I knew I wanted to eventually work for the Seventh-Day Adventist Church, I do. That is my goal, ultimate goal because we have colleges and universities all over the world and I want to ultimately work more from the international perspective. So, I went back to England to give a workshop, music workshop, at the base, Mildenhall, RAF [Royal Air Force] Mildenhall, and I visited my church in Cambridge [England]. We had been members of Cambridge Church, talked to a friend of my Robert--(unclear)--who was a fellow at Trinity College, Cambridge, and I asked Robert, whose originally from Kenya, I said what do you, what do you friends think of the American, of the EDD as opposed to Ph.D., find out. And so he talked to his friends and, and basically there's a difference. There's a different perspective, perception I should say, of the American EDD compared to Ph.D. And some people see the EDD as an inferior doctorate compared to a Ph.D, okay. While others see the EDD, those who are familiar with it, as a K12 degree. Well I, I really wanted to work in higher education, and I remembered how, how he was saying that a Ph.D. is a Ph.D. in any language. And I asked him may I quote you. He said yes, and so I reapplied for the Ph.D. program, quoting him. And so they, they admitted me to that and that was the only difference and graduated last year. I finished my Comps [Comprehensive Exams] in 1999, but two years I home schooled my daughter, 1998 I should say. I home schooled my daughter for two years, and then I graduated last year. Speaker 2: Now, now what year did you come to the Air Force? Speaker 1: Ninety-five, September of '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: So-- Story_ID: 72120 Speaker 1: That means that you were here during the Big Flood of 1997. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about that and your experience from that, that flood? Speaker 2: In fact, the blizzard, we call that the blizzard year. We said order a blizzard, you know. That was the joke because blizzards were happening every time you look around and so I was a commuter student. We still lived at the base. My husband was still active duty, and there was another student and I who would commute. And it was interesting that even one of the blizzards we had, we had a class teleconference in my bedroom. I'm talking to my classmates around the state of North Dakota and with the dean who taught that class she was sitting in her office because we were just missing so many of those classes because of blizzards. But the last blizzard that really hit--in fact I was working on a project and talking to a friend of mine, my girlfriend who lives in Raleigh [North Carolina], and lights went off. We just talked and then I said they'll come back on and then they did and then they went off again and they stayed off for days, and that was different. And it's interesting how one goes back to their upbringing when we had the, the tornados and the hurricanes in Mississippi. We always had plenty of candles. That's how we were brought up. You had plenty of candles. We knew how to layer our clothing. We knew how to layer the bedding, how to close off the rooms to keep them warm. These are things I learned as a kid and my kids thought it was wonderful because I began cooking things in a way that was different than what they were accustomed to. They had never heard of hot, hot water cornbread until then. Flipping things on the top. I, I just got into that mode of, of I don't have an oven. I worked, we survived, and we did okay. My aunt died in the meantime, so we went to Mississippi for her funeral. My aunt Chris who had to live with us, or we had lived with her and vice versa. And she had Alzheimer's and it's one of those things that it finally happened, and we were there. On our way back, I just called because everybody I think we were so exhausted from those years of holding on, of hoping and wishing, and it finally happened. We left later than usual, called here, and my friend says you no Cheryl you should have stayed in Mississippi. They're sandbagging, they've closed up the university, sandbagging. So, we hit the road and said we're gonna come back and help sandbag. I got so far and my husband heard that Grand Forks [North Dakota] was on fire. In the meantime before then, I called a friend just to find out where people were, members of my church. It is--I am blessed that I have a good memory, and I can remember numbers. I didn't have a church directory number, but I could remember everybody's number and I called folk. And a friend of mine's is a, is a cardiologist here in town, and he went to a conference because they said it wasn't going to be that bad and his wife was just--she says I'm gonna ride this out because I'm tough, I'm from North Dakota, and I said look, get out of there, take you pictures and take this and blah, blah, blah. She did everything I told her. We still laugh about that. It was weird because she has a mind of her own, but I think at that time she just needed somebody else to say this, and got out, and my husband found out later on that Grand Forks was on fire and so we were coming back to say okay let's see what we can do. When we got here, it was a different place, water everywhere, and of course the National Guard, guarding the town, you couldn't go in a certain way. I, I felt guilty that we were gone, and I felt guilty that I hadn't left my key with somebody, because somebody could have stayed in my house. Normally we do that, and I think because my aunt died we were just getting out of town so quickly to get down to Mississippi-- Story_ID: 72121 Speaker 1: Your house was completely flooded? Speaker 2: No, we were on base and so the base was safe, but it was interesting when we got there and we went to what they called the 3-Bay Hangar. It's a very, very big hangar out there. It's three hangars in one. You could see the social divide. That was the first time I saw the social divide in Grand Forks. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 2: The haves and the have-nots, and the haves were together and they were, many of them were getting ready to fly off somewhere, and the have-nots were over in their little corner. My husband is, is an even-tempered person, and my, my suggestion to him was you, you oughta work the 3-Bay Hangar, don't sandbag because they need people like you who's even-tempered and respect people as people. So, that's what he did and there were some people who came to our house and would take showers and we fixed food and that sort of thing. Our church had a center over in East Grand Forks and then one on this side and really primarily I worked with the Red Cross part of the time, but my job was really to support. So you know the person here or person there that type of thing. That's what I did during the flood 'cause my kids were still kind of little in those days. But it was different. It was a whole different experience to see basically a whole town evacuated, so I called around and my house was kind of the command center in a way. Folk kind of knew where people were. Call Cheryl she knows where this person it, so where's pastor, he's over at this place and this person is up north and even for the department calling around to the department and, and I think it's just my upbringing. You always check on the people you know and the people you love, people you care about, and I think even my department's attitude towards me changed. I don't think they really knew me. But I called--I found every professor and they didn't even know where their colleagues were. I don't know if they didn't think about calling them or whatever, but I'm--that's my character. And so that was my contribution, it was different though. And we helped clean out--my husband more so helped clean out basements and folks' houses. Speaker 1: "Cause from what, what I've read and heard it was a transforming experience for the city and some. Speaker 2: Very much. Speaker 1: At least that's what's what's stated downtown. I've read a kiosk--(unclear)--all the information about the flood. Speaker 2: You don't totally get over that. Speaker 1: You're right. Speaker 2: Even when the storm, I think a year or two later, a storm was brewing and there was a, there was a threat of a possible blizzard along with some flooding and I could tell there was a tension. Folk became very agitated, agitated with each other because of that fear of, of loss, you know. Speaker 1: Do, do you think it's affected Grand Forks [North Dakota] for the better or do you think it's-- Speaker 2: I think the flood was a mixed blessing for Grand Forks in, in, in one way. The schools needed serious repair. Well, FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] money helped take care of the majority of that. There were some businesses, okay, that were lost and that's the, that's a down side. There were some families who had, who just said I can't take this and they left. But, there were some people who, who actually wouldn't have gotten a house had it not been for the flood. I know some people who were trying to renovate their house themselves and it just didn't work and that was a mixed blessing. That's why I say it's a mixed blessing for some people, and I think it depends upon who you talk to. But, I think it also tells about the human spirit. It was interesting to see the berms all of the, the, the loss from the flood, people putting their things out on the corner out on the berm and then months later to see how the town looked. Some places you still had those things still sitting out there, but they really worked very hard to, to restore it as much as possible to its former glory or to a greater glory. So, it's, it's been a mixed blessing. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 72122 Speaker 1: So your activities here the last couple of years I guess you, you got your Ph.D. in 1998. Speaker 2: I got my PhD last year. I finished, I finished that. Speaker 1: 2001. Speaker 2: 2001 finally. Speaker 1: And, and so what, what has life been like here in Grand Forks [North Dakota] and what has your career been like here at the University of North Dakota? Speaker 2: Well, my career here, I'm director of the learning center and I remember somebody asking me how long are you going to do that? Until I get bored, I said because I'm one of these people I like something that is a challenge for me. I'm taking advantage of my time here to learn as much about higher ed, and the operations of a higher ed institute as I can, as much as I can. Right now I'm on the university planning and budget committee. I do love gov, governance and policy making. That's something I, I, I have discovered that about myself and where some people would find those types of meetings boring I think they're just thrilling. So, I'm a part of that. I'm, I'm planning to shadow the provost, the assistant provost here because I do find myself leaning more towards a higher level. I'm not saying that I would want to be a university or college president. I'm leaning more towards working for my church from the international perspective, working with their schools, but, I'm taking advantage of every opportunity to learn as much as I can about higher education from the academic standpoint and also from the student affairs standpoint. And also I wanted to look into some of the distance learning aspects of it, so that's what I've, I've done even as an administrator and I have great staff. You know I've really been blessed to have been able to hire a person who is just a super, as I call her a super duper person. And I have people who I work with more of a collaborative spirit. I'm not a micromanager. That's one of the things I don't like about a university. I find that some people micromanage, and I'm not that. I find when I give my staff something to do or we work on a project together, it, it really helps them to go to another level as opposed to looking over their shoulder for every little step. Yes, I have accountability. I require accountability, and I think that's with any job. We wanna make sure that we're, we're meeting the needs of our students because that's our goal here to be in higher education. Meeting the needs of our students and taking our students, maximizing I should say, maximizing their learning potential. So, right now in my job it is--I'm using every opportunity I have to take the learning center beyond the status quo of being a glorified tutorial center where we're actually meeting the students' needs beyond that. We've implemented new courses and some new ideas there, and I think students are really taking on. We're, we're busy where before we weren't busy, so it is one of those things that we're doing. I find that here at the university, of course there's an old guard here, and people have a tendency to be territorial and I guess that's with any organization. But, I find often times that attitude gets in the way of progress from my perspective. And so I'm learning what type of leader to be and not to be. Okay, at the end of the day what is the best thing, what is best for the institution, whose agenda. Is this my personal agenda or this is the agenda for, for the organization, so tho, those are some of the things I'm learning outside of class that they never could really teach me inside of class. Story_ID: 72123 Speaker 1: Are there activities that you've been involved in that you think are like highlights of your career here in, in, in the capacity that you're serving now? Speaker 2: I think being on the UPBC board, the University Planning and Budget committee that's I think that's one of them. I think--I worked with MC before my job as a graduate assistant. Speaker 1: This is M.C. Diab (ph.). Speaker 2: M.C Diab who is the director of multi-culture students services. He's assistant to the vice president-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --of student outreach services here at the university. Speaker 1: At the Era Bell Thompson. Speaker 2: Right, here at the Era Bell Thompson Cultural Center. And I think M.C has, I think unintentionally--I won't, I won't say intentionally or unintentionally, but he has mentored me and had ex,--and has exposed me to many aspects, especially of the student services or student affairs side of, of the university, that which that I did not get in the classroom, okay. And so, that sort of helped me in learning the dynamics of, of organization, organizational politics in a way. But, I think that's one of the culmination, one of the crowning acts and being on the UPBC board, I think, is very important. I'm also on the university assessment board, and that's, that's a big thing nowadays. Everybody's having--we're gonna have to be accountable and that's something that we haven't been in the past, but being a part of that group which transcends just--(unclear)--the student in outreach services, but also the medical school, the law school, the academic services, the university as a whole. I think being on those committees have been very good for me, very good. Story_ID: 72124 Speaker 1: So, what do you think is next? What do you gonna do next? Do you plan to stay in Grand Forks [North Dakota] for a long time? Speaker 2: I don't plan to stay in Grand Forks [North Dakota] for a long time. Speaker 1: Is, is it tough being one of 3,000 residents of, black residents of North Dakota you think? Speaker 2: Some days. Some days it's tough. I, I think some days it's the assumption--what is interesting to me I'll put it this way when, when people come to my office and ask for Dr. Saunders and my colleague who is actually according to my supervisor is my subordinate they automatically look at my colleague because she's white. And then when they see me and my colleague says no, no, I'm not Dr. Saunders she is and then they'll go oh; that's interesting. It is interesting when ones when talking to people and I've said to somebody I'm gonna go back to school and they oh what are you gonna work on a Bachelor's Degree? It's assumed, you know, the assumptions and, and then I said no I think I may work on a Master's, you know. Oh, well you oughta go for a Ph.D. and I say well I have one I'm just going back to do something else because I want to go to law school, but my family is quiet about that. I can't do that. And they, they seem very surprised. Well you must be smart. So, that's kinda--I get that sometimes here or I notice folk notice what's in my basket when we shop. It's interesting. As long as black people have been here, it's, it's interesting. Speaker 1: And black people have been here a long time. Speaker 2: Quite a few. It's be, because of when--well if you look at the book--there's a book called "African Americans in North Dakota." I think one of the first recorded births in North Dakota around the turn of the century, right before the turn of the century is of, of a child of color. So black people have been here a long time. In, in fact that book is by William Sherman who was a local priest, who's a sociologist. But, in this particular area because of the military black folk have been here. We have some retirees who have been here, what, over thirty years, at least thirty years. So, it's not that I'm an odd black person. We are here. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a gentlemen, [Jack] Mayfield, whose a boxer and a musician who died recently at age 106 right? Speaker 2: Right, Mr. Jack Mayfield. And this, this center here, Era Bell Thompson Cultural Center is named after Era Bell Thompson who's a, whose a woman of color. From the western part of the state her father was a businessman and her mom was a teacher, taught immigrants how to read and speak English. Era Bell Thompson wasn't a graduate, she wasn't a graduate of the University of North Dakota. However, she was a student here, but she wrote a book about, I think it was land of our fathers or something, one of her autobiographies. And so there are black people who've been around. Speaker 1: She was one of the--she was on the ed, ed, ed, editor board of "Ebony" magazine. Speaker 2: Right, she was--that's right she was the international editor of "Ebony" magazine and, and left an endowment to this university. So, it's not that black folk haven't been here. One of the city councilmen, Paul Pitts, former student here. He's down at the University of Illinois, I think, in, in Edwardsville [Illinois]. Was a student here at the University of North Dakota, black man. He was on the city council here, so. Speaker 1: So there's was black on the city council here? Speaker 2: Right, at one time, yeah. So, it's not that we haven't been here. Story_ID: 72125 Speaker 1: So your mother had a chance to see you get your Master's Degree? Speaker 2: She wasn't at the ceremony, but she saw me in the garb and all that good stuff, so that was, that was good, that was good. Speaker 1: Your education was very important to her, yeah? Speaker 2: Very, very much important. In fact, my Bachelor's Degree stayed at her house--the diploma stayed at her house until she died because she said that's your degree, the Master's is mine. She had given up a lot for me, and, and she didn't ask for anything in return, but I felt that that was hers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now I was asking you though it's going to be a long time before we, we have to think about this, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Wow, I was thinking about several things. I was thinking about what drives me and if somebody was to talk about me and I had died or gotten lost some place that I gave my best for others and that I respected people as people. I loved being black, I do. I--that I love my people and I gave my all for my people and to honor my people. That's for me, that's the important thing. That's the driving point. I want my people to be honored, so that's why I do what I do, and God is a part of that. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 72126 Speaker 1: --You, you have internalized some of the anguish of the American Indians on campus as well as they deal with their struggle around--(unclear)--and so forth. Can, can, can you talk about that 'cause we, we, we alluded to it when we first met here? Speaker 2: About American Indians? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well you know part of my family has Cherokee. That's on my grandfather side and even though you don't see that, you know, it's there. But even if the-- Speaker 1: That's part of Mississippi history. Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that is a part of that. Speaker 1: Cherokees and the Choctaw. Speaker 2: The Choctaws down there. But, even if I didn't have I think when--even if I didn't have that heritage, the human side of me says when we reduce a group of people to a mascot and we can treat them like anything and say anything to them, to me that's just wrong, it's blasphemous. I don't care if it brings you money; it's not worth it. As, as I shared with somebody today I graduated from the University of North Dakota, not the University of the Fighting Sioux. There's a difference. Speaker 1: The Fighting Sioux--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: The Fighting Sioux is the logo. Speaker 1: Nickname of the mascot-- Speaker 2: The, the mascot. Speaker 1: --of the University of North Dakota. Speaker 2: And I--and to be honest with you, I was a little apathetic about it as a commuter student until I saw a drawing and it was terrible of a squaw who had Sioux on her dress supposedly depicted a squaw had given a blow job to a bison. And I said that is just base--I'm just--I was against that. When we bring a group of people down to that level and that if you looked at the picture of this woman she could look like anybody's mother, sister, aunt, friend who was Indian, and I think that's wrong. So, I'm, I'm adamantly opposed to that. I don't think we should make people mascots. They're people and they should be proud of their heritage, not where they're kicking a ball, they're symbolizing a ball being kicked around. Speaker 1: And I guess the importance is that they didn't, they didn't chose to become, become the mascot for the football team--(unclear)--right? Speaker 2: Wh-- well I think in some of the hist--I haven't been looking at some of the history because it is, it is baffling me why did they chose--(unclear)--. I understand certain segments of the Sioux nation were okay. I guess when they decided to become the Fighting Sioux the chief came down, I guess there's a film documenting that. However, I don't think that those people saw into the future how their named--their name would be used and how their people would be depicted. I don't think they saw that. I thought they--I think they thought it would just bring honor to their people, but I don't think they realized the dishonor that their--(unclear)--abuse their, their students have, have endured. Because there are students who get called things. I was called the N word walking down the road, so. I was angry too. Angry, angry, angry. But, native students had--a native student shared that she was walking some place and had an egg thrown at her, hit her, and she doesn't know what caused that. Well, she has an idea; she was Native [American]. So, so we, when we reduce that it gives to me more credence and more permission to mistreat a particular member of our population and to me that's wrong. I don't care how much money it brings. It's not worth it. Story_ID: 72127 Speaker 1: This is my wedding reception in 1980. This is my husband, Lee, and of course me, Cheryl. Speaker 2: This one's kind of fuzzy here, so--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Oh, not this one. I, I love that picture. Speaker 2: Do you really? Speaker 1: Yeah, we, we wanted that little soft-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --that little soft look (laughter). Speaker 2: That's the basic wedding party, and I have to give you everybody, is that correct? Speaker 1: No, you don't have to give us everybody, you, you can if you want to. Speaker 2: Just my-- Speaker 1: If you do, go from left to right. Speaker 2: Left to right, that's my girl, my matron of honor. Her name is Dede McCray [ph.]. The man in the back is my uncle, Mathew Roberts. The girl in the front is Rosalyn Miller, my cousin, and there's my aunt, the late Erma Roberts. Of course, there's my husband and I and my mother-in-law is with the--is in the blue dress. Her name is Ms. Irene Saunders. Next to her is my father-in-law, the late W.N. Saunders, and right in front is Rochelle Parker. In fact, she's Dr. Rochelle Parker now. And up from there is Robin Parker, her sister, who was the maid of honor, and the next person is Charles Thomas. Speaker 1: Okay, what year is this? Speaker 2: That was 1980, long time. Speaker 1: This one is a little soft, you know what I mean. Speaker 2: Is it too soft? Speaker 1: It's gonna be what it is. I mean we can't make it sharper and you've got one of the same occasion don't you? --(Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah--(unclear)--wedding, but if it doesn't come out blurry--I just like that picture--(unclear)--okay. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Go, go, go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay, this is our wedding and that's my husband and I, Lee. It's 1980. Speaker 1: This is May--no it's 2002 I was singing at a women's--Christian women's breakfast. It was a prayer breakfast and that's here in Grand Forks [North Dakota] and I can't remember the lady who asked me. She's too my--she's on, on the right of the picture, but I was attending that, and that's here in Grand Forks. That's March of 2002. Speaker 2: That's a bag picture, sorry. I got the worst ones, sorry guys. Speaker 1: That's that's a bad one in terms of-- Speaker 2: It looks like it has a mark on it. That's at my, my Master's graduation, my husband and I. That's in 1983, August of 1983, University of Southern Mississippi. I received a Master's of music, in church music. Speaker 1: Oh, that's a bad one. That's the eleventh grade (laughter). Speaker 2: I can put up another one. Speaker 1: They're all bad. Those were my younger years. So what's that one? That's the eleventh grade, okay. That's 1970, '71' [1971] school year. Rowan High School. Speaker 2: How do you spell the high school? Speaker 1: R-O-W-A-N. Rowan High School, Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Sorry, do I hit something else. Speaker 2: That's eighth grade. That's Hawkins Junior High School. That's in Hattiesburg [Mississippi], and I think that was 1968. Speaker 1: That's the tenth grade at Blair High School 1969, 1970. Speaker 2: That's sixth grade. That's at Grace Love Elementary School and I'm tr, trying to remember the year because I made two grades in one, so I went from first to third grade. I started school when I was six. I'm thinking 1961, so that had to be '66 [1966], '67 [1967] or in '65 [1965], '66 [1966], I can't remember that one. Speaker 1: That's fourth grade. Okay, that's fourth grade. That's 1963. That was the year that John F. Kennedy died, and I was in Ms. Harrison's class. Okay. Speaker 2: That was my mother. That's my mother, and I can't remember the year. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Lula Roberts. Speaker 1: Do not use that picture (laughter). Speaker 2: In 1993, we were in Scarborough, England, my husband, Lee, and that's me. I was pregnant at the time. I remember that. I think that's May, yeah. Speaker 1: And that's basically the same place. Glare. You don't have to use that one if you don't want. Speaker 2: Was that in the photo, that fog--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think the fog is in the photo. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's Lee and Elana (ph.) Baker. She's from--there from England and that's her uncle, Michael Baker. Speaker 2: And year? Speaker 1: That was 1993. Speaker 2: Ooh, let's not use that. Speaker 1: And that's first grade. Speaker 2: I'm sorry would you start over, please. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry, that's Grace Love Elementary School. That's first grade, and I think the year is on there, 1960, '61 [1961], I think. Isn't that on there? Sorry, I have too many. Speaker 2: That's my mother and my sister. My mother is Lula Roberts and that's Stephanie Roberts. That's really when my mother was getting ill. That year is 1980. It's the beginning of 1983 or something like that. My sister's name is Stephanie. Speaker 1: That's my--that's 1971, '72 [1972]. That's my twelfth grade picture. Speaker 2: I don't know if you can see us. That's my children and I in--we were in Braunau in Austria. That's in front of Hitler's birthplace. Speaker 1: That was Hitler's birthplace? Speaker 2: Um-hum, that was in 1995. Speaker 1: This is my--from left to right Rachel Olson, Kelsey Rupert (ph.), my daughter Jasmine and me and then there's my son, Josh. We were getting ready to--I was taking the girls to England in 1999. They had never been to England before except for my daughter. We were at Minneapolis Airport. Speaker 2: This is a church in Reading, England and the church is mostly West Indian people. The lady I'm with--I'm in the pink suit, and the lady I'm talking to is Mrs. Gwen Malcolm who is really--who served as a surrogate grandmother for my children. She was like a surrogate grandmother, especially for my daughter. Speaker 1: I just gathered a group- Speaker 2: We have to start again, please. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. This is in Huddersfield, which is up in Yorkshire, up in England in the northern part of England, and I gathered together a group of people. We were putting together an, an ensemble for a particular meeting we were having, so those are members of that Huddersfield group. Speaker 2: That's at Huddersfield. That's the gathering. That's the previous group we were preparing for. Okay. Speaker 1: This is my husband and I, Lee, right outside of Reading Church. Typical cold English day and so that's where we attended the Seventh-Day Adventist Church in Reading. That is a good question. I have on a blue coat. When did I get--(unclear)--. I would say that's 1989. Speaker 2: We don't have to use that one. Speaker 1: That picture was taken 1999. Speaker 2: That picture was taken in Venice. What year did we go to Venice, before Josh. Speaker 1: Say again please. Speaker 2: 1991 in Venice, yeah. Speaker 1: We don't have to use Max, our dog. Speaker 2: That's--the children in front is Jasmine Saunders, my daughter, and Josiah Brown, and then there's me and Josiah's mom, Donna Brown. We were at Ludwigsburg in Germany and that was 1991. Speaker 1: I'm presenting a plaque to Chris Stoner who was a student at UND [University of North Dakota] won an award during the King celebration and that was 2000. Speaker 2: This is at graduation last year. My husband received his Bachelor's Degree in geography, and I received my Ph.D. in educational leadership, University of North Dakota 2001. Speaker 1: This is Disney World 1996, my husband Lee, my son Josh, Elana Baker, the little girl. The woman there is Ruth Baker, her mother, they're from England, and my daughter Jasmine, and there's me, and we were at Disney World. I think we--that's at MGM Studies. Speaker 2: This particular thing is 2000, I think it is 2002, 2001. This is at church, and I'm with Christina Olsen and we're presenting something. I think this was a baptismal service, a pre-baptismal service for a friend. It was a worship service. We can just call it that...