 Story_ID: 495817 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is [HistoryMaker] Sarah-Ann Shaw and it's spelled S-A-R-A-H, hyphen A-N-N, S-H-A-W-- Speaker 1: Okay what is your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and I'm named after both my grandmothers [Sarah Henderson Bomar and Anna King] that's why I have a double first name and no middle name. Speaker 1: Okay all right, all right, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: No, I'll give you my place of birth. My place of birth was Boston, Massachusetts. In fact I was born in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] where I now live where I still live. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I'm sure if you Google it you can find out the year but I'm not telling. Speaker 1: Okay, all right that's fair enough. So those who want to do hard research can find out. Speaker 2: That's right they can find out. Speaker 1: Ma'am what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am retired thank god but for thirty one years I was a news reporter for WBZ [WBZ-TV] Channel 4 in Boston. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? I'm sorry, today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February 13, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: And we're at Central Boston Elder Services at 2315 Washington Street in Roxbury, Mass. Story_ID: 495818 Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth there are five light weight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask everyone. They only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: String beans. Speaker 1: Okay, and I read someplace chocolate mousse was in there too. But I don't-- Speaker 2: Well chocolate too but see chocolate is an indulgence, strings beans is food. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Bermuda. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think I have a favorite phrase or saying, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have many things that I say but--perhaps something I do say when people ask me how I am I say something my mother [Annie Bomar King] used to say which is I'm here by being careful. Story_ID: 495819 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Norris King, Jr.] side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Annie A-N-N-I-E, Belle B-E-L-L-E, Bomar B-O-M-A-R is her maiden name, King was her married name. Annie Belle Bomar King [Annie Bomar King] and she was born in a little town called Inman, South Carolina which is outside of Spartanburg, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Can you give us her date of birth? Speaker 2: I don't really know because my mother was born sometime in the sort of late 1800s and I'm not really sure of her birth date or my father's either when we get to my father's side of the family. My mother's father [Benjamin Bomar] was a product of miscegenation so it's back in those days. My grandfather's father was white and his mother was half black and half Indian [Native American]. Speaker 1: Are there stories attached to these--how much do you know about your ancestors (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my grand--I don't know a lot frankly. Speaker 1: On your mother's side? Speaker 2: I don't know a lot because when you're young you don't really think about asking--you hear stories but you don't really think about asking what did they do, what were they like, et cetera, et cetera and the fact that my grandfather died before I was born also added to my lack of knowledge. But I do know that my grandfather was very skilled. He studied, he had a knack for figures and he was a builder. He could do blueprints. One of my aunts used to go with him and could help him as he was building buildings. There was a school named after him in Inman the Benjamin Franklin Bomar School [Ben Bomar School, Inman, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay so was a contractor on that school. Speaker 2: Well they named the school after him. I think he built the school but they named the school after him. There really aren't any people left who know that much about my grandfather and I understand my grandmother [Sarah Henderson Bomar] was very strict. She was called Big Mama and was quick to backhand you, give you the switch, et cetera, et cetera. Speaker 1: We all know that stereotype anyway of Big Mama. Speaker 2: Big Mama yes and I know absolutely nothing about my grandmother's family because as I said both of them were dead when I was born so I have no knowledge and people weren't as interested in their roots when I was growing up as they are. You've heard some stories and you've heard this one was a good cook or that one--like I heard about my grandfather's ability to build and do blueprints and draw but I didn't hear a lot about my grandmother except she was strict and a good cook (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. But we do know that your grandfather was highly thought of apparently because they named a school after him. Speaker 2: My assumption is that even though it was in the days of segregation the contributions he made 'cause we're talking 1800s and the contributions that he made must have been recognized by the people in Inman. Speaker 1: So you would say his activity, I guess would, would be circa 1870s or something or '60s [1860s] or '70s [1870s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I think before then. Speaker 1: Even, okay? Speaker 2: Even before then. Story_ID: 495820 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are there stories from your family from the days before the emancipation? Speaker 2: If there are I know them not. The only--I've heard bits and pieces like for instance I--my mother [Annie Bomar King] and her sisters had an aunt who used to go out in the fields and gather herbs and things, medicinal things and then there was another aunt who had a flower shop and all of the white people in town patronized her flower shop because she apparently had a green thumb and could grow flowers very well. But I'm not even sure of their names, the aunts, my mother's aunts. One thing we used to--one of my mother's sisters settled in Charlotte, North Carolina and we used to go south. I have one brother [Norris B. King] and we used to go south in the summer when we were small and once we went to Inman [South Carolina] to visit my mother's aunt, Aunt Emma [Emma Snoddy Bomar]. We went to visit Aunt Emma and Uncle Smiley [Smiley Bomar] and my brother and I being from Boston [Massachusetts], not having been on a farm before we were out in the backyard playing and in South Carolina the dirt is kind of clay like and kind of sticky. So we were out in the backyard playing and the stuff started sticking to our feet and we started screaming and my mother came running out. We thought it was quicksand and that we were about to go down someplace in this quicksand (laughter) because we were used to concrete. The other thing we did, my Uncle Smiley had a mule in the barn and so we went in, we were walking all around looking at this mule and he came in and he said, "You cannot go in the barn or walk around the mule like that." He said, "The mule could have kicked you into the next county," but what did we know. The other thing I remember is that Aunt Emma took a chicken and wrung the neck of the chicken and the chicken hopped all around in the yard and then she plucked it and took a piece of paper set it on fire and burned the feathers off and then she cooked it. I said, "I'm not eating that," and my mother spanked me because she said I embarrassed her because I said I'm not eating that. I had never--I don't think I'd ever seen a live chicken more or less a chicken hopping around in the yard (laughter). But we used to go south in the summer to my aunt in North Carolina and it was very, very different from growing up in Boston. She had fruit trees in her backyard and you could run around in your bare feet and I had cousins, lots of cousins and we used to play. It was very different from being in Boston. So that's what I remember a lot about North Carolina and South Carolina and in the past probably about ten, fifteen years they've had a family reunion and I did go when it was Inman and I went. There were distant cousins, it was no one really close, no one who really knew the old stories but I went just because I was curious and I found out that, I guess my grandfather [Benjamin Bomar] had a brother who married--he married one sister and his brother married another sister so. But I really am not close to them but I just sort of met them and knew who they were. Story_ID: 495821 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Annie Bomar King] talk about--did she grow up in Inman [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: She grew up in Inman and I'm not sure at what age she moved to Atlanta [Georgia] to take care of someone's children. She either took care of someone's children or worked in service, one or the two because that's where she met my father [Norris King, Jr.] in Atlanta. But I know that my mother was not very--she and her sisters went to a Presbyterian school they were Presbyterian and they went to a Presbyterian school which was started by the Presbyterian Church for black children. Speaker 1: In Inman? Speaker 2: In Inman and they were very proud of the fact that they went to this Presbyterian church--I mean Presbyterian school instead of because of--I (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Would it be instead of Benjamin Franklin Bomar School [Ben Bomar School, Inman, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Oh no, no it was a Presbyterian school. I guess you had to have money or something to go but they were inordinately proud of the fact that they went to this Presbyterian school. I think that the school that was named after my grandfather, I think that came about in later years maybe after he died I don't know. Speaker 1: So but they were proud of the fact that they went to that-- Speaker 2: Presbyterian school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they go all the way through high school there? Speaker 2: No they had very--they probably completed grammar school and that's probably about it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to the best of my knowledge. Story_ID: 495822 Speaker 1: So she moved to Atlanta [Georgia] as a teenager basically (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would say--probably about sixteen, eighteen something like that she moved to Atlanta to work in Atlanta. Speaker 1: And--okay. And your parents met there? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Let me ask you about--now did she have any stories of growing up that we were missing before I move on to your father [Norris King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: No not really my mother [Annie Bomar King] was in her forties when I was born so she was more almost like a grandmother rather than a mother and she didn't really--I guess if I'd asked her she would have talked about it but there are bits and pieces about their youth. They lived on a farm and their mother [Sarah Henderson Bomar] was strict but nothing in depth. I can't--how some people can go back into we were on the farm and we did this and we did that, I don't have those kinds of memories unfortunately. Now I wish I had asked but I didn't so it's too late now. Speaker 1: Well you know people didn't volunteer a lot of information in those days generally. I understand what you're saying about that it's rare that they did (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And when I got older and I asked a couple of my aunts after my mother died they didn't want to talk about it so there you go too. Speaker 1: Did you get the impression that your mother was glad to be out of the South? Speaker 2: Oh I think she was glad to be out of the South. I think she was definitely glad to be out of the South but I think when she came to Boston [Massachusetts] it was a real shock because it was so very different in the South when she came to Boston--when she and my father came to Boston. But I'm sure that she must have been glad to be able to get out of the South. Speaker 1: Okay, all right the reason I asked is just 'cause it may seem axiomatic to most people that people would want to get out of the South in those days since it's in history we need to try to talk about why, and that's why. Speaker 2: Yeah but I really don't know but I assumed that she was glad to leave the South and I'm sure she left Inman [South Carolina] because Inman was a little teeny small town and she had to work particularly after her father [Benjamin Bomar] died of a heart attack. He just kind of dropped dead and then her mother died and so I think that it was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when they moved to Atlanta they really didn't have any parents left is that what you're saying? Speaker 2: I think that my mother, I think that my mother's parents were dead when she moved to Atlanta. I think she probably worked around in, in (unclear) and Spartanburg [South Carolina] which was the nearest large town and then moved, moved on to Atlanta. Story_ID: 495823 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Norris, N-O-R-R-I-S, Norris King, Jr. K-I-N-G. Speaker 1: All right, ,and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Again don't know, he was born in Clayton, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe 1876 or something like that; I'm not clear because records were not that. I went to Clayton once to try to find out some information and went to the courthouse and I could kick myself now for not doing it. They had--I came across his name in the book but I was so taken aback because the day that we had always celebrated as his birthday was not the date that was entered in the record in Clayton but it might have been the midwife 'cause he was delivered by a midwife. The midwife got there after he was--days after but it was a different date than the date we always celebrated as his birthday. He and my mother [Annie Bomar King] both have the same birthday according to them. Speaker 1: What do you know about your father's ancestors? Speaker 2: I know that my grandfather [Norris King, Sr.], his father worked the railroad and he worked doing something with freight and it was a job that white people didn't want initially but then as the railroads developed and became more a mode of transportation, he lost his job because a white person wanted the job that my grandfather had. My grandmother who is Annie--I don't know her maiden name--Annie King [Anna King]. My grandmother used to do cleaning and tailoring and sewing and there's a story I don't know if it's true or not but according to my father and his brothers one of my uncles was in town in Clayton and a white man grabbed my uncle for some infraction or another and my grandmother went back into to town and as they said she thrashed the man (laughter). I can't believe it but it's possible that she had the kind of stature in the community or they were just so surprised that she took this tap but she thrashed the man according to them for putting his hand on her child. Both my mother and father came from large families too that's the other thing. My mother had one brother but she had let's see Jessie [Jessie Bomar Stroud], (unclear), Hattie [Hattie Bomar Richardson], Thelma [Thelma Bomar] she had four sisters and one brother and my father had Tom [Thomas King], William [William King], Russell [sic. Lee King] three brothers and three sisters. So they both came from, came from large families. Story_ID: 495824 Speaker 1: Any other stories from your father's side of the family that got passed down? Speaker 2: That's the only story that I, that I remember. I know that they, they lived in a--I went, I saw the house where my uncle used to live in Clayton [Alabama] when I went to Clayton. It was small kind of wooden house and I have some old photographs of people sitting on the porch and I went to try to find my uncle's grave but I was unable to find it because the church where they were they used to bury the people behind the churches and this church was so overgrown with thorns and greenery and stuff you couldn't see--you couldn't find the graves. Now I'd like to go back sometime to see if I could do more research about my father's [Norris King, Jr.] family and my mother's [Annie Bomar King] family. When I was looking through the records in the courthouse, I did come across something about my [maternal] grandmother [Sarah Henderson Bomar]. It said that she had died of congestive chill; I don't know a congestive chill. I don't know if it was a heart attack or she had pneumonia or what but it said cause of death congestive chill. Speaker 1: I guess that was the best they could do then in terms of coming up with a diagnosis. Speaker 2: Again both my grandparents on my father's side they both were dead before I was born so I never knew any of them. I had no interaction with them and I understand my grandmother [Anna King] on my father's side she had a heart attack and died young and my [paternal] grandfather [Norris King, Sr.] moved the family to Atlanta [Georgia] where he then remarried Mama Lula [Lula King] and they all lived in Atlanta together. And my father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's how your father got to Atlanta? Speaker 2: Yeah and my father went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] when it was a technical--Morehouse Training School [ph.]. It wasn't a college then and he went when it was a training school and one of his sisters went to Spelman [Spelman Seminary; Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about what school was like in those days? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Now what did he study? Speaker 2: I think he must have studied automobile mechanics because that's what he did when he came to Boston [Massachusetts]. I don't know what, I don't even know what they taught in the training school then but when he came to Boston he did do automobile mechanic work. Story_ID: 495825 Speaker 1: Do you parents tell a story of how they met? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) My mother [Annie Bomar King] and father [Norris King, Jr.] were, they never really--you know, it was the era where children were seen and not heard (unclear) and you didn't ask lots of questions. You just sort of accepted the fact you're here, you're the child and those are the parents. I'm sure if I'd asked they may have said something. I came across a card in a trunk announcing their wedding but I don't know. Speaker 1: Now is there a--do you know why or what the circumstances were that compelled them to move to Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I think my mother's sister was already here working in service and so she encouraged them to come to Boston and so they moved here I think it was 1920, 1925 something like that. They moved to Boston and they lived in the South End of Boston. Speaker 1: Now is that significant around here, I mean to say you live in the South End? Speaker 2: That's where black people lived. When black people left Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] they started moving into the South End and so they moved. My mother and father lived, and I guess they had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --in a, in a rooming house in the South End and they had a couple of different addresses where they lived in the South End. Story_ID: 495826 Speaker 1: My father [Norris King, Jr.] worked as an automobile mechanic and at one time he had his own garage on Northampton Street, I have a picture of King's Garage [ph.]. Speaker 2: Now that was a pretty big deal in those days (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 2: If you could fix cars. Cars weren't that old in those--here you're at the cutting edge, being able to fix cars with your own garage. Speaker 1: But then the Depression [Great Depression] came and he lost it al. Speaker 2: So after 1930 his business folded? Speaker 1: Yeah his business folded and he went to work for some other car company and then when the war came he went to work fixing cars and stuff from World War II [WWII]. I remember he was sent to Rock Island, Illinois for some special training on something. We have a picture of him in Rock Island, Illinois and that was the first time that my father had left us 'cause he went and he had to stay there, I don't know, a couple of months or so and it was really very strange since he had never--he had always been there. I remember being worried about was he coming back, why did he have to do, why did he have to go, et cetera. Fortunately for him he had relatives in Chicago [Illinois] so it wasn't as bad for him being in Rock Island. I think he was the only black man in this particular program that the government had for fixing military vehicles. Because the picture we have he's the only black man you see, they are all sort of posed beside these machines and he's the only black man that you see in this particular photograph. And then he went to work for the post office as a mechanic for the post office. Speaker 2: That sounds like a good job for those days in terms of benefits and-- Speaker 1: Yeah health insurance and all the rest of it. My mother [Annie Bomar King] was basically pretty much at home and then when my brother [Norris B. King] and I got to be, I guess we were in early teens she was able to get a part-time job at a store down on Boylston Street where she did dusting and--she wasn't a salesperson but she cleaned not floor and things but she dusted and she was a part-time worker there. See my mother and father were married for thirteen, fourteen years before my mother became pregnant with my brother and they had been trying to have a child. I remember them going to different doctors to find out what was the matter and when my mother became pregnant she didn't know what was the matter because it had been so long and then I was born a year and nine months later. Up until the time that she became pregnant, my mother did--she worked as a cook and she worked basically as a cook for different white people but then after we were born, you know, she was at home. Story_ID: 495827 Speaker 1: Can you tell us when you look at your parents personalities which, which one do you think you or what characteristics do you take after? Speaker 2: I think I take after my father [Norris King, Jr.] more than I take after my mother [Annie Bomar King]. My mother was always able to see the good in everyone and she was kind of a low key and not too hot tempered, very religious. She was a deaconess in her church, in the Presbyterian church. I think I take after my father more. My father was very interested in racial issues and he was interested in politics. In fact, as you know in those days many black people were Republicans and my father was part of a group called the Roxbury Democratic Club. He and some other men had founded this Roxbury Democratic Club and they had--I came across some postcards that they were sending to old Senator Bilbo [Theodore G. Bilbo]. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah Senator Bilbo of Mississippi (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mississippi, yeah and these were postcards urging Senator Bilbo to vote for the anti-lynching laws. So this was a group of men who were active around politics and I remember when Henry Wallace [Henry A. Wallace], I think came to Boston [Massachusetts] to speak at Braves Field or Fenway Park-- Speaker 1: He was a vice president? Speaker 2: I can't remember, I just remember the name and I remember my father and mother going and the reason I remember is because we got to stay at my aunt's house because they were going to hear Henry Wallace and it was the first time that I'd ever slept anyplace else other than, you know, my own house. Story_ID: 495828 Speaker 1: Well my father [Norris King, Jr.], you know, was a Baptist, he, he was a staunch Baptist but the funny thing was every Sunday morning a little Jewish lady used to come to the house with a copy of the Daily Worker and they used to discuss what was in the Daily Worker. She'd come to sale this newspaper to my father and they would discuss what was in the Daily Worker and then he'd go on off to the Baptist church. But we always had the Afro-American [Baltimore Afro-American] in the house; we had the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] in the house. My father was a race man, he always used to talk about the injustices and what needed to happen and how things were and I guess I would say that where I got some of my early orientation about change was from my father. He took me and my brother [Norris B. King] to see Paul Robeson. Paul Robeson came to town and he was appearing at the Old Masonic Temple [Boston, Massachusetts] not the one where the Masons are now who apparently owned Masonic Temple and the police came and broke up the gathering and I remember being so frightened when the police came and they turned everybody out. We were down on Tremont Street at the Old Masonic Temple. Speaker 2: What did you think of Paul Robeson and--? Speaker 1: I was little all I know is that we went to see him and I couldn't tell you what he talked about or anything. I might have been seven, eight, nine years old maybe and at that age whatever he was talking about was not something that I would absorb. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Another thing my father used to do there's an organization here in Boston [Massachusetts] called the Ford Hall Forum. Next year they're celebrating their hundredth anniversary. It's a free speech forum-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they broadcast the lectures on public radio. Ford Hall Forum, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yes and in those days they used to be over in Jordan Hall [Boston, Massachusetts] and my father used to take me and my brother. We really didn't understand what was going on but we went. I can't even tell you who some of the people were we went to see but my father used to take us to Ford Hall Forum on Sunday evening. We'd sit there and there would be the question and answer period, et cetera. And another thing he used to do years and years ago when I was young they used to have people who actually did soapbox speeches in Boston Common [Boston, Massachusetts] and we'd go down--he would take us to the Boston Common. There would actually be people standing on soapboxes talking about different things. When you're young you go it's not that you absorb or that you really understand what's going on but are three things that I remember. We used to go to the Common--go to Ford Hall Forum where he took us, you know, to hear Paul Robeson. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah he was an activist it sounds like (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah he was an activist in his own, in his own way and I think that influenced me too. Story_ID: 495829 Speaker 1: Do you remember any of his friends and were any of them involved in activism (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well Mr. Summerville [ph.] who had the store on the Humboldt Avenue around the corner from the (laughter), around the corner from my house, Mr. Summerville was in the democratic club [Roxbury Democratic Club] and he was a big supporter of Dewey [Thomas E. Dewey]. When Dewey was running for office and you'd see Mr. Summerville and he'd be walking up and down Humboldt Avenue just saying, "Dewey, Dewey, Dewey," (laughter) and I didn't know who Dewey was but I just remember that. Mr. Elam [ph.] was a friend of my father's [Norris King, Jr.], he also worked for the post office. He was very friendly with a man named Mr. Hedley [ph.] and Mr. Hedley was the publisher of the Boston Chronicle and that was a black newspaper. So he used to go down and visit Mr. Hedley and he used to take me with him and I'd be sitting over on the side and he and Mr. Hedley would be talking about various and sundry things there was a man named Bill Harrison who worked for Mr. Hedley at the Chronicle and Bill was a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate who had gotten involved with the Communist Party and as a result was black listed. A brilliant, brilliant man but ended up working for the Chronicle because he had gotten in with the wrong company as they used to say. So I know that they used to talk about politics and things but when you are a kid it kind of goes over your head. You have the sense of what they're talking about but you can't--unlike now I couldn't say oh they talked about elections or they talked about racism or they talked about lynching, et cetera. I know they were talking about politics. Speaker 1: It's interesting that he would take you with him to these--. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did you have? Speaker 2: One brother [Norris B. King], no sisters. Speaker 1: Is he older or younger than you? Speaker 2: He is older than I am but only by a year and nine months. But my father used to take us to these places. For me going with my father was interesting because in those days you didn't get to go very many places as a child. On Sunday you went to Sunday school and you went to church or Young People's Fellowship but you didn't really get to go, you know, a lot of other places. Story_ID: 495830 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: An earliest--I mean how early? I don't remember being a baby no; I don't remember being two or three. Oh let's see maybe when I was about maybe six, five or six and my father [Norris King, Jr.] had taken me and my brother [Norris B. King] to Monroe Park [Boston, Massachusetts] which was not too far from our house and he was sitting on the bench reading the newspaper and my brother and I had a tricycle and my brother was pedaling and I was standing up on the back of the tricycle and my father had said expressly, there was a little slope in the park, and my father had said expressly to us that we should just ride up and down on the flat and not go on the slope. So I said to my brother, "Let's go up there," and my brother said, "Daddy said for us not to go," and I said, "He's reading the paper he won't notice (laughter)." So I persuaded my brother to go up on the slope and we came down and we were doing very well until we got to--almost to the very end and there was this little gutter and somehow my brother steered the tricycle the wrong way and we both fell over and the handlebar hit me in the eye and I got a black eye. I told everyone that my cousin had hit me in the eye (laughter). I must have been about six or seven at that point I remember. My father was always reading, he was always reading. We had newspapers in the house all of the time. I must have been about six or seven that early memory of. Speaker 1: Did he ever find out what you were actually doing? Speaker 2: Well when he heard me screaming and crying then he put his newspaper down, he looked up and he saw me on the ground-- Speaker 1: Did he put the whole story together? Speaker 2: Well my brother said what happened, "Sarah-Ann [HistoryMaker Sarah-Ann Shaw] made me go up and ride down," but I told everyone that my Cousin Freddie [ph.]--I had this black eye and everyone asked, "What happened to my eye," and I said, "Cousin Freddie hit me in the eye and he said if I didn't behave he was going to hit me in the other eye." Speaker 1: Poor Cousin Freddie (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Freddie, yes. But it wasn't Cousin Freddie it was my encouraging my brother to disobey (laughter) as I was. Story_ID: 495831 Speaker 1: You grew up in Roxbury? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and Roxbury is a traditional black community in Boston [Massachusetts] and it's like analogous to saying Harlem in New York [New York] I guess, in some way. Speaker 2: Now but no, when blacks first came to Boston they were on Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] you know that. They lived on Beacon Hill where the State House [Massachusetts State House, Boston, Massachusetts] is. That's where black people lived, that's where Lewis Hayden lived, that's where the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts] which is the oldest (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so we're going back to the 19th century the great Louis Hayden that shot a man in the rescue of Anthony Burns. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, Anthony Burns well that's where black people lived initially. They lived on Beacon Hill then they moved from Beacon Hill to the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] and then moved up into Roxbury. When we moved up into Roxbury there weren't that many black people living in Roxbury only up to a certain point and then you'd go so many streets and then the streets is all about Jewish people. There were lots of Jewish delicatessens and Jewish bakeries and synagogues all through Roxbury because Roxbury had been--first it had been the summer home of the Yankees. The Yankees used to come here. They had large houses and land and everything (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you mean by the Yankees? Speaker 2: The Saltonstalls, the Cabots, the Lodges, the Yankees the landed gentry as it were. Speaker 1: The earliest Americans kind of the patricians of Boston. Speaker 2: Yeah the patricians of Boston, the Yankees lived in--they had summer homes in Roxbury. Speaker 1: They would be different from say the Kennedys and Irish that come later (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Irish yes, the Yankees were the ones who had the signs no Irish need apply. Speaker 1: The Yankees were there first-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --then was it Jews next? Speaker 2: After--you mean in Roxbury or in--? Speaker 1: Yes in Roxbury. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Jews came after the Yankees and some Irish came and then blacks came. Story_ID: 495832 Speaker 1: But when I was growing up I went to a school that had, elementary school that had a lot--there were still a lot of white children going to the schools in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. In fact on our street Dr. Lassisen [ph.] lived and he was the physician for the school department of Boston [Boston Public Schools, Boston, Massachusetts]. He was the doctor that visited all the schools; we lived on the same street. So there was still a fair amount of integration in Roxbury when I was growing up and then that changed with urban renewal and the migration of people and stuff. But I'm trying to think are there any other early memories. No just--I mean memories of being eight and ten and twelve and just playing with--being able to go out and play jump rope, play jacks, the neighborhood knowing everyone who lived on the street. I could tell you who lived in what house. Speaker 2: So people stayed in the same place for a long time? Speaker 1: For a long time yeah and my elementary school was right down the street. All I had to do--my mother [Annie Bomar King] would cross--it wasn't even a block away. The elementary school I went to was kindergarten to third grade and my mother would just take me across the street and then I would just have to walk down the street to the school. The school has, since has been torn down for a long time but-- Speaker 2: What was the name of that, that (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Boardman--the William P. Boardman School [Boardman Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 495833 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well there was the junkman who came around with a horse and the smell of manure, the junk man. There was the oil trucks. Men who came in trucks who sold ice, coal and oil and so you would smell the oil. We had in our kitchen, we lived on the third floor a three decker and we had an oil tank in the back down in the cellar because part of our stove was an oil stove and so you had to go out on the back landing to fill up the oil bottle and so the smell of oil is a smell from my growing up. Speaker 1: Now a lot of the furnaces used heating oil, right? Speaker 2: Well we had coal for the house but for the kitchen there was an oil stove in the kitchen and I remember it was a big black stove with silver around it and I used to go when I came home from school sometimes I would just go and sit in front of it and prop my feet up and eat bread and butter and sugar sandwiches (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let's see what else do I remember from the smells? (Pause) The air was just fresh. There was a woman across the street, Mrs. Henderson [ph.] she had apple trees in her yard and we used to go in her yard and snatch up the green apples and eat them. But sights there were all kinds of--There were stores around. There was one store Morgan Brothers Creamery [Boston, Massachusetts] that had the best pineapple sherbet you ever wanted to eat and there were all these little variety stores and you could get penny sherbets and two cent sherbets and three cent sherbets, the smell of dill pickles because you'd go and you'd buy pickles for a couple of pennies so you would smell the smell of pickle juice. The streetcars because we had street cars then and not buses. There weren't lots and lots of cars but we had streetcars and streetcar sounds the clang when conductors rang the bell and sometimes we would go because there were cars which would reverse and so sometimes we'd go to the part of the car if the conductor was at the front we'd go to the back and step on the little button and ring the bell even though we weren't supposed to. I remember the shoemaker--the local shoemaker John [ph.] the shoemaker we used to call him and Sidney's Grocery Store [ph.] and the A&P Store [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company] and St. Mark's Social Center [Boston, Massachusetts] which was a social center which was built by a congregational church which was nearby and it was a place for teenagers to hang out. They had a bowling alley and they had a basketball court and they had pool tables and ping pong tables and it was where we used to go. As teenagers we'd go hang out in St. Mark's Social Center and we had what was called Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] hours. People would drink Coca-Cola and you'd dance. Story_ID: 495834 Speaker 1: Well for me I started getting involved in things. I joined the NAACP Youth Council and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is--about how old were you when you did that? Speaker 1: About fourteen I'd say-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I joined the NAACP Youth Council. Speaker 2: The NAACP Youth from everything I've heard was really an activist kind of organization. The Youth Council did things that-- Speaker 1: Yeah we did a lot of things. We did some picketing of Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] because right down, not too far from where we are. There was a Woolworth's and we picketed because the Woolworth's hiring practices and we had been told by the adults not to be involved in the picketing and not to this and not to do that and we went ahead anyhow the national pulled the charter for our particular youth branch. Speaker 2: Well this isn't the first time I've heard that kind of tension between the NAACP Youth groups and the national. Speaker 1: Um-hm. I also belonged to another group called, when I was a teenager, called the Leaguettes. It was a junior group of women--the League of Women for Community Service and it was an organization that was founded back in 1912 and the first president was a woman named Mariah Baldwin [sic. Maria Louise Baldwin] who was a schoolteacher and a very eloquent speaker and very well known in her day. Mariah Baldwin and Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin whose husband [George Lewis Ruffin] was the first black judge in Massachusetts. Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin was one of the members of the league and they had this group called the Leaguettes. So they taught us two things, they taught us public service and they taught us how to pour tea, how to comport yourself, how to conduct yourself as a lady. Speaker 2: Something I read in some of the material we had that you won five dollars for best manner person or (simultaneous) -- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh that was when I was in fifth or sixth grade yes that was a big deal. That was before I got in the Leaguettes. Speaker 2: Were manners a big deal in your household? Speaker 1: In my house oh yes, please, thank you, excuse me, don't say what, huh no not allowed. My mother [Annie Bomar King] would send you outside to get a switch in a heartbeat or she got whatever she could lay her hands on, wooden spoon or something. In those days you could do that no one's going to call the authorities on you. Speaker 2: The Department of Children and Family Services would not be called (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes. Story_ID: 495835 Speaker 1: I went to Higginson [Henry L. Higginson Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts] for the fourth, fifth and sixth grade and it was there that I won the five dollars for, for being, having good manners. Speaker 2: Higginson School now this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Henry Lee Higginson Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was fourth, fifth and sixth grade. The Higginson's were the people who founded the Boston Symphony [Boston Symphony Orchestra], they are old Yankees. It was for good manners but also because I was on the honor roll. I was always on the honor roll when I was in school and as a result I was able to go to Girls' Latin School [Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts] which was one of the exams schools here. Now you have to take an exam to go but in those days if you had been on the honor roll consistently you got to--your teacher would recommend you and you could go to Latin School. Speaker 2: Oh Girls' Latin School is high school? Speaker 1: Yes, no it was seventh grade. Speaker 2: Seventh grade oh okay. Speaker 1: You could enter in the seventh grade or in the ninth grade and I entered in the seventh grade. Speaker 2: Okay but it was like seven through twelve? Speaker 1: Um-hm, you could either enter seventh through twelve or nine through twelve. You had two opportunities to go and it was the sister school of Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts] which I'm sure you've heard of. Right now there are three exam schools in Boston Latin Academy, which is the old Girls' Latin School. You see in those days there was same sex high schools. So all those high schools in Boston were same sex. There was a boy's trade and a girl's trade. There was the Roxbury Memorial for Boys [Roxbury Memorial High School for Boys, Boston, Massachusetts] and a Roxbury Memorial for Girls [Roxbury Memorial High School for Girls, Boston, Massachsuetts]. There was a Girls' High [Girls' High School, Boston, Massachusetts], there was a High School of Commerce [Boston High School of Commerce, Boston, Massachusetts] and high school kids went to same sex schools and so it's only been maybe the last twenty, twenty five years that they or maybe twenty years that they decided to have boys and girls go to high school together. Speaker 2: Now that's unusual, is that unique to Boston [Massachusetts], is it a northeast thing? Speaker 1: I don't know but that's how it was here and so Girls' Latin School has now become Latin Academy because boys go there but Boston Latin since it didn't have any connotation in terms of gender it's still Boston Latin School and the other exam school is the O'Bryant School of Math and Science [Boston Technical High School; John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science, Boston, Massachusetts] and that's school is named after a black man, John D. O'Bryant who was on the school committee with a guidance counselor in the schools. Speaker 2: O'-B-R-Y-A-N-T (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Y-A-N-T, yeah John D. O'Bryant at one point he was the only black high school guidance counselor in the system. When it was Technical High School he was the guidance counselor at Technical High School then he went to work at Northeastern [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts] and after he died they changed the name from Technical High School to the John D. O'Bryant School. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So there are three exam high schools now in Boston. Story_ID: 495836 Speaker 1: Now we know that you had good manners in school but what other qualities did you exhibit? Speaker 2: Well I guess I was a voracious reader, I loved to read, I've always loved to read. I guess growing up around books and newspapers with my dad [Norris King, Jr.] that--I remember once I had borrowed a Grimms' Fairy Tale book ['Grimms' Fairy Tales,' Jacob Grimm and Wilhelm Grimm] from the library and read it and took it back to the library and the librarian, I remember as a little short red headed woman I think Ms. Monahan [ph.] or something she said, "You couldn't have possibly have read this book in the length of time that you had it out of the library so take it home and finish it and then bring it back and you can get another book." Because she couldn't believe that I had gone through the book that quickly. So I took it home and then took it back and got some more books. I was a Girl Scout [Girls Scouts of the United States of America] and active in Young People's Fellowship and active with the NAACP Youth Council. I was saying about the Leaguettes, one of the things that we used to have to do you know the League of Women for Community Service we used to in addition to learning how to pour tea and the niceties of setting a table and all that, we had to go to a local nursing home and run errands for the people, write letters for them, read to them, et cetera. So that was sort of public--training girls to do public service, it was all girls who did this. Speaker 1: What was your personality like in school? How would you describe it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was quiet. I must have had some degree of confidence though because I ran for a class office, I wasn't elected but I ran for class office and I remember I made all these posters and things to put them around. I was quiet but I had pretty definite ideas about things. Speaker 1: So were you-? Speaker 2: I was not athletic at all. I did not like athletics at all; in fact the gym teacher told me that I really didn't have to participate (laughter). She said, "Just come to class with your gym uniform on," and that was fine with me 'cause I was not, you know, interested in field hockey or basketball or anything and I still don't like sports to this day. I'm not interested in sports. Story_ID: 495837 Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that were, that made a big impression on you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes indeedy, Zabelle Tahmizian she was an English teacher and I'm not the only person, I'm sure that--I know that there are other Girls' Latin School [Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts] graduates when you said to them did you have Ms. Tahmizian and they say yes. She was an Armenian woman and she was maybe about 5'1" and she could put the fear of God in you. She was an English teacher and she used to say, "Speak clearly, enunciate properly," and she'd have you at the blackboard diagramming the sentences and if you made a mistake--she was an excellent teacher but she really put the fear of God in you (laughter). She was very strict but she was an excellent teacher. She was really, really a good teacher, Zabellee and as I said, you meet people and you said did you have Ms. Tahmizian, yeah I had Ms. Tahmizian and people just remember her for her dedication to the students and her love of learning and her insistence that if you're there you had to do your best. Speaker 1: Were there many black teachers? Speaker 2: I never had a black teacher my whole twelve years of school--the Boston Public Schools [Boston, Massachusetts]. I never had a, one black teacher and at Girls' Latin School there were only two women who had been married and they were now widows because in those days you couldn't be married and teach. So there were two women who had been married and were now widowed but everyone else was a Miss and there were only maybe three or four male teachers in the school. The headmaster was, the headmaster was a male but the teachers were, were all females-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --basically you might as well say. Story_ID: 495838 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were asking me how did, how did I see myself or what was I like? I was kind of shy and quiet and I don't say--what I'm going to say next I don't say it in a bragging way but I knew I was smart but I didn't always--I wasn't always sure of myself even though I knew I was smart I wasn't always sure of myself. But I knew that I liked to do things and get involved in things. When I was a teen I remember I was selected by the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] to go away to Connecticut maybe for some girl's weekend--girl's leadership weekend. So whatever it was I guess some other people saw more than I saw in myself. But I did like to do things, the young people's fellowship, the Leaguettes [The League of Women for Community Service], and the NAACP Youth Council. Speaker 2: You indicated that one time you were an honor student? Were you an honor student at Latin [Girls' Latin School; Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: Well not as much--Latin School is a lot harder than elementary school. My grades went up and down. Some subjects like English I did very, very well, math was my downfall. I did not do well in math at all and in fact the year that I took algebra for some reason I had trouble assimilating the formulas and things but I could work out the problems and get the correct answer and Ms. Lundell [Margaret Lundell] thought I was cheating. So she kept me after school one day and gave me some problems to solve and whatever system I had devised I used the system and I answered the questions and did the problems and got the correct answers. But because I had not used the formulas, and done it the way--she failed me (laughter). Those were the days when, you know, being adventurous in school and not hewing to the line wasn't encouraged. So math was not--biology I liked, I liked history, I liked English very much and we took Latin. It wasn't a question of whether you liked Latin or not, you took Latin whether--it was a major subject. Speaker 2: Part of the name of school (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah exactly. Speaker 2: That's interesting that Latin was a major part of the curriculum of most high schools up until I guess the '60s [1960s] everybody took it. Speaker 1: You ran out and got your little trot (laughter) so you could figure out how to do the translations better. Do you know what a trot is? Speaker 2: I've never seen one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A trot--it's a book and it's actually a translation of Cicero [Marcus Tullius Cicero] and Caesar [Gaius Julius Caesar] and stuff and so you go get this trot and try and figure out what was being said and compare it with the Latin text, so. Everyone went out and got a trot so you could make sure you could get through it. Story_ID: 495839 Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school, now did you run for student body--student council in high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--no I ran for, I guess it was vice president. We didn't really have a student council at Latin School [Girls' Latin School; Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts]. I ran for vice president of the class but I wasn't elected but I had fun running, I think. Speaker 1: Now was there like a--well there was boys' Latin--Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] was the boys' school. Speaker 2: And that was across the street from us so this was all girls. Speaker 1: But did you find it helpful to be in an all-girl school? Speaker 2: I didn't know any different (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, you said the whole city was arranged like that. So when you were-- Speaker 2: It's funny because boys and girls--in Boston [Massachusetts] boys and girls were together in elementary school and if you went to junior high school before high school there were together in junior high school like seventh and eighth grade. But then when you got to high school same sex school so it was kind of crazy. Speaker 1: When you were a senior what were your aspirations? What did you think you would do? Did you intend to go to college? Speaker 2: Oh (laughter) yes, listen I lived in a house where study hard, make something of yourself. Study hard, make something of yourself. If you don't study hard and get a good education you won't be anything. That was the mantra a good education can take you many places. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really wanted to be a psychiatrist but--because people fascinated me but I didn't have the stomach to become a doctor because even now when I see--I'm squeamish when I see things on television, operations and things I'm squeamish so I knew that I could not get through that. So I said well no I guess that's not going to happen. And I wasn't quite sure what I was going to do so actually after I graduated I took a year off to kind of, to work and think about what I was going to do. Then I went to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and I studied sociology. Story_ID: 495840 Speaker 1: Let me ask you 'cause I didn't ask you anything about the media but did you have a favorite radio shows when you were growing up or television programs? Speaker 2: Well radio shows, we used to listen to 'The Shadow,' we used to listen to 'Let's Pretend,' we used to listen to 'The Shadow,' 'Let's Pretend,' 'Grand Central Station.' There were a number of radio--'The Green Hornet' those were the radio programs of my day and then you got to listen--start listening to music and dancing and stuff and so I listened to The Orioles and The Ravens and Ruth Brown and Bull Moose Jackson and I got interested in jazz when I was in high school [Girls' Latin School; Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts] too. Listening to Duke Ellington and listened go Illinois Jacquet and got interested in jazz and still like jazz very much today. But in those days when you were a teenager you wanted to dance so you wanted music that's going to be popping so you can whirl around there on the floor. Speaker 1: Other than music were there any black personalities on the radio? Speaker 2: No not really--well not in my youth, no. By the time I got to be in my late teens to twenties WILD [WILD Radio] had started in Boston [Massachusetts] and you did have Jimmy Early Byrd [James "Jimmy Early" Byrd] and a few others whose names I can't even remember but Jimmy Early Bird. Speaker 1: So he had a regular show or he would spin records (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a disc jockey and he would spin records on WILD, I'm trying to think who else was on radio there weren't any women that I remember on radio, it was mostly men who--Al Williams--you're forcing me to dredge down deep in my memory (laughter). Speaker 1: So were these guys on the radio in the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Yeah they were. Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear) names kind of sound like maybe the pioneer rock and roll guys in their town or something. Speaker 2: Rhythm and blues, rhythm and blues that's what they did. They did rhythm and blues (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Story_ID: 495841 Speaker 1: There was a time when we said rock and roll we meant rhythm and blues too but now it's kind of shifted where (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm, yeah. And we used to, when we were teenagers there was a dance hall down on Revere Beach [Boston, Massachusetts] called the Rollaway and my mother [Annie Bomar King] and father [Norris King, Jr.] said, "We don't want you going to the public dances," that's what they called them and (laughter) of course we'd sneak off and go. Revere is a distance away from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and you had to go on a train--you had to go on two trolley cars and a train to get to the Rollaway and Dinah Washington might be singing. There were live shows there, Louis Armstrong, Dinah Washington, Ruth Brown the singers of the day and so we used to sneak down to the Roll Away and listen to the music and dance. Then there was another--in Boston [Massachusetts] on Huntington Avenue there was called the Ritz Plaza--there was a place called the Ritz Plaza and they used to have dances there and it was a guy in Boston called Mambo Willie [ph.] and he used to promote these bathing beauty shows (laughter) and we used to go. He would promise the girls they would get some money whoever won, of course he was never around when it was time to pay but they used to have dances at the Ritz Plaza and we used to go to the Ritz Plaza for dances. In the housing development--public housing development, not too far from here was a place called Social Hall [ph.] and they had a stage and we used to when we were teenagers we used to go to Social Hall and they'd have entertainment. There was a family that moved from--they moved here from Florida and the father danced and--the Spencers. Willie Spencer was the father and he had a son named Bobby [ph.] who was a teenager when we were teenagers and his brother Willie and they all danced and so sometimes they'd be dancing down at Social Hall. Also at church which no longer exists, St. Richard's Catholic Church which wasn't too far from where I lived they used to have quarter dances on Friday nights. They'd have record hops they would call them at St. Richard's and we'd go to St. Richard's to dance. That was okay but it was going to these public dances that was not encouraged by my mother and my father. We used to still sneak off and go and try to make up some story about where we had been when we came back late (laughter). Story_ID: 495842 Speaker 1: Now you, you graduated in '52 [1952] right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. From Girl's Latin [Girls' Latin School; Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Right. --you say you took off a year sort of before you went to Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) BU yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. What did you major in at BU? Or did you have a major at first? Speaker 1: I went to the college of general education [College of General Studies] 'cause I wasn't sure what I was going to do. It was sort of a hodge podge of everything. I only stayed there two years-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I kept saying I was going to go back but I never did. Speaker 2: Really? Okay. So what happened or what did you do after those two years or what were those two years like first of all? Speaker 1: The two years were interesting. I played a lot of whist, hung out in the commons which is the big dining hall and played a lot of whist and met some people and met kids going to college from other places. Oh I used to go to camp when I was teenager, I went to Camp Atwater [North Brookfield, Massachusetts]. Did you ever hear of Atwater? Speaker 2: I think I have, other people have mentioned it I believe. Speaker 1: Up in East Brookfield, Mass [Massachusetts] near Springfield [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Is that a Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] camp? Speaker 1: No it was run by the Springfield Urban League [Urban League of Springfield, Inc., Springfield, Massachusetts] but it was camp for black kids and I met my--that was where I first met someone from Texas, Sally Bowie [ph.] was her name and she used to talk about riding horses and everything. I mean growing up in the city, riding horses what is that. The camp seemed so huge, it seemed so large when I went to camp and [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis was the dance instructor at Camp Atwater when I went and my grandson went to Camp Atwater a few years ago and I was amazed when I went back to see how small the place was (laughter). I thought it was this big, expansive camp and my cousin from Washington [Washington, D.C.] came up. She came to Atwater; she went to Atwater and we were there at the same time. She was older than I was and she was at Atwater when I was Atwater. Story_ID: 495843 Speaker 1: Now this is a--may seem like an off the wall question but Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] I think was at Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] working on a Ph.D. in '53 [1953], I don't know I think he was--I know he was certainly out of there by '55 [1955]. But-- Speaker 2: I didn't know him the only connection I would say The League of Women for Community Service, Coretta Scott King lived there for a while and so I'm affiliated with the League now. It's just sort of a full circle kind of thing and she lived there for a while because it was a place for black women who weren't welcomed in the dorms in Boston [Massachusetts], they lived at 558 [Massachusetts Avenue] the League and so we can only assume that he came there to pick her up and everything when he met her. Speaker 1: So you were around him but you didn't really know him. Speaker 2: No now I knew--it's possible--I might have been--I used to go parties and it's possible in those days you knew some of the people, some of the people you didn't know so it's possible he might have been at some of the parties because most of them were parties given by guys in fraternities so it's possible that he was at-- Speaker 1: Yeah because he was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 495844 Speaker 1: So what happened after '55 [1955]? What did you do after--why did you stop going to school and--? Speaker 2: Well I'm not quite sure why I stopped. Well part of it, you know, I was being a little independent and my folks well particularly my dad [Norris King, Jr.] was saying do this and I was saying I'm not doing that you know how you get in your rebellious stuff. Speaker 1: Now did your brother [Norris B. King] go to college? Speaker 2: No, he got out of high school and went into the [U.S.] Army during the Korean War time. He went in the Army and he was stationed--he never went to Korea but he was stationed in Germany for a while, he was a clerk so he went to Germany. When he got out of the service he moved to New York [New York] 'cause he was a big jazz buff and New York was the mecca of jazz and so he went to--when he got out he moved to New York and stayed in New York for the majority of his adult life he was in New York. Speaker 1: So what did you do in '55 [1955] when you left Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Well I had a baby, I got married, I had a baby and started to work. My ex-husband I'm now divorced we got sort of involved in community stuff. There was a very charismatic man named Noel Day who came here from New York. He had been a social worker I guess in New York but he came here to be the director of St. Mark's Social Center [Boston, Massachusetts] that I mentioned earlier and Noel came and we used to spend time with Noel and with Jim Breeden [HistoryMaker James Breeden] and his wife Jeanne [Jeanne Savoye Breeden]. That's when urban renewal was starting to come into Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and the other thing was about employment and another friend of mine named Bernie Bruce who is now dead. We started looking at what could we do in the community that would be kind of helpful. So we formed a group called the Boston Action Group and we tried to convince people not to buy Wonder Bread because Wonder Bread was a big seller in the community but there weren't any blacks driving Wonder Bread trucks. So we said oh let's and we had this slogan about the big stick made of money and we used to have these little rag taggled maybe fifteen, twenty, twenty-five of us would be marching with our signs, "Don't buy Wonder Bread the big stick made of money." We were going into the local--in those days there were lots of variety stores because I think you only had the A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] that was the largest and First National [First National Supermarkets, Inc.] those were the largest food chains. It was before all the other food chains and so we would go into the little variety stores, the corner stores and say to the guy, "Please don't sell Wonder Bread they won't hire our people," blah, blah, blah. So finally Wonder Bread capitulated and hired a couple of drivers and then we did a similar campaign with Hood [HP Hood LLC] milk because that was going on and then we moved on to trying to being, trying to have some, trying to get the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority]--make urban renewal be better than it was because they came in and they really decimated Roxbury. I mean they tore down stuff like right and left, houses that didn't really need to be torn down. They just--you know, it was early--just, (makes noise) I mean this was not renewal it was removal. Story_ID: 495845 Speaker 1: Many people in communities around the country called it Negro removal rather than urban renewal and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I think what they called Greenwood Avenue in Tulsa [Oklahoma] was--wasn't destroyed in the riot of '21 [1921]--it was rebuilt but it was destroyed when they put the expressway right through the middle of Greenwood Avenue and Archer [Street]. Speaker 2: Yeah there were some houses in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] that did need to be torn down but despite the fact that there were cold water flats and all there was a sense of community in Roxbury in those days. In my late teens, early twenties it was a sense of community. If you got on the streetcar you knew almost everybody who was on the streetcar or you knew someone who was related to them and you had a sense of safety in the community. You could walk around and you never thought someone was going to hit you in the head or hold you up or do anything like that. There was a real sense of community and urban renewal just--they tore down houses, they put in different roads and the problem was that the only people who could get the money to do the rebuilding of housing--replacement housing were churches. So you had three churches that did development but--St. Mark's [St. Mark's Episcopal Church, Boston, Massachusetts], Charles Street [Charles Street African Methodist Episcopal Church, Boston, Massachusetts] and St. Joseph's [St. Joseph Catholic Church, Roxbury, Massachusetts] did replacement housing but the amount of replacement housing that they were able to create did not--was not enough to replace what had been torn down. I mean there were really some gorgeous houses that were torn down. They took people's houses it wasn't about do you want to stay, we can do renovation, et cetera and that's why I think Charlestown [Boston, Massachusetts] benefitted from what happened in Roxbury and in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] because when they went to Charlestown with urban renewal the people in Charlestown were able to say, "We don't want this clearance, we want some renovations, we want this," and their community was not as badly scarred as Roxbury (pause). Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and it dampened--I think it fractured the sense of community that we had in Roxbury. Story_ID: 495846 Speaker 1: How was it operated, was it operated by the--did they have--did black people play any official role in this, I mean with jobs (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were two people who--there is a place that still exist called Freedom House [Dorchester, Massachusetts] which was started by Muriel [Muriel Sutherland Snowden] and Otto Snowden [Otto P. Snowden]. They started it as a place to bring blacks and whites together, to provide job training. I was never quite sure what Freedom House did but anyhow they were designated as the relocation agency for Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and they had a place up on-- Speaker 1: This was an organization run by whites in Roxbury? Speaker 2: No black, Muriel and Otto were blacks. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So they were the agency in charge of--? Speaker 2: They were the agency--the relocation agency so if your house was taken or if you had to move 'cause they tore down your house this was the place you were supposed to go to try and find new housing. There were complaints--now there were a few blacks working for BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority] but see in that time blacks were not really in the government system. I mean they really weren't--there were maybe one or two black elected officials. Linc Pope [Lincoln G. Pope, Jr.] was the state rep [representative] and there was a man named Lawrence Banks who had been elected to city council except they wouldn't seat him and they took the election away from him and we didn't have anyone on the city council, no state senators and maybe one or two people as state reps. So we weren't really represented in the political structure. There were two brothers, Bal Taylor [Balcom Taylor] and Shag Taylor [Silas Taylor]--Silas also known as Shag and they had a drug store in lower Roxbury, the Lincoln Drug [Lincoln Pharmacy]. They were both graduates of Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] and they were the go to black men. They were very active in the Democratic Party so people were trying to get a job in some way in the city or something they would go to try to see Shag or Bal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I really feel that urban renewal just took the heart out of Roxbury in some ways because people who left--many of the people who left didn't come back and people who moved--some of the people who moved in were not the longtime residents so you didn't have the same kind relationship with them 'cause they weren't people you knew in the same way. I just wish that we had been able to preserve a lot more of Roxbury than got preserved. It wasn't just the physical; it was the feeling of the community, the feeling of safety, the feeling of being together as a unit. You know, in those days as I said you knew people and people would come together around issues and different things. Speaker 1: So this is like the mid to late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Story_ID: 495847 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Urban renewal was at its height and this is also the height of the Civil Rights Movement around the country. Were you closely following the activities of the movement? I suppose you would if you were organizing boycotts on a local level. Speaker 2: I was the director of the Boston Northern Student Movement. The Northern Student Movement was sort of like a northern SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. There were chapters in New York, Connecticut, Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: How did you become the director of that were you on the ground floor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was active in doing different things in the community, different groups. You would always see me at a meeting or if there was a picket line I was on the picket line picketing the school because you know we had the whole problem with the schools here with Louise Day Hicks, et cetera. The guy who was the national head of NSM, Bill Strickland [William Strickland] was someone I had grown up with and so Strick hired me to be the director of the Northern Student Movement in Boston. Speaker 1: Is this the same Bill Strickland that was at the Center for the African World [sic. Institute of the Black World] in Atlanta [Georgia] at one time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding and them. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 495848 Speaker 1: Okay, we're just talking about all the breadth and depth of the activism here in Boston [Massachusetts] in those days and we were talking about Bill Strickland [William Strickland] before (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well Bill asked me to be the director of NSM, Northern Student Movement in Boston and two people who are now elected officials worked for me. They were on the staff, Representative Byron Rushing [HistoryMaker Byron Rushing] who is a state rep and Chuck Turner [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Turner] who is a city counselor and they both worked on the staff of Northern Student Movement. We had an office on Blue Hill Avenue when it was called Agency Row because you had the Boston Action Group, you had the Northern Student Movement, you had CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] was on Blue Hill Avenue, you had Blue Hill Christian Center [Boston, Massachusetts] which was where Reverend Virgil Wood [Virgil A. Wood] who was the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] person in Boston. Blue Hill Christian Center was also on Blue Hill Avenue. The Unitarian Universalists [Unitarian Universalist Association] had an office on Blue Hill Avenue so it was called sort of agency row, we were all in these storefronts. Those were the days when you worked out of a storefront to show that you were indigenous and with the people and among the people. You weren't downtown with those people who were shucking and jiving and kowtowing, you were doing stuff. Story_ID: 495849 Speaker 1: And NSM [Northern Student Movement] we had--I know we made an impact, we had several hundred students from all the nearby colleges, BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] and Emmanuel [Emmanuel College, Boston, Massachusetts] and Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: How was this done? Now people think-- Speaker 1: We would go out on the campus and talk about the school system. The fact that the school system in Boston [Massachusetts]--there were inequities that black kids were going to overcrowded schools and didn't have the kind of books and equipment that they needed in the schools and as a result they needed tutoring. So we set up tutoring stations in basements of churches, in settlement houses anyplace we could find the space we set up tutoring centers and we matched the tutoring and the tutee and we were off to the races with the tutoring program. That's basically what we did but in addition to tutoring the children, we tried to work with their parents and we would try to get parents registered to vote and we would tell them about political things. We would tell them about-- Speaker 2: So voter education and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So voter education, voter registration. Speaker 2: Registration. So did you all have when you started out what kind of training did you have? I know some people don't have training they just kind of fall into it and do it. Speaker 1: We did it. Speaker 2: But today people say well how did get one hundred--what technique, what strategy did you use to do that? Speaker 1: I think we just did it because it was the time and people were--the Civil Rights Movement was going and people in the North were seeing what was happening in the South and they felt the need to do something. So as a result it was fairly easy to raise money. You'd go out and talk about what you were trying to do, you'd go on to college campuses and talk about the need to help kids learn better by tutoring them and it was much easier because I think the feeling and the tenor of the time was that people wanted to do something. People wanted to be involved and they felt they had a responsibility to be involved. They felt they had a responsibility to do something. So it was pretty easy. You would talk to the parents of kids who were being tutored and you'd say, "Who's registered to vote, let's go get registered." To have someone like Fannie Lou Hamer come up and talk about what it meant--how she was beaten and how she was treated because she was trying to register to vote and juxtapose that with people who all they had to do was go to city hall here to get and no one would say you can't register, you can't vote. So we got parents and we would go into bars and try to do voter registration. In bars we would go and say, "You registered? Hey brother are you registered?" There was another woman and myself who used to go to different bars and try to register people to vote because we felt if we could get people to vote, that we could change the system because we really felt that freedom was going to be tomorrow. It was that feeling, I'm sure other people told you that same thing that we felt that we would do this fight, we would do this activism, we would this and tomorrow it would all change. Our mistake was not in opening doors but not opening all the doors we needed to do because in addition to opening the doors of education, we needed to do something about economics, we needed to figure out a way to spread the money around better and also to get people more involved in the whole economics of their lives. But see we grew up not going into banks where there were black vice presidents or customer service people so you didn't even think of the banks and the economics of our lives. I think that we were so intent--if we could get people to get educated and if we could open some doors and people could go into these different jobs that things would change but it wasn't that easy. But we didn't know it--but we were naive and we didn't know it but that didn't stop us from working very hard to try to make something happen. Story_ID: 495850 Speaker 1: So one of the biggest victories that you had, what would you say? Just looking back? Speaker 2: Oh well one victory we had, a lot of, many of the, not many but some of the mothers of the children who were receiving public assistance and the welfare department was withholding surplus food. You know cheese and butter and stuff and we did a whole campaign about what they were entitled to and so they went and talked to the social workers. They said, "We're entitled to this, we're supposed to get this." So they were able to get the surplus foods and that was a victory. We got a lot of people registered, we got people to turn out to go vote and that was a victory and then a woman who was working for me as a parent organizer, Ellen Jackson [Ellen Swepson Jackson]. Ellen and Betty [Elizabeth Johnson] both were working for me as parent organizers they sort of broke off and founded Operation Exodus where they got buses and took kids to underutilized schools. So in a sense it was a NSM [Northern Student Movement] victory because they had sort of cut their teeth as parent organizers for NSM. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In that time just interacting, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would come to town and we'd all be in meetings together talking about strategy. We'd go down to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] office talking about strategy, what can we do, what's the next thing we ought to be looking at in the city [Boston, Massachusetts], how can we get some people elected. Even though we didn't have huge victories if we were able to make a breakthrough or make a dent, it felt good, it felt like ah ha we've gone a step forward. Story_ID: 495851 Speaker 1: Although in reality we hadn't gone, we hadn't--as I said because we didn't put the other piece which was the economics, the economics and the housing piece we didn't do that. We tried to--because we didn't know, we didn't really own property and we weren't housing developers. Did you ever know any black housing developers when you were growing up? Speaker 2: No I knew some real estate agents and some contractors but not really developers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But not developers, not people that would go do a whole twenty, thirty, forty, fifty houses and so I think that we had gaps and we didn't realize that we had those gaps and that we needed certain kinds of other skills. We've always had doctors and we've had lawyers and we've had nurses and we've had teachers but we didn't have--we might have had like one man who started an insurance company and someone who was a real estate agent but there wasn't someone who was doing a big deal and being--like they have CDs, community development corporations now. We didn't have blacks who were CDCs or running CDCs in those days because they didn't exist and the political structure boss was still 99 percent white. So we didn't have the political power either. The numbers of black people in Boston [Massachusetts] were not that large. Speaker 2: Proportionately they would be about how many? What proportion of the population or percentage of the population would you say blacks were in those days? Speaker 1: Maybe 8 to 10 percent or something. Speaker 2: That's way different from the city like Detroit [Michigan] or in those days (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or Chicago [Illinois] or Atlanta [Georgia], yeah-- Speaker 2: Chicago's got more blacks than any city in the U.S. other than New York in Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: So there were a few people from the Caribbean here. You had African Americans and then you had a few people from the Caribbean who were here. There have always been people from Cape Verde here but they called themselves Portuguese. They did not identify with the Cape Verde islands. They called themselves Portuguese and they said they were white. Story_ID: 495852 Speaker 1: Now did you know [HistoryMaker] Eugenia Fortes out in Hyannis [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I know of her, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was from Cape Verde and founded the NAACP [NAACP Cape Cod, Cape Cod, Massachusetts] there. She considered herself black. We discussed this in an interview a couple of years ago. She decried that kind of behavior on the part of Cape Verdeans. Speaker 2: But do you know she said that it existed (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah she did. Speaker 2: They didn't really interact with blacks. Speaker 1: And she doesn't look that much different from you but the Cape Verdeans many of them were afraid to identify with black Americans. Speaker 2: Yeah they didn't and they didn't interact with us. They would put up their noses and be snooty with blacks because they said they were Portuguese and they were white. They were not-- Speaker 1: The Portuguese didn't think so. Speaker 2: Well I know the Portuguese but it was only with Gibral [Strait of Gibraltar] that they started to see that there was a connection to Africa and started to identify with Africans when Gibral and the whole thrust for independence in the islands started. That's when they started to say, "Oh well maybe we are from across the coast of Africa," but before then growing up Portuguese kept themselves very distant from the black community. There were some but there wasn't a lot of interaction with people from the Caribbean. People in the Caribbean tended--some of them were Garveyites. They intended to be Episcopalian; there were three main churches one in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and two in Boston [Massachusetts] that they went to. Whereas African Americans they were in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church and they were in the Baptist churches or they as we used to say and my mother [Annie Bomar King] used to chastise the holy rollers (laughter). My mother would say, "Don't you say that about those people." There were a few Catholics but there weren't that many black Catholics in Boston even though in Boston the Irish Catholics dominated the political structure there weren't that many black Catholics they were proportionately. Speaker 1: It's a different set up in a lot of the major U.S. cities (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well the first black--a black nun from New Orleans [Louisiana] came here during that time in the '60s [1960s], opened up St. Joseph School [Holbrook, Massachusetts] which is an alternative school and she was the first black nun that I'd ever seen and she was from some order in New Orleans that still exists. Because she came here last year because her school was impacted by Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] and she came to Boston to do a fund raiser to raise money to get supplies and things for her school and Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King] and his wife [Joyce King] helped to get people together for this fundraiser. Sister Sylvia [Sylvia Thibodeaux] was the first black nun that I had ever seen. Everybody in Boston the priest they were white. I'd never even seen a black priest they were white priests. There was a real separation between Catholics and Protestants in those days. I remember when I was going to Latin School [Girls' Latin School; Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts] I used to get off the bus in front of mission church [Basilica and Shrine of Our Lady of Perpetual Help] which is a big church not too--up on Mission Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] and Protestants were not encouraged to go into Catholic churches and vice versa. So I decided that I wanted to see what was inside this church so I went in the church and the door swung and got the heel of my loafer and took the heel off and that to me was a sign that I wasn't supposed to be in there so I got out of there very quickly (laughter). It was a long time before I went into another Catholic church. It was so funny, I went in and the door swung and my heel came off my shoe and I said oh I'm really not supposed to be here but that's just an aside. Speaker 1: Is that a survival from the South, I mean the whole idea that if something like that happens it's a bad sign? Speaker 2: I don't know if it was an omen or what but that's how I felt. I felt I'm not supposed to be in here, if I had not come in here this would not have happened and so I got out of there quickly. Story_ID: 495853 Speaker 1: As we get towards the, I don't want to skip anything but as we get towards the late '60s [1960s] I know that '68 [1968] was a big turning point for a lot of things in Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well 'Say Brother' started and because I'd been very active in lots of different organizations and picket lines and this and that and the other thing. I was asked would I like to be on 'Say Brother' to do interviews particularly with people from the community. Speaker 1: Now the lead in to that though and correct me if I'm wrong is that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in April '68 [1968] and there were riots here. Speaker 2: Right but 'Say Brother' had started before then. Speaker 1: Did it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right because I have a timeline that indicates--so it started--when did 'Say Brother' start (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because--it was in '68 [1968] but it was before I think King's assassination-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay so-- Speaker 2: --and it was a program by and for the black community that's how it billed itself and that was the theme song it was 'Say Brother' and-- Speaker 1: Ray Richardson was the producer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ray Richardson was the first producer, [HistoryMaker] Stan Lathan was the director, Jim Boyd who now works for Channel 5 [WCVB-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] was on the show, myself, a young man who was a teenager named Stewart Thomas he was bringing the youth perspective to the show. The photographer's first name was Bob [Bob Wilson] and there was a guy named Andy [Andrew Ferguson] who was the assistant director. Tony Lark was the videographer and we used to just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it was entirely produced and directed by black people? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At WGBH [WGBH-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] which was a public TV station here (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Public TV station, Channel 2 and 'Say Brother' was it, boy. We did all kinds of things. 'Say Brother' was really a program ahead of its time and brought in national figures. I interviewed Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] on 'Say Brother,' I interviewed lots and lots of people. Story_ID: 495854 Speaker 1: And at the same time that 'Say Brother' was happening you had [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis doing whom you've heard of, Elma was doing her thing. She was bringing African heads of state up to her school and she was starting black nativity and she was doing things-- Speaker 2: The black arts movement was in full swing. Now let me ask you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The black arts movement was in full swing and let me--I remember what you asked me about someone who might have impacted me, a couple of women who really impacted me my mother [Annie Bomar King] because even though she was not a highly educated person she belonged to the mother's club and she was deaconess in the church and I remember going with her on Sundays. On Saturday we would go down to her church and she and my aunt and the other women would be cooking, getting ready to cook dinners to sale on Sunday to retire the mortgage of the church. So her industriousness I saw that and her involvement and a woman named, Mrs. Case, Mrs. Melnea Cass. Mrs. Cass was very well known, I mean Mrs. Cass had the ear of the politicians. She was very outspoken, she helped to bring the anti-poverty program to Boston [Massachusetts]. Oh I worked for the anti-poverty program too after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A portion of Tremont Street is named for her, that's who that's named for? Speaker 1: No Melnea Cass Boulevard is not far from here, it's Melnea Cass Boulevard, it's named after Mrs. Cass. She helped bring the anti-poverty program to Boston and I worked there. I was in charge of organizing the first anti-poverty elections in the city for all the different sections of the city. We ran my department--ran the elections for maximum, feasible participation. That was the (unclear) mantra that the anti-poverty program would have, would mean the maximum feasible participation by the residents. Speaker 2: Now these are LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] era programs? Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah the great society programs (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) War on Poverty and all that. Speaker 1: But Mrs. Cass was my Girl Scout leader and Mrs. Cass was a very outspoken woman. She was fearless, she spoke up and it didn't matter who you were if you were wrong she would tell you. She was not a retiring person and so I saw Mrs. Cass and some other women in the black women's club movement. She was a big club woman so I think being exposed to that through my mother and through Mrs. Cass also had, you know, an impact on me. Story_ID: 495855 Speaker 1: Now when 'Say Brother' was started was it--I know there were a couple of other early shows I remember 'Soul!' and 'Black Journal.' Did 'Say Brother' precede those shows? And they came out of New York [New York], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not sure, yeah they were NET [WNET Radio, New York, New York]. I don't know who as the oldest show, I really don't. I think New York, I think-- Speaker 1: I know they were all about the same time. Speaker 2: About the same time but 'Soul!' might have--that was Haizlip wasn't it? Speaker 1: Ellis Haizlip's 'Soul!' yes. And Tony Reynolds [sic. Tony Brown]-- Speaker 2: But then there was another guy who had a program in New York. Speaker 1: Right, you're talking about oh 'Tell It Like It Is'--'Like It Is.' Gil Noble 'Like It Is.' Speaker 2: Yeah 'Like it Is' Gil Noble so they were all around in the same time. Ellis Haizlip because he was working for a public television in New York he would come to Boston [Massachusetts]. I met Ellis but we would have all kinds of different people on 'Say Brother' entertainment, lecturers, et cetera and 'Say Brother'--Ray Richardson was fired because there was a riot going on in New Bedford, Massachusetts and Ray went down there with a crew. There was shooting, there teargas, I mean it was really a riot the New Bedford riot and he was down there shooting everything and interviewing people. One of the people he was interviewing either said damn or another swear word and considering what's on the television now it seems almost unbelievable. But the people at GBH [WGBH-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] said, "You're not putting that interview on the air with those swear words and everything," and Ray ran it anyhow and they fired him and we were picketing in front of GBH to try and get him his job back because he was a sweetheart and a man of real vision. He was also a cinematographer as well as a producer. But he was such a sweet; he was a person that you could have so much confidence in. He was just--you could feel his goodness, you could feel his goodness and you could feel his commitment to black people, you could feel it. They fired Ray and so we picketed and we picketed and we picketed but we were unable to get his job back unfortunately. But they did set up a community advisory committee to work the, I know, with the station about-- Story_ID: 495856 Speaker 1: So the show continued? Or the-- Speaker 2: Yeah the show continued, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay Now who-- Speaker 2: It's on the air now but un-, it has--but it's very, very different. I mean now it's called 'Basic Black' and it's mostly an in studio show. Before there were all kinds of film, there were all kinds of video. They travelled to other places and shot--they went to the [U.S.] Virgin Islands; they went to different places, went to different states and shot things that were of interest to black people. There's a website---there's a 'Say Brother' website you can look at. Speaker 1: Is that the show--I know at one time I think they had a national-- Speaker 2: Yeah there was a national--they tried to do a national version of 'Say Brother.' Speaker 1: I think there was a national episode to 'Say Brother' that featured Dr. Allen Counter [HistoryMaker S. Allen Counter] and David Evans [David L. Evans] from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] when they went to Suriname. Is that part of the original 'Say Brother' series (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it's possible. There's a huge archive of 'Say Brother' programs at GBH [WGBH-TV, Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 1: But do they exist? Speaker 2: Oh yeah they still exist. Speaker 1: I think they just recently discovered some episodes of 'Soul!' because back in the--sometime in the '80s [1980s] I was told that NET [WNET Radio, New York, New York] destroyed old copies of 'Black Journal.' Speaker 2: Well no these were saved because about shortly after I retired, I did a consultancy job at GBH where we looked at all these old episodes because I was able to identify a lot of the people and put names with faces and things because some of the paperwork had gone. But I knew that was Pat Rainer [ph.] and I knew that was So and So and I knew that was So and So. That's when they were in the process of developing the website and so there's now a 'Say Brother' website. I wrote some of the copy talking about 'Say Brother' and stuff that's on the website now. Speaker 1: Is there any particular show you're the most proud of or you think you made the best contribution to? Speaker 2: No I think they were all important. I think it was important because we were able to get people like Doris Bland who was running a group called Mothers for Adequate Welfare. Get people like Doris on the show to talk about the issue or we could get someone who is in a housing crisis to talk about how they got in that particular crisis. But we would also have Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] or we'd have Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon] on or we'd have Taj Mahal on. So it was such a rich, rich tapestry of people and things and events which were portrayed on 'Say Brother' that it's hard to pick out one and say ah this is the one because it was all important and it was all--it was all wonderful. Story_ID: 495857 Speaker 1: Now is the, is the current show ['Basic Black']--does it live up to the tradition of--? Speaker 2: No, now they don't have the same kind of budget, they do no travel, they do no videos. It's an in studio show. It's one person who is the host and whoever he's interviewing. Sometime it might be one person, sometime it might be--the other day I saw the show and they had a group of five or six young people who play chamber music. They performed and then he interviewed them about classical chamber music and blacks, et cetera but it's not like--the same no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it wouldn't be someone talking about the housing crisis or from the neighbor on the show-- Speaker 2: You might have someone but the person might tend to be someone who is a developer as opposed to-- Speaker 1: The organizer, neighborhood leaders. Speaker 2: Yeah I think we've swung away from some degree--many of those programs no longer exist. They have gone down the drain because when I worked at Channel 4 [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts], because I went to Channel 4 in 1969 I was the first black woman reporter when I went there and I used to host a show called 'Mzizi Roots' later and I used to-- Speaker 1: What does mzizi mean? Speaker 2: It's a Swahili word, god you're asking me to remember something that was thirty years ago (laughter). Speaker 1: That's all right I just thought I'd ask. Speaker 2: Well it had meaning when we named the show. Speaker 1: How do you spell it? Speaker 2: M-Z-I-Z-I, 'Mzizi Roots.' Speaker 1: I should be able to say what it says myself but I can't right now. Speaker 2: That show--that public affairs show disappeared but now they have a show Liz Walker does a half hour show on Channel 4 now but she has an integrated show. She has all different kinds of people there. I very rarely had white people on the show, I was trying to do sort of a 'Say Brother' kind of thing and I brought in musicians and I brought in authors and I brought in local people but if someone from out of town was in town and I knew that they were going to be in, I'd invite them to be on, to be on the show. Story_ID: 495858 Speaker 1: Well just for the sake of history my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey and we're continuing an interview we started last February and please state your full name and-- Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Sara-Ann Shaw, S-H-A-W. Speaker 1: Okay and what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today is September 10, 2007. Speaker 1: All right. So we're going to pick up with 1969. Oh today we're at the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts] who--you know, the famous African Meeting House. Story_ID: 495859 Speaker 1: Well in 1969 I went to work for Channel 4 [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] and I was the first black woman reporter to work at Channel 4. And I had no intention--becoming a television news reporter was not something that I'd thought about doing but the opportunity presented itself. I served on a committee with the man who was general manager of Channel 4 and he called me up and he offered me a job and to show my naivete, I waited six months to tell him I would take the job because at that point I was directing a community health education project in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and I debated with myself could I do more good for the community and have more impact staying at this community health project or going to Channel 4. I decided I'd go to Channel 4 and I started--I was also working at that time at 'Say Brother' which was a public affairs show at WGBH [WGBH-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] the public television station here. I was doing interviews--straight interviews not news but in studio interviews, basically in studio interviews on 'Say Brother' and I would interview people who were directors of community based organizations, people who started grass roots organizations, people who were trying to run for political office and a wide variety of people, that's what I did on 'Say Brother.' I did interviews particularly about issues that were important to black communities at that time. I guess maybe about '70 [1970] or '71 [1971] it became a little bit--well actually they had a new producer came into 'Say Brother' and so we didn't quite sit horses and he decided he didn't want me on the show anymore. So I stayed at BZ full time without doing 'Say Brother' and at Channel 4 when I first started we were using film. So we'd have to rush the stories, come back the film had to be processed and then be spliced together. Story_ID: 495860 Speaker 1: And the stories I did were mainly stories in the black community because if you could imagine in 1969 after the little--all the riots had been going on in black communities around the country, Boston [Massachusetts] was no exception. It had its riot but not to the same extent as say Washington [D.C.] or California or New York [New York] or other places. Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Chicago but there was an incident up in Grove Hall [Boston, Massachusetts] with the police and people set some stores on fire. It really was a tense time. The other thing was when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed because he had connection with Reverend Virgil Wood [Virgil A. Wood] who was the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] representative here in Boston and also Martin Luther King had the connection in Boston where he came to go to school and he met Coretta [Coretta Scott King] here, et cetera. He used to attend Twelfth Baptist Church [Boston, Massachusetts] so when he would come to Boston to march on behalf of inadequate schools or different issues, I would try to interview people who were close to Dr. King and talk about why he was coming and what the issues were, et cetera. Now when I first started at BZ [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] since I was the first black woman, at times I would arrive at the story because as you know having been a reporter yourself, that you don't always go to the assignment with a photographer. I would arrive at the assignment and a secretary generally would say, "Well Mr. So and So," particularly at the State House [Massachusetts State House, Boston, Massachusetts], "well the representative can't see you or the senator is not available he or she is going to be interviewed," it was mostly he's in those days because there weren't that many women elected officials either. "He, sometimes she, are going to be interviewed for television," and I would say, "Yeah but I'm the reporter," and you could just see the look of surprise on their face when I would say that I was the reporter because again it was unchartered territory for people to see black people on television. There had been a black male reporter, in fact a black male anchor at Channel 4. Years before Terry Carter who went on to do a lot of stuff in California and Terry had gotten very, very close to a parent group from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] who really were upset with the school department and the way they were being treated and Terry kind of did some advocacy reporting and I think that led to his sort of demise here at Channel 4. But there were two black male--one black male reporter when I went to the station that was Walt Sanders. Story_ID: 495861 Speaker 1: And then over the years I covered a lot of stories. I covered court ordered school desegregation for Channel 4 [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts]. I was assigned to Hyde Park [Boston, Massachusetts] which although it wasn't as volatile and as hateful, to be perfectly honest, as some of the things that happened in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] and to some degree Charlestown [Boston, Massachusetts]. It was still hairy at times, I mean there was name calling and not just kids but adults would come around the school and they would-- Speaker 2: Right, footage of that made national news. Everybody in the country knew about that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah everybody in the country. Speaker 2: It was a very hot situation. Speaker 1: South Boston was the hotbed but Hyde Park because Hyde Park in those days, I'd tell you 99 percent white, a white community and you had things like the mother's march where women would walk up the streets saying the rosary and then they would drop to their knees and say the rosary again and it was very bizarre, I tell you to see. Speaker 2: It was in the name of segregation, right? Speaker 1: To keep these kids out of their schools. They saw that Hyde Park High [Hyde Park High School, Boston, Massachusetts] was their school and all of a sudden they are bussing these kids from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] and Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts] to their school. A community that was probably 99 percent white and all of a sudden you've got all these black kids and I'm sure that there had to have been some Latinos and Latinas going to the school too but it was predominantly black kids because in those days there was some Puerto Ricans living in Boston [Massachusetts] but there weren't--you didn't have what you have now in Boston where you have people from Panama, people from the Dominican Republic, you have people from Mexico, you have people from Brazil, you have a lot of Spanish speaking countries represented here. But in those days it was predominantly people from Puerto Rico. Now the Cape Verdeans did not call themselves Cape Verdeans in those days, they called themselves Portuguese and if you asked them they would say they were white. They did not acknowledge that Cape Verde was off the coast of Africa and that they had a relationship with Africa. So you didn't really think of the Portuguese as being kids of color. So being in Hyde Park High was difficult. We'd get there every morning--early morning about seven o'clock and the tactical police force were assigned to be at Hyde Park to make sure nothing happened and the justice department had people there. Every day no matter what you did when you put your story together at the end of the day there were always complaints. White people would call up and say, "You talk about what white kids did to black kids what about what all the black kids did to the white kids?" Black people would call up and say, "I know that there were more incidents where white kids would attack black kids. How come you didn't talk about all the incidents that happened?" So it was really difficult to please people in terms of reporting on court ordered school desegregation because one side or the other side was always accusing you of not telling the full story and not telling the whole story and not telling the truth about what happened. The media was really castigated, "You lied about this, you lied about that." So it was not a comfortable assignment but we went every morning and we'd be there and some of the police officers who were not in favor of court ordered desegregation out of the side of their mouth sometimes they would call us names or they would say, "Why don't you all get out here, all you're doing is making a bad situation worse," blah, blah and things like that. They wouldn't say it openly so you could identify them and report them as they were marching by with their big boots on and they would say, "Why don't you all get out of here," and you wouldn't really be able to tell who had said it. So you were sort of betwixt and between. Story_ID: 495862 Speaker 1: Then as time went on I started doing after school (unclear) schools desegregation calmed down so I started to do a lot of different kinds of stories. I tried to do stories that showed positive events happening in the black community and not just--for a two-fold purpose. I thought it was important particularly for young black kids to see themselves not on television for fighting, for doing drugs, et cetera. But for doing something positive, for them to have a positive image of themselves and I also thought it was important for people who lived outside the city--white people who didn't live in Boston [Massachusetts] who lived in the suburbs to know that there were positive things happening in the black community. That there were people who lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], in Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts], Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts] who went to work every day, who went to church every week, who raised families, who were as concerned about--who were buying houses, who were just as concerned about achieving the American dream as these people who lived in the suburbs. What I tried to do was to present the kinds of stories that would allow people to see that there was more than one side to the black community. In those days you could do a lot more. I hardly ever--I find the news now very, very lacking. Very seldom do you see those kinds of stories about the black community. It's mostly someone got shot, someone got arrested, something else happened. You don't really see stories about kids who are doing something in school. You don't see kids who are being entrepreneurial. I'm sure that the same way kids do lemonade stands to raise money for good causes in the suburbs that there are kids in the inner city doing the same thing but you don't really see it. But that's what I did, I was at BZ [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] for thirty-one years and during that time I tried the best I could to be even handed and fair and that to me was important. Story_ID: 495863 Speaker 1: For instance, when I would go to a story because the mayor was going to be there or the governor and the desk wanted them to comment about whatever was the hot topic of today, they would send us to an event that was being held by a nonprofit group generally and the nonprofit group would get all excited. They would see us come in with the television camera and they'd say, "Ooh we're going to be on television." I really made it point to go to the groups and say, "I want you to know we are here because we have to try and interview the mayor or the governor on this particular topic. The possibility exists--there is a very strong possibility that this event where you're either honoring someone or kicking off a fundraiser or kicking off a program, there's a strong possibility that this will never see the light of day." And at first we used to go and I wouldn't tell people that and then it wouldn't be on television and people would be calling me up saying, "I saw you there what happened?" I've had to say, "It is a decision of the management," blah, blah, blah. They didn't see the management, they saw my face so I thought to salvage my own sort of reputation that I would tell people right in front that I really wasn't there to cover their event that I was there to talk to the mayor or the governor or if they had a guest speaker that--someone from Washington [D.C.] or someone Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] or someone that the desk wanted to hear from. I thought that was only fair 'cause I think you have to be fair to people. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was a long winded answer, I'm sorry (laughter). Speaker 2: You're a person who has like a deep background in the community and the different organizations trying to make social change in the City of Boston [Massachusetts]. Did people still question your fairness on the non-community side because you knew so much about the community? Speaker 1: Well sometimes people would accuse me of trying to promote--they'd say, "Well it seems like you're standing up for this or standing up for that." I'm saying, "No I'm just really trying to tell both sides of the issue." Because often people felt that only one side of the issue should be told. Say if it was a landlord tenant dispute I felt it was just as important to talk to the tenant as it would be to talk to the landlord and get the landlord's point of view. Sometimes I'd be accused of trying to slant the story or not telling the whole story. But to the very best of my ability I tried to tell the whole story because I felt if people are going to draw conclusions or come to a decision they need to know as much as possible. Story_ID: 495864 Speaker 1: Is there a particular story that comes to mind where there's, there was a, that was a real big issue here in Boston [Massachusetts] then? Speaker 2: Well beside court ordered school desegregation was probably one of the biggest issues that this city has really ever faced. Now another big story was when Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King] ran for mayor and everyone said, "Oh a black man can't be elected mayor in this city," and people were just amazed at the number of people that Mel mobilized and how people--he was starting to get support because Mel had run for school committee before and had not been elected. Because Mel wore dashikis and he was seen as a firebrand and all of a sudden here is Mel in these suits and ties. Some people said wow now he is too radical, he can't be elected mayor and he ended up running against Ray Flynn [Raymond Flynn] in the general election. No one thought that he would survive the primary and he did and ran against Ray Flynn in the general election and was defeated but that was also a big story. To me it kind of signaled some of the breakthrough of minorities particularly black people thinking ah we can get involved in politics. Speaker 1: Now this is in the '80s [1980s] right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah and this is after repeated attempts of people to--Tom Atkins [Thomas I. Atkins] still remains the only black who was elected at large to the Boston city council. Tom was a brilliant guy, he was the secretary of the Boston branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and received a lot of publicity because of the NAACP school suit and people knew who Tom was. But he was just a brilliant man and just a fiery orator and he was elected to the city council at large. That was some feat in those days because now with the majority minority city that Boston has become, it's still hard, but it was really hard then because he really had to get people in parts of the city that had probably never voted for a black person before to vote for him. So I'd say Mel King running for mayor that was a big story and court ordered school deseg-- Story_ID: 495865 Speaker 1: Oh and the Stuart case, and the Stuart case. You heard about the Stuart case? Speaker 2: This is Charles Stuart? Speaker 1: The man who said that his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His, yeah. Speaker 1: the black guy had, had shot his wife [Carol DiMaiti Stuart]-- Speaker 2: Medium size black guy with medium--a friend of mine had a description and was going to put it on a t-shirt, this is I didn't do it on. This was in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause it reached--there was a case of a woman named Smith in North Carolina that happened about a year apart. These mass searches from some fictional black man that committed a horrible crime. Charles Stuart was parked someplace near a hospital (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well he and his wife had left Brigham and Women's Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts] and they were on their way home to a suburban town where they lived and somehow he took a wrong turn he said and ended up in Mission Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] and this man came and shot him, shot his wife and blah, blah, blah. I thought it was really strange when I first heard it because leaving Brigham and Women's Hospital you would not head towards Mission Hill to go to the suburban town where they lived. You would take another direction; you would go in another direction. But when I heard the state police tape I said to myself boy we're going to be off and running and every single day, every single day until he jumped off the bridge there was a story on television or in the newspapers about the Stuart case. Willie [Willie Bennett] the guy from Mission Hill that they tried to pin the--what was his name Willie something--it was him and then they found out Charles Stuart's brother [Matthew Stuart] had put the woman's handbag someplace. Little by little--but that was a big story and that really created-- Speaker 2: The upshot was that they harassed and arrested scores of black men in the community trying to find this alleged perpetrator when Charles Stuart himself had killed his wife. Speaker 1: Yeah they stopped innumerable men and searched them and if you were walking and you were a young black man and you were walking you'd get stopped and get shaken down, et cetera as they tried to find this person that didn't exist. Speaker 2: And as you said Charles Stuart when he realized the police were on to him jumped off the bridge which bridge was it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jumped off the bridge. Mystic River Bridge [Maurice J. Tobin Memorial Bridge]. Speaker 2: Mystic River Bridge and committed suicide. Did the black community gain some leverage in this case? Could they then get indignant and confront the police department and the city and say well look this is what you've done to us and you traditionally do this. Speaker 1: I think all along people were saying in the black community that this story doesn't seem right, there seems to be something wrong. But the voices weren't heard that well because Charles Stuart had said that a black man had done it and in America they thought, I guess this is possible. This whole black man attacking white woman, probably true and after it was, after it turned out to be false, black people were saying I told you so, I told you it wasn't so, I told you it wasn't so. Story_ID: 495866 Speaker 1: But see I really don't know how much--I really don't know how much, how many lessons have been learned because a recent newspaper in Boston [Massachusetts] they talked about the--the police were supposed to be gathering data to show if they were arresting--so they could really determine if black men were being arrested for driving while black and it turns out that many of the police departments more than two hundred of them were supposed to be involved in this and it turned out that many of them didn't collect the statistic. They collected it in different ways; they didn't report it to the state so despite the fact that there had been some progress it's like they'd take two steps forward and three steps back. So I don't know what would happen today if there were a similar Charles Stuart thing if the police would have learned their lesson or if they would run forward again and say we've got--we know what happened. It's possible that they learned a lesson and would not be as avid to point the finger, I don't know. But I tell you the people in the black community--they were saying I told you so we knew that's not the way it happened. Speaker 2: So what you're also saying is that no lasting change or policy change came as a result of the-- Speaker 1: I would say no because this year they just announced there was going to be some sort of police review. People started asking for a police survey and review board and one was named but they have no power, they have no power. I don't think they can--I can't remember all the details but it's not powerful like the civilian review board in other cities unfortunately. It's a small group and it's a small board and they have to interact with the police and if they--some of the stuff that has to be reviewed back to internal affairs. So it's not like it's a civilian review board that can say this cop was wrong discipline him. It's not that at all. So even though this is a majority minority city there is still a ways to go in terms of power sharing and in terms of equitable-- Story_ID: 495867 Speaker 1: You know what the rest of the country looks at Boston [Massachusetts] and they say well they have the Kennedys-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and some liberals, John Kerry they look at, you know, Senator Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] when he was here, he's the only black senator we've had before Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] in the twentieth century and they say wow they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you had [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun too before a black man. Speaker 1: Yeah we did have her too but long ago Ed Brooke way back and a republican. So people think this of being a lot more liberal-- Speaker 2: Yeah this is the birthplace of liberty, John Adams, Paul Revere and the Athens of America all that stuff that--I'm not sure that counts for anything when it comes to how people are treated and the access people have but I mean there is still lack of access. If you go into City Hall [Boston City Hall, Boston, Massachusetts] you would think that there'd be a dozen, two dozen department heads, right unh-uh. I think there are probably three maybe four and that's at City Hall. Speaker 1: Democratic mayor, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's a way to go still. Speaker 2: Oh there's a way to go still. Same thing with state government, you know, if you just walk through the statehouse you'll see. Story_ID: 495868 Speaker 1: Now we were talking about city politics but I want to ask you about internal politics of being the only black woman reporter at WBZ [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] back in those days from the, I guess early '70s [1970s] on. Speaker 2: Well I think I had a little bit of an edge in one way in that I had been active in a lot of community affairs, belonged to community groups and was known--I was known to a lot of people in the community. So I'd sort of had a, shall we say, I had some support. I had people who had my back but it still wasn't easy because I would frequently say to them why is it that you keep calling asking the same people to make statements or to interview. There are plenty of people. If you need doctors there are lots of black doctors, if you need ministers--you know you don't need to do the same people all the time. And sometimes they would disagree with me about the intent of what was going on. I said who lives there, who lives there, who do you think knows a little bit more about Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] me or you? And then we would have reporters who would go out and they would do a story and then come back and I'd say where did they get that information? I said that's not true so often I was in--not a conflict but there was a lot of pulling and tugging between me and station management. For instance, the people in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] and Hyde Park [Boston, Massachusetts] who were against busing they called it forced busing. So all of a sudden I'd see creeping into the copy at the station it would be the lede or the reporter talking about forced busing and I went to the management and I said it's not forced busing, it's court ordered school desegregation. The more we say forced busing the more we're invalidating what restore our alienated rights and the South Boston marshals and all those people were against it are saying. We validate it by using their terminology so we really need to talk about court ordered school desegregation or school desegregation or something. That was one thing I would do, I'd pick up on--I'd listen to leads, I'd listen to what a reporter was saying and I would try to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What happened in that particular situation? Did the station take your advice or did they continue-- Speaker 2: They did about the forced busing but on other situations they let the reporter--if another reporter is doing the story they would let the reporter have her say or his say and I could steam all I wanted to but that's the way it was. Story_ID: 495869 Speaker 1: Someone wrote a newspaper article once the Quincy [Massachusetts] Patriot Ledger [The Patriot Ledger], the woman called me the conscience of the newsroom, that's what--and, because I tried to keep them in balance as best I could and it was not easy. It was not easy and I would say why are we doing this story again or why aren't we doing this side of the story. So I was in a tugging and pulling often situation with management and when I would go to them with a story that I felt was a decent story in terms of showing something or illustrating something they'd say, "Ah no." I'll give you an example (laughter) these kids had done a particular program and they had been invited to Ted Kenney's [Edward M. Kennedy] office and Kennedy was in town at his Boston [Massachusetts] office and Kennedy was going to give them some sort of an award or certificate or some kind of recognition. Well it turned out that something had happened that affected the Kennedy family or something that happened in Washington [D.C.] so they wanted to get Kennedy's comment and so we went there and I had the photographer shoot some of the awarding of the certificate and pictures of the kids, et cetera and then I did ask Kennedy the question that they wanted him to comment on. When we got back I was furious because the person who was the editor--the producer of that particular show said, "Okay we're just going to use the Kennedy thing," and I said, "You know if those kids had started a riot or if they had started fighting with each other in Kennedy's office you would have used that." I said, "But because they were there for something positive you don't want to use it." Well he became angry with me, he was yelling at me, I was yelling at him so sometimes I won and sometimes I lost. That's the best way to put it, sometimes I was able to get them to look at what was going on and what they were doing and sometimes I just wasn't able to so. Speaker 2: Okay but you stayed with it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh I stayed-- Speaker 2: --and they didn't try and fire you or anything. Speaker 1: Well when I went there I told the general manager who hired me, I said, "I want you to understand that I'm coming here and I'm going to try to the best of my ability to be fair and to be honest because the only thing you can do to me is fire me." I said, "That's the only think you can do to me is fire me." So given that position from the beginning they knew that I wasn't afraid of being fired. They also knew that I had people, not just in the black community, I did a lot of reporting on social services, on daycare, abused children, spousal abuse so I knew a lot of people in the social service field and they felt that I was the person that they could trust and they could depend on so they would call me with a story. A lot of stories I got that other reporters didn't get 'cause people knew my name and they would call me. So because of that I think people at the station knew that they could say--they might say A and if I knew A wasn't correct, I was going to say no that's not so because all they could have was to fire me. I think I might have been able to find another job maybe not in television but doing something. So that was my approach, I said just know this from the beginning, the only thing you can do is fire me. And I think (laughter) if you go in and say that at the very, very beginning on your first day on the job they have some idea of where you stand on issues. Story_ID: 495870 Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a curious--I mean the idea that you would do something other than try to be fair--you'd think that was the greatest fear that management had or that the white community had in general if a black person is a reporter then somehow they are not going to be fair? Speaker 2: Oh yeah I think so. You're not going to be able to be objective whatever that is or you're not going to be fair. I think the white people sometime assume well if you're black and it's a black issue you're going to come down on the side of black people no matter what and not going to be fair. But as I said if there are two sides, you need to show both sides so people can try to get some sense of what's actually going on. The other thing is a lot of reporters go into the business with their eye on going to the network so that means getting the lead story and getting the story that's going to create the most splash and getting the story that's going to be noticed and maybe getting the story that might run four or five days in a row. And I think that if you are on that track you might tend sometime to play a little fast and loose. You might try to pump the story up and report it in a way that's not quite as accurate as it should be for the sake of making it more interesting, making it more sensational--the sensationalism. And because of that you might advance but if you're not interested in that, if you're just interested in trying to tell the story and help people. Speaker 1: Was there a time when you took a side of a story that angered the black community, they figured you weren't on the side of the community? Speaker 2: Well yeah there were stories like that when they are crime stories or they say, "You're agreeing with the police or you're agreeing with the district attorney," and I tried to explain to them it's not that I'm agreeing this is what I was told happened. That's what I'm reporting what I'm told happened. I said I'm not taking any sides and it was very hard for people not to understand. Sometimes it was hard to get people to understand that. By reporting I was not taking a stand, I was reporting. But as a black woman I came to the job knowing inherently that there was racism because racism is in this country, it was and is in this country. So even though I tried to be fair in my fairness sometimes people would think my being fair that I was accusing people of being racist. I wasn't accusing people if what they were doing was racist, I would say--I might not say it's racist but I would say it was discriminatory and then that would get people upset or if it was something a black person had done and I'd say they had done something black people would say how come you take the side of So and So. So you're damned if you do and damned if you don't (laughter). If you're fair and try to put the information out, I never would try to shy away from doing black stories either which is another thing. A lot of young black reporters--I've met when I first started out I'd meet black reporters who said, "Oh no I'm a reporter first and I'm black second." No, I was black first and I would die being black and so that's why I felt it was important to try to get black stories on the air and-- Story_ID: 495871 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a story I wanted to raise, I'm trying to think of the man's name, and I--'cause we interviewed him here. He was in the famous case where during the school desegregation crisis he was walking downtown with a three piece suit on and was attacked-- Speaker 2: Ted Landsmark [HistoryMaker Theodore C. Landsmark]. Speaker 1: Ted Landsmark, yeah and his story of what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was attacked on City Hall Plaza [Boston City Hall Plaza, Boston, Massachusetts] with an American flag. Speaker 1: Yeah well the story around the country is that he was speared with the flag and he was a Republican who became a Democrat as a result of being speared with this flag. He went through all of the false--he said he wasn't speared with it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was hit with it though but the picture [The Soiling of Old Glory] looked like he was being speared with it but he was attacked with a flag. Speaker 1: Yes he was and he's had to like clear that up. He wasn't a Conservative Republican at the time, he was actually-- Speaker 2: No he worked for the mayor and it was a democratic mayor. He worked for the mayor of the city. Speaker 1: So it was used around the country as a picture that showed this is enough to make a Negro turn black. Speaker 2: Yes, this is what Boston [Massachusetts] is really like. That is what helped among, in addition to all the rock throwing and everything, it's what gave Boston a bad reputation. It made black people say, "I don't know if I want to go to Boston they are very prejudice there, a lot of racism in Boston." I remember covering a story where people were angry with Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy], the anti-busing people were angry with Ted Kennedy. They got--the Kennedy building [John F. Kennedy Federal Building] right down in Government Center [Boston, Massachusetts] and they banged on the window, they banged on the window and the window broke and all this glass came down. And see, if it had been a black group that had done that I'm sure that there would have been a helluva lot more arrests than there were when this happened 'cause I was there when it happened. There were so many of them banging on this window bang, bang, bang and the window broke. And, so I'm sure that things like that made people say no I don't think I want to go there. Story_ID: 495872 Speaker 1: Tell me about 'Mzizi Roots' and when did that start? Now that was a WBZ [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] show? Speaker 2: It was a half hour show, I was the host. It must have started around '71 [1971], '72 [1972] and it was a show to try to showcase--talk about issues that might not get on the news or showcase people with talent who people might not have heard about poets, dancers, actors-- Speaker 1: So it was mainly a cultural show? Speaker 2: Oh yeah it was a cultural show. Speaker 1: Now what does mzizi mean? Kiswahili it sounds like. Speaker 2: Yeah it's Kiswahili but I cannot even remember--all I know is that we had to stop using it because someone else had that name somewhere and we had to stop using it, our own roots or something. Because I wanted something--that was during the period of time when black was beautiful and you really were into expressing your heritage and I don't even know where we came up with the name. Speaker 1: It has something to do with ancestral roots but I'm trying to--I had some Kiswahili one time. I know that wazazi is ancestors and mzizi is--might be one of them that might be it. Speaker 2: And it was a cultural show, I mean--again it shows you--there was an example of how things can happen. I did a show on South Africa this was before the end of apartheid. I did a show on South Africa and I had some South Africans expatriates here talking about what was happening and how they were being treated, how they were being banned, et cetera. I don't know if the man was South African ambassador to the United States or the consult here in Boston [Massachusetts] or what but he called the station and complained and said the interview was one sided and the station made me and I did it under great duress, I said I didn't think it was fair. They said I had to interview this man on 'Mzizi Roots.' He came on and he was very--I remember he was very stiff and very clipped answers and I was not very welcoming and forthcoming--I was forthcoming, but I wasn't very welcoming I said with us today is blah, blah, blah because I didn't think I should have to do it because it was true what these Africans were talking about was true. People didn't know a lot about Africa in those days and they had brought me slides of things that had happened in some of the townships. How people were getting beaten so I'd incorporated these slides because you didn't have networks and people over there taking--doing video and stuff and I had these slides which I included as part of this interview. It really showed people being clubbed and beaten and blah, blah, blah. Steve Biko and all of that and it was just an indication of how people saw things that they felt we'd better let this white man come on and talk about it from his point of view what South Africa is like. I was very angry and I argued with them a lot about it because I said it's true, what is happening in South Africa is what these black South Africans talked about. I said I don't care what this man says; he cannot put a good face on what they are doing to black people in South Africa. Speaker 1: Yeah it seemed self-evident on some level but I guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah but we were--the United States as a country particularly black people were very ignorant of what was going on in South Africa. It was thousands of miles away and it didn't affect their livelihood and didn't affect the economy of this country, et cetera. So it wasn't someplace--well I think even nowadays Africa as a continent is really ignored by the mainstream media. But that was one of the few times--I would have white people on the show to talk about different thing but it was--predominantly the guests on 'Mzizi Roots' were black people and some Latinos but predominantly black. But if it was a situation where there were two sides and one side was white, I would have a white person on or if it was a white person that was doing something that affected the black community, I would have, you know, I would have them on. Story_ID: 495873 Speaker 1: What do you think was your most significant show on ['Mzizi Roots']--? Speaker 2: I don't know because we covered such a wide variety. I remember I had [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte on talking about Africa and the situation in Africa and then I had the South African tour band but then I also had people like Jimmy Slyde who is a preeminent tap dancer who was well known around the world as a tap dancer. So I think that I tried to do--I tried to do a variety of different things that illustrated who black people were, what they had accomplished and what they could do. I'd do history shows--black history shows, I would do shows about black people in Boston [Massachusetts] who had accomplished things. I can't even say what I would consider to be the most significant show because to me all of them were significant because they all had their own story they told, they all had a point that they were making so I don't think I can say one above the other. But they were all interesting, I mean as I said. I tried to participate when Jimmy Slyde the tap dancer was on he said, "Let me show you some steps," and there I was trying to (laughter) tap dance with Jimmy Slyde. Or people would come in--I tried to participate. I wish I had some of those tapes now because there were a lot of interesting people. If people were well-known who were coming to town for something else, we would get them on the show. We would get them to be on the show if they were in town at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] lecturing, we'd get them to come on the show. If they were in town playing someplace, we'd get them at Storyville [Boston, Massachusetts] or some of the other clubs; we'd get them to come on the show. So there was a lot of--Joe Williams was on the show who sang with Count Basie. So there were many, many different music, politics, cooking shows, you name it we tried to do it. Speaker 1: It seems like Boston is the kind of place that has a, in terms of black history, there's all kinds of people have had some kind of connection with Boston. Everybody from Malcolm X lived here; Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] lived here at one time. I don't think there's any other city where (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Malcolm's nephew was on the show talking about Malcolm. Speaker 1: Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] you know you can go down the line, everybody was here at some point. Speaker 2: The African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts]--the people who built African Meeting House those people. David Walker, the appealed David Walker, you know there's a lot of black history in Boston. Black people lived on Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts], they owned Beacon Hill practically--not that they owned it but this is where they lived and then it wasn't a fashionable place to live but that's where they lived until they moved to South End [Boston, Massachusetts], and then out. Story_ID: 495874 Speaker 1: How long did your show run ['Mzizi Roots']? Speaker 2: It ran about I guess three or four years-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then like all things the media had sort of gotten battle fatigued about black issues. When the riots and things were going on, getting the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] passed, et cetera when all that was going on there was much more interest and I think there was much more guilt on the part of white people about being fair, getting people on the air--getting stories on the air but then you started getting the--the ecology movement started. The Vietnam War came and lots of protest around the Vietnam War, the ecology issue and people were talking about ecology before this--everyone thinks global warming and green is new but the ecology movement back then that was what fair foods and foods without pesticides and all that was back then. As these new subjects came and got legs of their own and started becoming the big stories the other stories that had been the big stories just sort of slid off to the side. So they wanted a show that was more mainstream that appealed to a broader segment of their viewing population. Speaker 1: Did the coming of cable television and public access television make the need for public affairs programming from the black community go down? I wonder about that sometime because FCC [Federal Communications Commission] has changed the rules now, you don't have to have any public affairs programming but did-- Speaker 2: I don't really think that cable and public access had that much to do with it, I really think it was the change in emphasis on the part of the media management because I think as people--you talk to a person today who is thirty, they have no sense of what this country was like when they were a year old. So to them it's ancient history and not something that they're interested in and so as you started getting management who--two things as people started getting interested in these new themes, ecology, Vietnam War whatever they started getting away from and I've seen it happen--the ecology movement got dropped, Vietnam at one point, people got battle fatigue with Vietnam. So I think that as the new issues cropped up and the media latched on to them and made those the stories of the day that had something to do with it and then I think as people who had lived through some of these other events, as they moved into left moved into other positions and younger people came and the young people it was not their experience and unless you had someone who was in a position of authority who had institutional memory who could say it's, this, it's important to include this and to make this part of our coverage in what we say and what we do then it would go by the board. Story_ID: 495875 Speaker 1: Trying to think, I talked to someone, oh recently I talked to a young black woman reporter who had just come to work in Boston [Massachusetts] and I called up to tell her--I don't know her--I called her up to tell her about a story that I knew that was going to be happening and I said this brass band from New Orleans [Louisiana] is going to be in Boston and they're going around to remind people about Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] and blah, blah, blah. They are from New Orleans and they're trying to stay together as a group and the person that's the contact person is the son of Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses]. I said, "You've heard of SNCC haven't you?" She said no she had not heard of SNCC, I said, "You need to go into your Google and go into your internet and find out what the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee was and who Bob Moses was." I said, "This is his son who is bringing this group here but I said if you find out about SNCC and Bob Moses you would understand why he would have a son that would bring a group from New Orleans here." But see she had no idea, I was just--but I know she's not alone and I think that is something that I have to blame part of that failure at my feet and the feet of people my age. That we did not make young people understand or make sure that they studied or understood the history. Just like I don't know enough about the history of what happened except through anecdotal of what happened when slavery was going on. So I think it's really--when she told me she didn't know what SNCC was I was like-- Speaker 2: I think you're being too hard on yourself on some level 'cause you have talked about what went on in this hall since we've been here. Weren't you a part of the foreman of the National Association for Black Journalists [sic. National Association of Black Journalists, NABJ]? Speaker 1: Yes I was. Story_ID: 495876 Speaker 1: Yeah we were talking about who is teaching the young black journalists and we were talking about the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] that you were part of the founding of and one of its missions is to do that, right to try to--? Speaker 2: Right, I think if you're going to be a journalist and you are a black person that it is important for you to do some research and do some wood shedding, do some reading and familiarize yourself with the history. Things just didn't come from here to there there's something in between and you need to know what that in between stuff is and how it impacts and what kind of--how it influences what is going on today. Black journalists when we started we were concerned about coverage, we were concerned about hiring, those were--and we were also concerned about getting people into management because I used to tell young people when I would go out and speak to them everyone wants to be on air but being on air isn't the be all and the end all. You want to be in management so you can make decisions about who gets hired, who gets fired, how budgets are allocated. That's what you really need to be thinking about as you think about television. Story_ID: 495877 Speaker 1: I mean, when we started we were really--we were small. I mean, we were a small group of journalists and we met and we would have maybe a hundred people at the first--the first convention we ever held was in Texas and I don't, I don't-- Speaker 2: About what year was that? Speaker 1: That had to have been in maybe '70 [1970] or '71 [1971]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and what's the black school there, Texas State University [San Marcos, Texas]? Speaker 2: Texas Southern [Texas Southern University], in Houston [Texas]? Speaker 1: Texas Southern that's where we met and it was very funny (laughter) when we went there. There were a group of us who--we went up to dinner and most of us were from the East Coast and we were in this restaurant and we were acting you know, "Can you get us this, can you get us that." The black guy who was working outside as the valet said, "You all are the first black people to come in (laughter) and act like that since I've been working here." But NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] has really grown. I used to be the regional director for this region. I was president of the Boston Association of Black Journalists which actually predated NABJ. The Boston Association of Black Journalists predated NABJ and I don't know if NABJ now--we would speak out on issues, we would shoot our press releases, we heard about things we felt were inequities. I remember we did a big thing around Earl--oh god he worked for the New York Post and they tried to fire him, New York News [New York Daily News] or the New York Post. His first name was Earl-- Speaker 2: I wish I could help-- Speaker 1: I'm sure if I could say it you would--Earl Caldwell and we really push for Earl Caldwell with letters, we got the people because we felt he had been treated unfairly and we were very public with it. I haven't been to a NABJ convention for a long time because I'm retired, I'm not looking for a job, many of the workshops that they have--now I've heard this spiel before if I went, I would just go to see old friends and some of those old friends have died. [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett is gone; Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] is gone. I don't know if [HistoryMaker] Chuck Stone is still-- Speaker 2: Chuck Stone is still (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know he is alive but I don't know if he's-- Speaker 2: Yeah he still comes. Speaker 1: He still comes, I haven't seen Chuck in-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock. Speaker 1: Yes Paul Brock who is our executive director there for a while. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Francis Ward still comes. Speaker 1: Yeah Frances and his wife Val Gray [HistoryMaker Val Gray Ward]. Val came to--used to come to the early conventions. So I think at the beginning of NABJ we had more, how should I say, I think because we were sort of trailblazers a lot of people who were in NABJ in the beginning were people who broke barriers, who got in jobs in media. Tom Johnson [Thomas A. Johnson] working for The New York Times, et cetera, we had jobs that had not traditionally or regularly been held by black people before and so we felt a sense of urgency about the necessity to create change. To open up the doors to bring people in, to make younger people understand what the amount of, the vast amount of power that the media had and still does have. Story_ID: 495878 Speaker 1: But I think as NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] has become more of a, not an institution but NABJ now is different because it's so many thousands of people and many of the younger people who come, I understand there are three, four thousand people at conferences. I'm serious when we started we were lucky to have a hundred, two hundred people. Instead of twenty workshops, we could have three or four and everyone would pretty much be in the same workshop together. I'm not sure because I haven't been, I don't know how much is still the mission of let's try to create change although to the credit of NABJ the NABJ was out calling for Imus' [Don Imus] ouster before Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton]. NABJ sort of jumped out there and I was glad to see that they did jump out and say something. And I think it's still important for NABJ to jump out and (yawn) excuse me, I still think it's very important for NABJ to jump out and take stands on issues that affect the black community and be very, very strong about it. That's not to say that because we take a stand as black journalists that it will get the coverage but I think it's important to get out there. And even if it's in local black papers or on local black shows then at least the people in the community know where black journalists are standing on issues. Story_ID: 495879 Speaker 1: How long did you--were you on the air before you retired, you-- Speaker 2: I stayed at BZ [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] until 2000, I retired in 2000 and by 2000 they weren't using me all that much every once in a while. I was still there and I was still having some input into stories 'cause people were still calling me up and giving me tips about stories and sending me information about stories. Speaker 1: So even when you weren't going out covering a story yourself you were having a lot of input in terms of content (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was trying to have some input in the newsroom letting them know this is a story that's coming up, this is something that's happening, this is an issue that's developing in the community and these are the groups that are going to be meeting to do something about it. So I would do that. Speaker 1: Okay now what have you been doing since 2000? Speaker 2: Well I serve on a number of boards and go to community--go to meetings and try to stay abreast of things, try to help organize things right now. It is a city council election coming up in Boston [Massachusetts] in November so I'm working with a group of people. We're going to have a forum (yawn) excuse me I don't know why I'm yawning, you're going to have to forgive me please. We're going to have a forum for the at large city council seats because in Boston you have four seats where people all across the city have to vote to elect you and then the rest is mid district, district seats. So the at large seats there are nine people vying for four seats. So we're going to have a forum and invite-- Speaker 1: Do those then provide a balance of power in the city council often? How many-- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah often they do and right now there only four people, two blacks, one Asian and one Latino on the city council. So they usually vote as a block. They call themselves team unity and they usually vote as a block and sometimes they can swing but often they can't because they're out voted a lot but we're going to have this forum for the city council candidates so I'm working on that. I'm working with the Boston Public Library [Boston, Massachusetts] trying to develop a whole project about how to--because we have branch libraries around the city, how to best service the branch libraries, how to give this service to the communities where the branch libraries are located. How do we give the best service, what kind of service should we be giving and then there is another. There is a trust fund that was given by someone to Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] many, many--more than a hundred years ago and there is a committee that tries to have some input into how that money is spent for nonprofits so I sit on that committee. So I sit on a number of different committees and that's how I spend my time but I'd rather be that than doing nothing--sitting home doing nothing. Story_ID: 495880 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I'm hoping that the African American community can really--well one thing we've got to really be able to convince and it's not all young black people who are doing violence and shooting people but the ones that are perpetuating the violence with the guns, et cetera, we've got to figure out a way to get to those young people and get them to understand that violence is not a good way of life because innocent people are getting hurt, that's one thing. I'd like to see the black community get, really get what it's entitled to in terms of resources, in terms of education. Our schools are horrendous. They thought integration would make the difference, white flight--white people ran away from the city and education is such an important issue and we're really not educating young people nowadays. They're going to school but they're not really getting educated. You ask them about this or that; they're teaching to the test they're not really educating kids. So I think I'd like to see the black community have equity in terms of education, in terms of housing, in terms clout. I want the black community to be listened to. We helped build this country for no money, for no money we helped build this country and I think that if black people say that they feel that the police commission should pay attention to what's going on in their community that should happen. If black people say to the mayor that you don't take us as seriously as you say you do. Because a lot of mayors say, "Oh I'm for this or I'm trying to do this, I'm doing that, I'm doing the other thing," but when you look at who works for the mayor, who's in his inner cabinet. Access, I want the black community to have the same kind of access in terms of economic power, political power, educational power. I want us to be able to sit in the board rooms and make the decisions and I don't want to feel ashamed of what we do. Black people get in positions--often they get in positions where they are the boss and they feel I can't hire two or three black people because I'll be accused of being prejudice, I'll be accused of nepotism, white people do it all the time and we never say oh how come Mr. Smith who was white did not hire a rainbow. Mr. Smith hires who he wants to hire. We've got to stop--I want us to stop feeling guilty or feeling that we have to prove ourselves. We have the capability to do things and we should be allowed to do it in the same fashion that they are--that white people are. I think that--So and So, he can't do that or she can't do that, you're shaking your head you know what I'm talking about. So that's what I'd like to see--I'd like to see the black community made whole. I think that the community and I can only speak for Boston [Massachusetts] but I think it probably applies other black communities around the country, I don't think we're whole like we used to be. I don't think that our--what we see as our values are--what we stand for and what we won't stand for in terms of behavior and in terms of value and I know the world has changed and I know this is a fast pace there's the internet and YouTube and all of that but if you stand for something, who is it--Malcolm [Malcolm X] said, if you don't stand for something, then you fall for anything, and I want us to stand for something as black people. Story_ID: 495881 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could do it again? Speaker 2: If I could do it again I would really try to impress upon younger people the necessity, that it's necessary to know yourself and to work--that it is not about you, that it's about community. You may be able to accomplish something but you don't know how long you're going to be able to last without the support of others. That working for a community is better than working for yourself. I think after the Civil Rights Movement because we had breakthroughs in areas we felt freedom is right around the corner and we've had this breakthrough and so now we can sort of open the doors for people to come through. I think that we should have made them understand you don't get a free pass to go through the door. I think that we should have with our children and now our children's children--make them understand with freedom comes responsibility. I think we didn't do it with--I don't think we did it those of us who were involved in civil rights, I don't think we really did that lesson. Jewish people always tell the kids remember the holocaust and they go to Hebrew school. Muslims children go to schools where they learn Arabic, there are Asian schools. We need somehow to figure out a way to teach our children who we are, who we've been and what we need to do in order to maintain our place in all of this. I guess that's the thing that I tried--if I had it to do over again I would try and impress upon people there is no freedom without responsibility. Speaker 1: I think you're still doing that now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah but I mean in a broader sense. Speaker 1: You mean as an educator maybe perhaps? Or, or--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know how I would have done it but I think just talking to young people and stressing that with young people. Story_ID: 495882 Speaker 1: You received the Boston Radio-Television News Directors' Association [Radio-Television News Directors' Association] award, the Lifetime Achievement Award for the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] and the Yankee Quill Award from the New England Society of Newspaper Editors, when you look back at everything that you've done to this point what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: To try to make a difference. I think if there has been a sort of epithet she tried to make a difference. She tried for fairness; she tried to make a difference. She tried to open up opportunities for others. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess I've never even really thought about that but I guess-- Story_ID: 495883 Speaker 1: Your parents were activists did they get a chance to see you become a, become an anchor--I mean, a reporter for WBZ [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father [Norris King, Jr.] not my mother [Annie Bomar King], my mother had died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: So what did he think about it? Speaker 2: It was okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family. Do you have children? Speaker 2: Yes, I have one biological child and I have two adopted children and I have three grandchildren and my granddaughter just started college this year in 2007, she's a freshman and the youngest grandchild is a freshman in high school. Story_ID: 495884 Speaker 1: Now is there any question we haven't asked and should have asked or didn't ask that you can think of that we need to deal with right now before I ask my last question. Speaker 2: Well I don't know you've asked about Boston [Massachusetts], you've asked about jobs. (Pause) Of course I'll think of it afterwards but I can't think of anything off the top of my head right now. Speaker 1: Okay now you were the president or are you still the president of organizations right now? Speaker 2: No thank god, no. I've stepped down, I mean I'm still with organizations and I hold like a clerk or something like that but I'm not--I'm no longer the president of the League of Women for Community Service, I'm no longer the president of the Boston Association--Boston Coalition of Black Women [Boston Coalition of Black Women, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I still belong but-- Speaker 1: Well our last question is similar to legacy but a little different, I guess. Ma'am how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think I'd answer it the same way someone who tried to make a difference for her community and someone who was a good mother. I was a single parent, I got divorced when my child was eight so it wasn't easy. Someone who was a good mother, a good grandmother who cared about her community--deeply cared about her community, about the black community, who cared about young people, who tried to make a difference in the lives of black people. Speaker 1: Okay thank you very much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: You're welcome...