 Story_ID: 127204 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Donzell Starks. D-O-N-Z-E-L-L, last name Starks, S-T-A-R-K-S. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth: 1/7/60 [1960]. And the place of birth is Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your profession? What's your occupation? Speaker 2: (laughter) Currently? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Entrepreneur. Yeah, basically I guess I call myself a lot of things, but entrepreneur. Speaker 1: Okay. And specifically, though, you-- Speaker 2: Specifically-- Speaker 1: --own your-- Speaker 2: Specifically, I'm a developer and owns, in this particular case, owns movie theaters. I'm a movie operator. Speaker 1: Okay. This is Inner City Entertainment. Speaker 2: It's called Inner City Entertainment, yes. I'm a movie operator, yeah, that exhibit first-run movie theaters, first-run movies, I should say. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Today is what, August 27th? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: '03 [2003]. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At present, right now we're at the office of the filmmakers in Chicago, Illinois on [S.] Michigan Avenue. Speaker 1: The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: The HistoryMakers, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Okay, All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, HistoryMakers, yeah. Speaker 1: We have to ask that in the beginning; slate this, okay. Speaker 2: Good, good, good, good and good-- Story_ID: 127205 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions, lightweight questions that we always ask, and they just require a short answer. The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is baked potato and salad. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: July. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have two of them. But the one I use and the one I like the most is: "You didn't make me, so you can't break me." Speaker 1: That's a good one. Story_ID: 127206 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to start with your mother's side and then your father's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Mazola Robinson [Robinson is Starks' biological grandmother whom he regards as his adoptive mother]. M-A-Z-O-L-A, Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Mom's birthday is October 31st, which is Halloween, I think, in '22 [1922]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because she'll be eighty coming up. I think, I think '22 [1922], I think. I think it's '22 [1922], October 31st, 1922. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you know about her side of the family? I mean, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Her father's name was Curtis Robinson. He died about, probably died about two or three years ago; he lived to be 100 years old. That was something special. And pretty much I can really just, Pine Bluff and picking cotton, Curtis Robinson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's pretty much I can really think about. Speaker 1: Did he have his own land, or was he-- Speaker 2: He had his own land. He was a sharecropper, he had his own land, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I went there. Funny thing about it, I went there probably when I was maybe nine or ten years old, and we picked cotton. I didn't like that, coming from Chicago [Illinois]. And when you had to use the washroom--I think the, I forget the facility, the term they used. But it was, was it an outhouse or something? But the washroom was outside. And then you had, of course you had the flies and things like that. I'll never forget that, and I never wanted to come back. And then I, we, happened to go back there maybe three or four years ago and Pop was, he was in the hospital a couple of weeks. And he said, "Listen, I want to see your son." And at the same time, my son was saying "I want to see, you know, Grandma's father." It was strange, because they had never met each other. But maybe him going to, passing away, and then a new one coming in, they wanted to meet. And they met. And when he died a week later, that was the funny thing. It was about the second time I'd been down to Arkansas, you know. And like I said, I vowed not to, I just did not like that type of living, you know, and I would have resented it. But it actually it was a good living, and it was his. But I didn't, I didn't understand at the time, but I didn't like the picking cotton thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then you get spoiled up there sometimes in the big city, because you got all these washrooms and in-house and the whole thing. And you're going to do some things a little different. You get like, "I want to be different." At that time, yeah, so that's as far as I really remember about, in terms of my mom's, my mom's parents that far back. Speaker 1: Did your grandfather tell stories about growing up, or about his family or anything like that? Speaker 2: He didn't tell a lot, he didn't really tell-- Speaker 1: A hundred years old, he'd have to-- Speaker 2: A hundred years old, yeah. We, you know, we didn't spend that kind of time together. You know, I wish I did. The weeks I was there, we got there before he passed away. Yeah, we talked a little about, you know, the field and picking cotton and, you know, and this KKK [Ku Klux Klan] stuff, you know. Speaker 1: All that stuff is important, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, what kind of stories did he talk about, and tell about the KKK? Speaker 2: He just mentioned that, you know, they tried to take the land and, you know, how he just somehow, you know by the grace of God was able to keep the land and stuff like that. And they made them in the form of the sheriff, or in the form of some odd person in town, something like that, it might be the mayor. But he said that they all were, in some form or fashion, you know, in his mind the KKK, you know, kind of thing like that. So it's like, you know, we got to keep this land after I pass, and the whole thing like that. And so, you know, so far we've been able to keep it, and things like that. So, you know, those kinds of things like that. But that was like the last week or so, and we didn't spend a lot of time other than that. Other than that, before, he was picking cotton. Speaker 1: Okay. Were all his people from Pine Bluff, Arkansas or thereabouts? Or do they have a tradition of being from someplace else? Speaker 2: Yeah. I think it was Mississippi, of course Arkansas. Mississippi and Arkansas probably, pretty much I know that they came from. A lot of people in Arkansas, though, Pine Bluff, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, All right. Speaker 2: All his daughters and everybody like that. Speaker 1: Did they have a big family? Speaker 2: Well, my mom had a, yeah, pretty nice sized. I think three, she had three other sisters. And I think one brother like that, yeah. Not huge, but enough grandkids and all that stuff. Story_ID: 127207 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your mother. How did she grow up, and what kind of life did she lead? Speaker 2: Well, the funny thing about it is that, since we're talking about that. I was, Mom [Mazola Robinson], well, the funny thing about it, you know, like I said, I was adopted by my grandmother who actually adopted me. And that's who I know as my mom. My mom lived in Seattle. In fact she just passed away, my birth mom, about in April. So, my mom to me obviously is my mom who raised me. And that's the history that we have about that. As far as my mom, birth-- Speaker 1: So, you're saying your grandmother really raised you? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was really my mom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because she adopted me. Speaker 1: And your grandmother was born in 1922? Speaker 2: Exactly, right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mom passed away, my actual mom passed away this past April. But we were like a, I mean we loved each other to death. But she was like my brother or sister kind of thing, because we really didn't have that kind of relationship. Because when I was seven, or five rather, I had this, at that time my particular father, I think I met him that one time. And I was, I was not, she wasn't married. So I guess I was--I'd like a better word--I guess in terms--a bastard child, you know, kind of thing like that. I guess it was the term they used back then. But so, I never-- Speaker 1: They haven't used that word in a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, I guess some people do, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, like I say, I'd like a better word. Speaker 1: Nowadays it doesn't seem to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: --have the same kind of-- Speaker 2: Right. But back then when I was growing up, that term was used, you know. I can remember that term. But like I say, it's lack of a better word. But yeah, you know, so, you know, we lived in--I lived in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], in Watts [neighborhood in Los Angeles], when I was young. And I was born here, though, in Chicago [Illinois], at Cook County. But then Mom went there and got married, stepdad, the whole thing. He was from here. And in fact, Stateway Gardens [a public housing project located in the Bronzeville neighborhood of the South Side of Chicago, Illinois] and the whole thing. And we went there, and for some reason it just didn't work out. I mean, you know, I think there was some physical abuse involved. You know, I think it was, from, I mean upon me as well as my mom. So, you know, you can only take so much. So, Mom, you know, I remember we used to go to Amtrak. I remember she would say, "Hey, listen." You know, like I say, seem like once a year. It probably was not that often, but it seemed to be, you know. I'd get up in the morning because my stepdad was a contractor. And in fact he helped build the, when he was here, the Sears Tower [now the Willis Tower]. And then in Seattle [Washington] he helped build the Space Needle. So, that kind of thing. So, anyway, you know, six o'clock in the morning, we're going get up and leave. Because he would go to work early something like that. And we'd take the Amtrak. So we kept going back and forth, and you know, and then my mom said--my mom now, Mazola Robinson--said "Listen," My mom, her birth name was Erma Ragland [ph.], as I said, by birth. You know, my mom was a Ragland. But my grandmother said, you know, at the time, "Listen, if your stepdaddy calls, you know, if your stepdaddy calls and want you to come back, you ain't going back." So he did call and say come back, and my grandmother said, "You ain't going nowhere." And then he said, "Well, hey, you know, if," he told my mom, "if Donzell don't come back, don't you come back." So, my grandmother said, "Well, you ain't coming back, because Don ain't going nowhere." So, you know, it worked itself out. And, you know, when you're young you say why your mom want to give you up so easy like that? So, it wasn't easy for her, I'm sure. But, but, you look back on it like it was a, you know, it was a good decision. So that's part of her love for me. The fact that I'm mature enough to understand, because you know, she did it because it was the right thing to do. And my mom raised me, so it was good. Speaker 1: Was she very young at the time when she had you? Speaker 2: How old was Mom? You know, I think Mom was sixteen. I'm forty-three, you know it could have been, I mean maybe twenty, something like that. I'm forty-three, she died at sixty-five was it? I'm forty now, so I guess really we'd say twenty-two or whatever years old. So, yeah, really too young. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But back then I guess that wasn't "young, young," because when people were having babies, they were-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: You know, so-- Speaker 1: She felt she wasn't, you know, in a position, or your grandmother-- Speaker 2: I think that she was really in an abusive situation that we were dealing with in the house then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, so, it was a good thing though. And eventually, that was the way it happened, though, you know. Speaker 1: Now, had your grandmother moved to, I mean did they move together to Chicago, or-- Speaker 2: What's that, who is that? Speaker 1: Your grandmother and your mother, how did they get to Chicago? Speaker 2: I think they moved, yeah, yeah, together. From Arkansas? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So they, did they-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, I want to go back. Was she fourteen when she had me? Was she fourteen or fifteen? No, I think she came up here by herself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think, and then headed here. No, no, no, Arkansas, they moved together. They moved together, yeah, back here, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, your grandmother--? Speaker 2: My grandmother and my mom moved here together, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did they move when she was little, I mean your mother was small? Speaker 2: She was little. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On 40-something and Indiana, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did they have relatives here already when they moved? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. I think the sisters all packed up and moved basically. So at the end of the day, you had all three of the sisters here, and the brother stayed in Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 127208 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family? What was his--? Speaker 2: I don't know anything about my father's side. I don't know nothing. Speaker 1: Do you, can you give us his name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: What is his name? I don't know it. I mean, I mean I think my mom tells me. I forget his name. What is his name? I don't know his name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It wasn't John. John was my stepdad. But I don't know his name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If I asked my grandmother, she would tell my mom [Mazola Robinson], and she would tell me. But I don't know his name. I mean, it's not a thing that I'm blanking out or anything like that. It's just, you know, you just, you know, you don't seem to remember somebody that wasn't part of your life, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And it's not bitterness. Because as you get older, as you get older, you know, you understand. I mean, you know, you understand but you don't understand. I mean, and at the end of the day, you know, it's, it actually was a plus for me from where I'm at, though. You don't understand when you're young. When you get older, you understand the survival tactics. You understand that it's not about, a question about right or wrong. You obviously know it's wrong to do; you didn't live up to your responsibilities. You know that's wrong, but that's not the way the real world is. You've got to survive. You've got to survive, you've got to survive out here, and you got to do what you got to do. And I think, I do know that he died on the corner of fortieth, on thirty-something. Because he got robbed or something, and something like that. Speaker 1: So, he was killed in a robbery? Speaker 2: He was killed. He was killed, yeah, a robbery or something like that. Yeah, on a corner liquor store, kind of like that. You know, so, I do know that. Speaker 1: Was he operating the store? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Or was he, he was just in--? Speaker 2: No, no. He was hanging out on the corner, hanging out on the corner, yeah. I do know that; I was told. But you know, survival tactics, you know what I mean. You know, and you deal with that. But far as that, it helped me. Because you know, as you get older you understand things, and it helped me have a stronger relationship with my son. Me and my son, we have a strong relationship. So, you can do one or two things when you're in those kind of experiences. You can be like, you know, those particular adults, or you can be the opposite. So, I chose the opposite. That's why I have a foundation now that I mentor twenty-four kids a year. And then my son and I, we're very strong, strong relationship. Because that's who I choose to be--you know, to be around with kids, and that made me understand. It made me--for lack of a better word, it might have been a--who knows, a scar that's positive for me. You know, because I love being around kids. And then my son, we really got a, we got a bond together. Story_ID: 127209 Speaker 1: Okay. What is the first, your childhood memory? Speaker 2: First childhood memory? Bad or good? Speaker 1: Either one, yeah. Speaker 2: First childhood memory. I guess childhood, childhood. You know, I mean think about everybody. Right now, in this spot right now, I think when you say childhood--I think the fact that when my mom [Mazola Robinson], we used to stay in Stateway Gardens [a public housing project located in the Bronzeville neighborhood of the South Side of Chicago, Illinois]. And my mom, who is my grandmother now, she worked at Oscar Mayer for forty years. And she would pick me up from the Stateway Gardens projects. I didn't like it over there. So you know, who would? But Stateway, the projects were projects. It wasn't, it was always killings. But now, it's more exposed. Anyway, the point being that, picking me up after she got off work on the bus, picking me up. And she'd have these marshmallow pies--that was chocolate and vanilla--picking me up, you know, on the bus, and coming home and staying with her for the weekend. That was cool. That's, that's what I remember, this point in time. Boom. What I remember, childhood, that's what I remember. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 127210 Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the sights and smells and sounds of growing up, you know, in your neighborhood? What do you remember? Speaker 2: Sights. I remember playing ball--baseball, basketball. I remember just, you know, basically playing ball. And right in front, I went to Burnside which is now called Burnside [Elementary Scholastic] Academy [Chicago, IL]. I went to Burnside Elementary [School] at [E.] 91st [Place] and [S.] Langley [Avenue], right across the street. You couldn't go nowhere, but I did play ball, so Mama [Mazola Robinson] could see me. That was cool, at Tuley Park playing ball. That was cool, playing ball. That's what I remember from that point. Speaker 1: Did you play Little League baseball? Speaker 2: Definitely. Little League baseball, Pony League. Then I left that and started playing more and more. Speaker 1: That's the Jackie Robinson Little League, I think, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was Jackie Robinson and all that stuff, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Good times. Speaker 1: Mostly baseball, or--? Speaker 2: Early age, baseball. Then I stopped when I was about thirteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then circuit basketball. Then I got real good at that and went to Hales [Franciscan High School in Chicago, Illinois], you know, scholarships and all that kind of thing like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 127211 Speaker 1: All right. Oh, what other thing did you remember growing up? Now, you went to Burnside Elementary School [now Burnside Elementary Scholastic Academy in Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, Burnside Elementary. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember some of your teachers there? Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember a couple. You know, I remember Mr. Ben Dolphy [ph.] who was the principal. I got a white principal. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Ben Dolphy. I don't know the spelling, but it's Ben Dolphy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember Miss Murphy who was the math teacher, and who is now presently the principal. Because I went back there about a year ago to speak to some kids; they asked me to come back. And I remember Mr., well, Miss Cross, I remember Miss Cross. And you know the guy who, do you watch, what's his name? He's a sportscaster. He's a sportscaster and an anchor. He has his own sports show where they count down. They're arguing, Michael Wilbon, Mr. Wilbon. Speaker 1: Wilbon, okay. Speaker 2: Wilbon. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: It's Wilbon. Speaker 1: He's on with Tony Kornheiser. Speaker 2: Right, right. But his mother was my library teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his mother said to me that--and I remember that clearly, it was a good thing. She said that, "You will never amount to anything." Miss Wilbon. And it's a good thing because at that point I'm beginning, you know, to kind of turn things around. The other person I remember who was really, really, as far as me getting into Hales [Franciscan High School], in terms of, say, I mean I was going to Harlan High School at [E.] 95th [Place in Chicago, Illinois]. And he called my mom [his grandmother] and said, "Hey, Mr. and Mr. Robinson," my coach and gym teacher said, "Donnie's got a lot of talent. Don't send him to that public school. You know, send him to," and he knew Mr. Omulus, too; Omulus was the varsity coach there. He said, "Send him there." And I got up and went to Hales at that point. So, those were the teachers I remember right at this point and time. Speaker 1: Okay, All right. What kind of a student were you? Did you like school? Speaker 2: I probably liked school for the wrong reasons. I mean, you know, I got the grades. I mean, you know, you know, I was the kind of guy at that time--you know, getting up to do what you have to do, and you do it. In other words, if I need to pass, I'm gonna pass. You know, and getting a goal to get A's or B's or whatever doing that time, that wasn't a goal of mine. I wanted to get in and pass the test. I wanted to do well, but if it was a C, it was C. If it was a B, it was a B. You know, so I wasn't a dumb kid. I wasn't a, I don't think anybody's dumb; I say I was not an unintelligent kid. I was an intelligent kid, but did I want to put my, was my aspirations or focus on trying to get good grades? No, but get a grade. If that grade happened to be an A or a B, then so be it. Speaker 1: Now, did you see yourself using the school to get a career or something at some point, or did you see it-- Speaker 2: In grammar school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. What I saw--I mean, like I say, looking back on it, I probably was a good student compared to the people that were going there. You know, because obviously I got into Hales, which was a private school. So I had the grades and testing to get in there, and obviously got in there. I also got into Dunbar [Vocational High School], which you had to take tests and exams at that time. So, I had the grades to get in there. But as far as a career thing--you know, the problem with what we have in today's society to, and what we have even in yesteryear is that you don't have the mentors out there so that you can see what you could be. What you have is police officers, and that's not negative or positive. But you have police officers, you have fire people, you know, and you have gangbangers. You have, you'll always have gangbangers. So, you're only left with so many options that you visualize. So to have a career, a career in what? I didn't know anything about, this is in grammar school now. I don't know anything about being a lawyer, being a doctor. You hear those terms, but you don't, you don't have a vision how to get there, you know. I mean, my mom, you know, she didn't have that kind of education where you know, she could talk about being a doctor or a lawyer. She worked for Oscar Mayer from four o'clock to, like, what? She'd leave home at four o'clock in the morning, from six to maybe about four in the evening or whatever in that cool, in this cool box with the meat, the whole thing. Yeah, that was, I wasn't thinking about that at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 127212 Speaker 1: All right. So, were you home a lot by yourself? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. My, I mean I was home by myself, but I had a great, I had a great home. My mom [Mazola Robinson] was cool, me and her one on one, it was cool. I had a babysitter, the neighbors. When she, early on, she would go, leave in the morning, I would get up in the morning, hated that, go to Miss Miller, the neighbor. Miss Miller would take care of me, you know, just like Mom did--you know, whip my butt, feed me, whatever. I'd go to school, got to be back over there to Miss Miller. When school was out, I'd go over to Miss Miller's house. I couldn't go outside. As I got older, like about eighth grade, you know, then Mom would get to work, "Hey, get up now. You know, you get to school. I'm going to call you, and you better be in this house at two o'clock." That kind of thing. So, yeah, so you know, yeah, a lot of, I was by myself but not myself. I was never left alone to being a security issue. Speaker 1: But you always had people to turn to-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, always. Speaker 1: --in the neighborhood. Speaker 2: Rodney, Rodney was a police officer. Rodney and Ronald Crinkler [ph.], they were the older guys in my life, you know, seventeen, eighteen, that kind of thing. They were like my big brothers, you know. And they were to the left of me, and Miss Miller was to the right of me, you know. So, you had Miss Dawson, a next door neighbor. You know, my best friend, Joey, his grandmother was Miss Dawson next door. So, we had, yeah, I had those kind of neighbors, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I had also Miss Hardy down the street, who ran the store, you know, and her daughter Wiggy [ph.], you know. So, yeah, you know, definitely, I call that support in terms of-- Speaker 1: You had a good neighborhood? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, a good neighborhood at that time, yeah, no doubt. Story_ID: 127213 Speaker 1: Now, you were playing baseball in grade school mostly, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Little League baseball? Speaker 2: Yeah, in grade school playing, and basketball, too. I mean baseball, a lot of baseball. But I was playing both up until about seventh grade, and I stopped playing baseball and I picked more basketball up. I started basketball when I was in probably about fifth grade. That's when I started getting good at it, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, what, what turned you towards basketball more? Was it just that it was more available? Speaker 2: In terms of basketball it probably was the, inside, visualizing, you know, "Dr. J" [Julius Erving], like any other kid. And sometimes it hurts, you know, thank God that I was able to get strong and do some other things. But it hurts kids a lot; you know, you visualize their dream too much, too long. When I was growing up, Dr. J, that was my man. Earl "The Pearl" [Earl Monroe], that was my man, you know. And you know, Earl "The Pearl" was my man. And you know, those kinds of things, Dr. J and those kind of things. You would hear about the ABA [American Basketball Association], and not the NBA [National Basketball Association], when I was older. But you know, coming up you heard about them, and those kinds of things like that. So, you visualized those kinds of things like that. [Nate] "Tiny" Archibald, yeah, you know. So, you want to play ball. You say, "Man, this is great." Whereas baseball is a slow, it's a slower game. But that was the first thing you were introduced to. It was a great game, you know. And as time moved on, you started saying, well, you want people to see you, and it's too hot. And you want the girls to come out and see you, so you begin to change, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what other kind of activities were you involved in when you were little? Speaker 2: That's all, baseball. Speaker 1: Mainly sports. Speaker 2: Sports, that's it. I didn't gangbang. I mean, my mom would kill me. I was more, I used to walk to the park, Tuley Park, and they would say, "You're drafted." That was back then when you just get drafted, you know. And, you know, "Hey, you drafted, come here." You know, they put a gun to your head or a gun to your back or whatever, kind of like that. But they would say, "Man, that's Donnie, he play ball." You know, that's what saved me: "You know, he play ball, man." You know, but, you know, I wouldn't join a gang anyway. My mom [Mazola Robinson] would kill me. I was more afraid. That's why I got this hickey on my head now. You know, my mom would say, "Hey, you know, you better be in this house." Speaker 1: What happened? What's the story on that? Speaker 2: Oh, man, I didn't come in. "I'm getting older, I ain't coming in. I'm coming in when I want to come in when I want to come in." So, I came in one time when I wanted to come in, iron cord on the other end. Whack! Sometimes like, it be eight o'clock. So I used to be, we used to play, it's a playground across the street. And the courts were behind, were behind the school, so you couldn't see. But it was to the point where she used to call me, and everybody's laughing. "Get home, your mom is calling you, you gotta get home." You know, I gotta get home. But it was to the point, it was at 7:45 and I would hear her calling me and she wouldn't be calling me, you know. But I had to get home, you know. So, it was like an echo. I was like I got to get home, man, you know. So, you know, it was, yeah, I remember that. I'll never forget that, vividly. Yeah, you know, "Ain't nobody calling you." "I got to go, man." Again, I said, "I got to go." You know, because I knew--because I was, she was mean, man. She was mean, man. She was mean, but she was mean in a good way. She wasn't mean in a bad way. It was like when you cross that line, you know. You know, then that whole church thing, man. Whew! Man! So Sunday school, I got to do that. Speaker 1: Yeah, well what church did you go to? Speaker 2: Saint Stephen's Baptist Church on 92nd. I had to do that. And the choir thing, I had to do that. I had to do that, man, you know. I wasn't missing that, you know, because that was a good thing. You know, looking back I didn't dig that. But I remember Sunday was a good day for me. Sunday was a good day, because I would go to church and come back, and you had this, so I'm a vegetarian now. But that steak and rice, and watching Charlie Chan, watching Sherlock Holmes. And y'all laughing, you don't know what I'm talking about. But that, that was a good day; double feature, that was a good day. That was a good day. Yeah, I would go out on Friday nights and come home. I used to watch "Halloween," I used to watch "Creature Features." You know, I had my own little room. Those were good days, you know. I mean I had a good, a single family, you know, not a lot of issues there. I mean, you know, I mean I was definitely, I didn't have the kind of silver spoon a lot of people had out there. The kids I knew, grew up with, like the Gardners and those kinds of people who had kids in my area, you know, Leonard Johnson. I know all of those cats. Now, I know them, but I didn't have the silver spoons they had. [HM] John Rogers, I know all these guys. And, but what I'm saying is I had a good, I had a good upbringing, though. Story_ID: 125456 Speaker 1: You started off, you were going to go to Harlan [Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to complete-- Speaker 2: Harlan, and I went to Mendel [Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois]. In fact I went, it was crazy. I went to, that's why I can kind of understand how these players move--moving is not necessarily a good thing--move from school to school. But I went to Harlan, got out of there, and I went to Mendel. The coach that recruited me there, he left there and went to Addison Trail [High School]. So, I got out of there and then went to, then went to, went to Hales [Franciscan High School, Chicago, Illinois], yeah. But at first I was going to go to Dunbar [Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] because Dunbar had Price there, and they had Lonnie Lester. Lonnie, what's his name, Lester? Speaker 1: Ronnie Lester? Speaker 2: Ronnie Lester. Ronnie was there, and I was going, coming in. And, you know, but Price, I got there and he started hitting me with that paddle in the summertime. Because like what kids do, what you do, before you get on a team they already know who your teammates are because you play in the summer with them. So I was playing in the summer with Dunbar. And as I said, that paddle thing, whoa. But Umber did the same thing, too. Speaker 1: The coach had a paddle? Speaker 2: Yeah, a paddle. You know, you miss lay-ups, you know, boom! It wasn't uncommon. Lightfoot did it too. Not Lightfoot, but Umber did it too. You know, so, so, you know, it was not a new world, like "Oh, no." But, but at the end of the day, you know, I end up going to Hales. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I chose Hales because Hales had won--that was a big thing--they had just won City. They had just won city [championships], you know, and that was a good thing. They beat Loyola [Academy in Wilmette, Illinois] for the city championship. Back then, Catholics were not going downstate; it wasn't set up the way its set up now. Speaker 1: Okay, so they won like the City Catholic League championship? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Which was a big thing in the City Catholic thing. Because then you wind up playing, wind up playing the state champion as well. Hirsch [Metropolitan High School in Chicago, IL] had won state champion that year. And this was, it's crazy, you know. Hales, they won in '73' [1973]. Hales was, no, they won in '73 [1973] or '74 [1974]. And Hales was going to play--no, what happened was that in '73 [1973] Hirsch won, and Hales played Hirsch and beat Hirsch. That's when they stopped, that's when they started really kind of sending everybody down because how can you be a state champion and then come back and play for the city championship. And in the Catholic League, Hales beat Hirsch--Ricky Green and Robinson and those guys back then. So, anyway that, anyway that inspired me to go to Hales because they were winning championships. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. What position did you play? Speaker 2: I was, at the time, point guard/two guard, shooting guard. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, so, well, how did you like Hales? Speaker 2: Oh, man, Hales. Man, that's why I'm on the board now. Hales was, that was the second best, (unclear) you know, strong African-American school, college preparatory. You know, it was Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and then at the time I didn't understand or know Morehouse, but I understand now it was the Morehouse of that time, and still is today. It was a great experience in brotherhood. Phenomenal. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 125457 Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers or coaches that stand out? Speaker 2: Yeah, Coach. Called him Mr. Lewis--called him Bolo. Bolo. 1971. Sam Puckett and all those cats. Great, great team--won the champion for all the time he played. Went to Creighton [University in Omaha, Nebraska], wound up playing for Creighton. Puckett went to [University of] Notre Dame [in Indiana], but he, that whole school thing. Puckett was really, yeah, he got out of there. Speaker 1: Is that the Puckett-- Speaker 2: Sam Puckett? Speaker 1: Kirby Puckett's nephew? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A little guy? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I know him. Speaker 2: Yeah, Sam Puckett. Speaker 1: He's a, he's a good ballplayer. Speaker 2: He's the baddest thing out there. Talking about a ballplayer, he's the baddest thing out there. You talking about [Nate] "Tiny" Archibald, Sam Puckett. Yeah, I mean Sam used to kill, Sam used to kill. I saw him one time when I was real little, because he used to, Lloyd Walt, I know Lloyd real well. Lloyd used to tell me stories. I see Lloyd all the time, because Lloyd lives down the street from a friend of mine, well, a friend of mine when I was a little kid. But I call him my friend, he was Cornell. Cornell played for Mount Carmel [High School in Chicago, Illinois] with Lloyd. And Cornell went to Creighton and, of course, Lloyd went to Marquette [University] with Bo Ellis [ph.]. But before, Mount Carmel was playing Hales [Franciscan High School] and they were going at it. And Puckett was killing them--he was killing us, you know. And Lloyd went and played pro, went and played pro ball. So I'm saying, you know, those kinds of things excited me about Hales. But Al Lewis played with Puckett, and they won a lot. So, Al was my coach, and you talking about tough! Man, he'd fire you up in a minute, you know. Fire you up in a minute, you know. Bam, fire you up in a minute. But there was that serious bond; it was great. It was great, you know. And I remember Mr. Brown was the music teacher. And Father Field is still there now. We call him "Jughead," you know, relations with the priest, Jughead, and he was our music teacher. And those are some I remember. Mr. Naughton, Mr. Naughton used to say, you know, think of how a penguin looks, the penguin. He used to walk side to side. And he said, "Starks, how's your grades?" I said, "It's alright, Mr. Naughton." He said, "You know what? Go get them grades if you going to be with me." Then he started singing this song, "In the Good Ol' Summertime." He was talking about summer school. So, you know, those kinds of things like that. Yeah, he'd say, "How's your grades?" "They alright." "Well, if you don't get them," Then he'd start singing. He wouldn't say you were going to miss summer, he'd just sing it, "Oh, the good ol' summer school," you know. So, it was kind of funny, yes. So, so, those of things you remember, yeah. Yeah, Father Eugene. Father Eugene would have a pin, and one thing about Hales is consistent "sigging" [teasing]. They'd sig all day long, "Your Mama this," and "Your Mama that," you know. You'd say "Father Field, you got a big ol' head." He'd say, "Yo Mama like it." (Laughter). And he's a preacher. It was just crazy with Father Field. Father Field had this, (laughter) he had a pin in his arm, and I guess, he had a strong arm. He had a pin in there. And if you started messing with Father Field, "whack!" You know, just looking back, back then like, man, this cat is, back then, but you know, they're preparing you to be a man now, preparing you to be a man. But it was a bond there. I mean you wouldn't go home and say "Hey, Father Field hit me." You know, or, and the priests were pretty good; they were pretty good, pretty good. I enjoyed, Hales was the best thing, the second best thing that happened to me, without a doubt, without a doubt. I wouldn't trade it for--I'm on the board now--I wouldn't trade it for the world. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Talking about the games we used to play. Man, I used to go back, man, man, man. The games, boy, we'd have our little section. I'm playing; I mean I was one of the very few guys that played, freshmen that played varsity. So, I had four years' experience. I mean, you talking about the girls, oh, man. The sock hops, and I mean it was going, it was really, it was an exciting time, yeah. Mount Carmel and Mendel [Catholic High School] would play, and Mendel would play, Mendel. We played King High School, that's when King was tough. We used to play King in the Public City and Catholic thing. Because they always thought we were punks or sissies, whatever you want to call it, because we're Catholic. And then you got King and DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. But see, what they failed to realize at that time, you know, Hales was recruiting guys from the inner-city, I mean from the urban area. They were from DuSable or they were from Dunbar. They were from that area; they just happened to go to Hales. We had, I remember, we had this big fight at Mount Carmel. I don't know if you been in Mount Carmel's gym, but Mount Carmel has a gym, a very small gym, and it has a track around it. We got to running up there and fighting up there, and they started spitting on us. This is when they had a big mix of Mount Carmel. They started spitting and then they started fighting, just, it was just a big, it was just interesting. A bad scene, but good time, you know. I remember those kinds of things like that. But four years, I got out of there though. Four years I got out of there. I was an honor student. And that's, Hales taught me a lot. But Hales, Hales taught me a lot. But I became an honor student probably, probably because of, probably more because of my wife, probably more because of my wife. And I'd been knowing [HM] Alisa [Starks] since we were in the eighth grade. Story_ID: 125458 Speaker 1: Okay, so you met, now how did you meet? How did you meet? Speaker 2: I'm not getting off track am I? Speaker 1: Pardon? Speaker 2: I'm not getting off track, am I? Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Tell me if I'm getting off track. Speaker 1: No, this is in sequence. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Because you're at Hales [Franciscan High School, Chicago, Illinois] now? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And you say you met her [HM Alisa Starks] in eighth grade? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Now, when you were in eighth grade you were still at-- Speaker 2: I was at Burnside [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]]. Speaker 1: Burnside, right, okay. Speaker 2: The funny thing about it, you know, Burnside, and she went to St. Philip of Neri [School]. But anyway I met her. I'll go back. I met her, a friend of mine named Tamara, Tammie owns right now, Tammie owns all these, all these, she owns several kindergarten schools. So, Tammie went to Burnside with me--good friend. I mean it was kind of, it was kind of strange, too, because it wasn't, Tammie was a nice looking girl, nice looking girl. And, and it wasn't like, you know, we were trying to be boyfriend and girlfriend; we were just really good friends. She'd come braid my hair, the whole thing, and just hang out--you know, the kind of thing like that. And to this day we're really cool. And she said, "I got a friend for you"--because Tammie went to [Saint Thomas] Aquinas [Grammar School]. And then, you know, Alisa and the whole thing. And then you know, and that was the eighth, we do say eighth grade. We met in eighth grade because she met Tammie somewhere, but then they both happened to go to Aquinas. I mean, then we really started dating really the sophomore year, going to the eighth grade. So, but me and her, her family as you well know, from Tire World, Mr. King [Levert Paul King, Jr.]. He was a different kind of brother, you know, he was a, man, good brother. And he was the first adult male who I really respected. I respect guys like, "Oh, that guy's cool," "That guy can play ball," or "That guy, you know, he got a lot of girls." But I said, adult male, I respect, because the whole African thing, the whole knowledge thing, DePaul [University]--he was in grad school. The whole thing was, you know, and you know, her mom was in, you know, the grad thing, teaching, education thing, you know. That was a different world for me, because I hadn't met anybody like that in terms of the family and education. Then I met his daughters, I mean, you know, I mean, I mean just ultra-smart. I mean just, valedictorian, I mean you know what I mean. And I'm like okay, she's smart as a whistle. So I'm like, you know, I'm going to the house. And I'm going to the house and, you know, I'm going to the house and we trying to--you know, get out and do what we got to do. But her mom [Mary Ann Davis] says, "Listen"--this is a different concept for me--"Listen, you can't go to the drive-in, but you can stay here." So, I would spend the night over there. I'm like, okay. Okay, I'm saying these are highly educated people. And I'm like, "Spend the night over." I said, "That ain't bad." I'd eat all the food up and everything. So it was a different kind of concept. But when I look back, I understood why she was doing something like that. "I don't know what you going to out there, but I know what you going to do in here," Miss Davis said. And I mean, I mean, I mean, just, man, I love her to death. I love her to death to this day. And she said "Listen," she called me up, and she said, "I want you to call Don up, and we're going to take a trip down, you've been accepted to Northwestern Illinois University. And won't you, maybe you and Greg can take a ride down there." "Okay, Greg, he can go with us." We went down to Northwestern. I mean, and this is why I do what I do in terms of my later life now. Because I never seen anything like it in my life. I never seen anything like it in my life in terms of, I grew up at 91st and King Drive, the whole thing. And I see these homes and churches. I drive down Lake Shore Drive, first time ever, down Sheridan Road past Loyola [University Chicago]; I'll never forget it. And you go into this little area, you pass into the area and you got these big old houses. I'm like, "What is that? That's a house?" And that was the first time in my life I said, "You know, there's something outside the community." You know, and them houses and that trip--that trip probably saved my life because it exposed me to some things I really wanted. I want that big house. How do I get that big house? Go to school. Okay, and go to school? And my whole thing is that I go to school, okay. And then, you know, the family thing was great and everything. And it was the fact that, you know, I would come in--and this is my junior or senior year--and I'd say, "Hey, listen, on my report card I got a C, ha, ha. I can play ball, I'm cool." I got a B here and a C there; that was probably my junior year. And their response was like--they were like, a look of stupidity. Different area; different concept for me. I think I'm doing something, C and B. They slamming down straight A's. Deborah and her sister Ann, straight As. I'm like, she was not happy with C, because she's like, in her family I was a F. But I was cool with it. It turned me around. I said, "Okay, I'm getting it." So, a different exposure. So, so, unlike grammar school that I was telling you about where I didn't get that push or desire to go get it, I started turning the corner. I said, "Okay, I want to get A's. I want to get B's. I want to turn B's into A's." I started getting it. And eventually at Hales [Franciscan High School in Chicago, IL] I did graduate as an honor student, you know, my junior and senior year, because of that. You know, so that was, that was a rude awakening for me. Story_ID: 125459 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now, when you were a senior at Hales [Franciscan High School in Chicago, IL], had you, had you thought about what you wanted to do as a career? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, somewhat, somewhat. I knew I wanted it to be business, because I had took some business classes at Hales. I knew I wanted it to be business. I didn't know what business I wanted to do. I wanted to do business, but I didn't know what business it was. I knew it was something about making money. I wanted to make money, so I knew that, you know. And I wanted to do business. And I didn't know until--I didn't know what I really wanted to do until about sophomore year and, or after my freshman year, maybe freshman, sophomore year, in college. Probably at the end of my freshman year. Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to college? Speaker 2: I went to Western University, Western Illinois University. Speaker 1: Western Illinois. Speaker 2: I went to-- Speaker 1: In Macomb? Speaker 2: Yeah, Macomb, Western Illinois University. I played ball and the whole thing. I couldn't get a scholarship and all that kind of thing, so I wound up going to Western. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So, did you play ball there at Western? Speaker 2: I went down there, was on the team to play ball. I was emotionally spoiled, "Oh, I ain't startin'? I ain't playin'." You know, idiot kind of thing. Speaker 1: That's what you said? You said-- Speaker 2: No, I ain't playing. Speaker 1: --if you don't start, you're not-- Speaker 2: No, I ain't playing. If I ain't starting, I ain't playing. I ain't going to be playing, right. You know, at the end of the day--you know, for the most part I'm being catered to--I mean, guys picking me up. I'm playing ball on my scholarship at Hales. I'm, I can do this; I can do that. So you go down there, you know, and you don't, you know, it didn't happen at that moment, I'm saying. But over the course of the year, that first year or something like that, or during that year, like you just, hey, you know you want to play. And you know, you feel you're better than some of the guys out there. So, you just don't do it. So, I quit playing. Because--and that was an excuse--but the real reason was I wasn't interested anymore because if I did, I would have kept up--I wasn't interested in playing ball anymore. Because back then you had contracts, but not major contracts like that. You know, you had guys come out and say I'm going to make five thousand dollars a year. You know, like Magic [Johnson]'s first contract, and Isaiah [Thomas] was five hundred thousand dollars a year. Then you got the million dollars. But guys weren't coming out making five million and ten million a year. So I'm saying that exposure, that knowledge for me was not a big thing for me. As I got more into the business world, I felt I could make it in the business world. I started realizing that there was another option out there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, as you got-- Speaker 2: As I was saying, right. That's why, so it probably happened my eighth grade to freshman year, I realized that there was another option out there for me. Speaker 1: And then when you, by time you got to college, then you started really-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --going to school and-- Speaker 2: Growing up. Speaker 1: --knowing that stuff is more real. Speaker 2: Exactly, right. Well, the biggest turnoff for me was, an additional turnoff, for me was when I went to Alisa's [HM Alisa Starks] cousin, Bernard, Bernard Broussard. He was an investment banker and stockbroker for Dean Witter. So one summer, maybe Christmas or whatever, he invited me up. There was a party at the Playboy [Club]. He lived in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Playboy, that's when the Playboy was going strong in Wisconsin, Racine, or wherever it was [Lake Geneva, Wisconsin]. And I saw all these brokers and bankers, white tee-shirts and everything. And the killer thing about it, though, there was more reefer smoking and cocaine going on, and I didn't know what it was. I knew the dangers of it, I'm saying. But it was, it was just, it was a tremendous party. That day, that's what I wanted to be. I wanted to be an investment banker. So, I knew I wanted it to be business. But that day 'cause of that party, and the kind of money things going on, and the kind of sophistication going on, and the house he had, the whole thing, "I'm going to be an investment banker." And that's what helped turn me around to focus on business. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 125460 Speaker 1: Now were there, were there any teachers at Western Illinois University [Macomb, Illinois] that you remember now who were particularly helpful to you? Speaker 2: No, except for one, and he wasn't my teacher, but he was definitely a strong force: Dr. Matavaha [ph.]. (Unclear) Dr. Matavaha, the whole thing, you know. He made you realize where you come from, you know, that whole thing, keep you conscious. Speaker 1: And David Patterson, he's also known as, right? Speaker 2: (Laughter). David Patterson [ph.], no question. That's right, I figured you knew when you laughed. Dr. Matavaha, David Patterson. Yes sir, that's him. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He had a strong business background with IBM-- Speaker 2: Strong business background. Speaker 1: --at one time. Speaker 2: People didn't realize that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Strong, very smart. Speaker 1: Very interesting man. Speaker 2: Very interesting man, yeah. Yeah, David Patterson, yep. Speaker 1: So he helped, he was sort of a mentor to you? Speaker 2: Yeah, sort of a mentor indirectly. We wasn't close close but we had conversations that made me, obviously stuck in my mind, got me to where I am to this day. Yeah, I mean, but back in--you know, back in those days you really didn't have, like I say, you didn't have a lot of strong--unless it's your parents--you didn't have a lot of strong, at least in my area, you didn't have a lot of strong African-American mentors. You know, who say "I'm a lawyer, how you doing?" You know, "I'm an entrepreneur, how you doing?" The way the system is designed for, is the fact that you just get to go do a nine-to-five, pay taxes, and 65, then die. That's the way the system is designed. But as I got older my thoughts have changed, and I know it's more to it than just that. That's not a bad deal. I'm saying that's, for me it's more to it than that, I understand. And I'm not saying that's a bad deal if someone does that. But I mean for me I understand a different deal. Speaker 1: Right. And he was one who would say--he was critical of the education-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was. Speaker 1: --that most black youth were getting. Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying, very critical. Speaker 1: Being trained to do a job-- Speaker 2: Exactly, right. Speaker 1: --or work for somebody-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --instead of being trained to start your own business. Speaker 2: Exactly right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Exactly right, he was the first one. I remember that clearly. Funny thing, I got a friend named, I guess we're good friends now, Jim Davis. Jim Davis' father, his father was an entrepreneur. He used to sell to different gas stations. He was an entrepreneur, the point being, is that they used to laugh at Jim. Jim might get out of school and Jim would say, "I'm going to be an entrepreneur. Man, I have no thoughts about working for anybody." I'm laughing at him, "Jim, man, come on, man, you know. You're an entrepreneur? What you talking about?" I mean he had gotten it; Jimmy got it. I got it late. He got it. That was the concept of being an entrepreneur. So I'm saying, you know, yeah, so you live and learn. But, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Dr. Matavaha was the first one that put that in my mind, yeah. Story_ID: 125461 Speaker 1: Okay. So, your grades kept going up, I guess? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They didn't? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Man, I got, got down in school and, you know, my grades would have kept going up if I had made a different decision. Otherwise, I graduated with Lerone Bennett, Lerone Bennett III. I know Junior real well, I mean, Ebony and Jet, you know. I mean it's, talking about a mentor, man. But his brother--his son--went to school with me, graduated with me. So when he graduated, he said "Don, listen. If you want to go down to Morehouse [College], my father is taking me down to Morehouse." And I hadn't been down there to Atlanta. I had never been out of Chicago. If I did that, I would have went to Morehouse, from what I know about Morehouse now. And I remember visions; I've been down there often now. But so, then I would have saw what needs to be done. At Western [Illinois University, Macomb, Illinois], I was still just, I mean I didn't have it all together. Because I went there, you know, and Hales [Franciscan High School in Chicago, Illinois] was great for me when I went there, you know, just playing and believing--not really believing in myself--you know, trying to cheat on the exams and the whole thing, trying to get by. So I went back, you know, doing that kind of thing. But like I said, my sophomore year, in between my freshman and sophomore year, then my grades started going up. I got on probation, one, and I had to get off. My mom said, "Well, you're going to be here, there, or you're going to be back here working." You know, so I didn't want to, I wasn't ready to work. So, right between that freshman and sophomore year, I started picking up. Then I started to get going, in my core classes and everything. You know, I started doing real well because I mean, you know, I just started doing, I was going to class, but I wasn't studying, you know. I got caught up, you know--independent, being by yourself, ain't got to do anything. You know, going to school is cool, the whole thing like that. Yeah, so you know. But the sophomore year I started, the second semester of my sophomore year, I started picking it up. And then by time my junior and senior year all my core classes were A's and B's, which was finance, economics--you know, straight A's and all that stuff like that. I'm beginning to--you know, you get mature and you're ready to get out. You know, so yeah, that's what happened. Speaker 1: What was your plan when you were on the verge of graduation? Did you have job offers, or were you going to go to graduate school? Speaker 2: I wanted to, I wasn't thinking about graduate school then. My plan was to go out and get a job, a nine-to-five, and make some money. Get me a 280-Z, get me whatever, get me a BMW. Because at that time the BMW, they just came really out, hot. They were out, but they were foreign. But now they started Americanizing them, they're hot, BMW. You know, get a 280-Z and be a banker. So, you know, I came out my first year, Metropolitan Life, selling insurance. Speaker 1: About what year was that, I'm sorry? What year is that when you got out of college? Speaker 2: I got out of college in '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighty-two, [1982], '83 [1983], '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: And then, you know, worked a couple years with MetLife then went to Highland Community Bank. I worked for George Brokemond [ph.] over there for about a good year. And then, you know, I just, I said, "This ain't enough. This ain't really enough." And the fact is that my wife [HM Alisa Starks] was in grad [graduate] school at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. So, that really, at that time we weren't married. She was in grad school. So I said, "You know, let me do this, do this grad school thing." So I wind up going to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, Illinois], you know. And the funny thing about it, one thing about it, the grad school thing was very interesting. Because--and I tell people what you do, there's a cause and effect to everything you do. What you do early on can affect what you're going to do later on. And the fact that I played around, my grades weren't what they were supposed to be, should have been. I thought, until then I really didn't focus on that until I got in grad school. But fortunately, though, I was able to get in IIT. Because IIT let me take some pre-exams, if you will, pre-courses. And the goal is if you pass the exams, you can get in. And they were finance classes. And obviously, I knew I could do it. I did it, and got A's. And I got into the program in the Graduate School of Business and became an honor student. Now, I'm about to mess it up. I was an honor student going out of there, you know, like a four-something or whatever, you know. So I was pretty cool then. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 125462 Speaker 1: All right. Now what did you do next? Speaker 2: Well, I got my M.B.A. [degree]. I got hired right out of school because, in that particular era in Chicago [Illinois], banking systems and all of that. So, I wanted to be an investment banker. So, I got hired by the Bank of Montreal. And the Bank of Montreal was kind of looking for African-Americans, you know, to come in there and try--you know, that quota thing at the time, that quota thing. And I did that, and I was pretty good at what I did and then I got promoted. And it was crazy. I got promoted, but it was like, you know, they were trying to, looking for people to go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to run the office. So, it was like, you know, it was a bad situation for me up there, too. I was the only African-American up there. I mean, for three years up there. And so I'm up there, and I'll never forget, Harold [Washington] passed away. And the guys was laughing. Speaker 1: This is 1987. Speaker 2: Yeah, '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: --when the Mayor-- Speaker 2: Right, '87' [1987]. Speaker 1: --when Mayor Washington died. Speaker 2: Right. Because I had got the job in '87 [1987], right. Because I graduated in '87 [1987] and I got the job in '87 [1987], right. And laughing, I'll never forget that, you know. And then, you know, Dave Matthew, my boss, and when I saw the report, they were talking about somebody going to L.A. to run the office, and here's the qualifications. They wanted some energetic guy, but they never really interviewed me for the job. And one day I decided, I said, "What's up? You know, I mean I'm interested in going to L.A., going and interviewing for the job." And they interviewed me for the job, and then they basically said they had these qualifications. I said, "Well, what are they?" He said, "You know, you have to have an MBA." I said, "I got that." "You got to have, you know, a couple years' experience." "I got that." "You got to have a certain type of range in terms of your training." "I got that." And I said, "Well, how come Mark and Jim, how come they got a chance to interview?" "Well, Jim is getting his M.B.A. and Mark just got accepted into Kellogg [School of Management, Evanston, Illinois]." I said, "Well." I said, "The first criteria, they're not meeting them. What are we talking about here?" That kind of thing. So, eventually, you know, I guess word got around. But I didn't really, I really didn't care one way or the other, really, because I still was working, you know, at that time. And I wind up getting to go out to L.A. (unclear). And looking back on the whole scenario, you know, as you get older, but as Alisa says, I shocked the world. Next thing I know I had, because Bank of Montreal was out of Toronto, okay, the corporate office. And they really would come into the station, it would be more global. They got, they had just bought Harris Bank. They wanted to come to L.A. and do something like that. And I went there, I mean to start everything up, you know, in terms of, my goal was to go out there and bring new accounts in, and do a trading race--equities, stocks, bonds, the whole thing like that--and trade. I traded two-year and five-year bonds, something like that. And the next thing I know, for the year period, I had Security Pacific, I had Sanwa Bank, I had First Interstate--I had all the major banks, a new account for them. And you know, they was, they was stunned by that. So two years went by--two or three years went by and I left there and went to [Morgan Stanley] Dean Witter [& Co.]. And you know, and then I did that thing there for about maybe about ten years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was out of the grad school and into the workforce. Story_ID: 125463 Speaker 1: All right. Now, when did, now, you were in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for-- Speaker 2: About three years. Speaker 1: About three years, all right. And now, when did you start, was it in L.A. that you started thinking about the movie idea? Speaker 2: The movies, the movies-- Speaker 1: The movie theaters? Speaker 2: Yeah, the movies, the movies. You know, we thought about it, you know. [HM] Alisa [Starks] was at Burrell [Communications]. She came down and stayed with me, you know. Obviously, we were married then. And she had, I guess we saw a theater called the Baldwin Theater, which is a one-screen theater, three-screen theater, in Los Angeles, California on Crenshaw Boulevard. And we were amazed by how, just amazed by how the money, the kind of money it was generating for a three-screen theater. And, and that pretty much, probably the first movie we saw there when we were there was "Boys in the Hood." And, you know, it was an interesting market. So, okay. So, we had some meetings with Magic Johnson and some representatives of Prince and all that, to try to buy this particular building and its theater. Then, you know, things didn't work out, right. At that same time, Alisa and I decided let's move back to Chicago [Chicago]. Because you know, have a kid, you know, whatever, we want to have it in Chicago. I didn't have it in L.A. just, because the support wasn't there. We got there and then she, then she went back to Burrell. I got another investment banking job. And in 1991, '92 [1992], we started thinking about this concept. And it really was like, it really was her idea. Story_ID: 127214 Speaker 1: You asked me before about how this started? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, let's start there. Speaker 1: Okay, and then we'll get to that, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, I think, I think it was actually Alisa's [HM Alisa Starks] idea, my wife. And she worked for Burrell [Communications], man, fourteen plus years at Burrell. What, the McDonald account, Martell's her thing, Martell, and all of that. Boy, it was so much Martell, boy, that cognac. But it was her idea, and we both made a decision in it. Because she had this idea about the inner-city, you know, looking in terms of okay, are there inner-city theaters across the country? Where are they at in an urban area? In fact, the matter is there really were none other than the Baldwin Theater [in Los Angeles, California], you know. And then after that we made a conscious decision that, hey, you know, to--a conscious decision to say okay, what does, what does one want to--how does one want to go after this particular dream? And we knew that both of us could not stop working. So, because her situation with Burrell was so great, we decided for me to stop working in 1992. So, in February of 1992 we started a company called Inner-City Entertainment. And from there, I began to use my investment banking skills in raising money. And that's how it kind of started. We were raising money and it was, it was, it was, it was what I call--it was somewhat, for lack of a better word, it was sweet, but bittersweet to some degree. Because the concept again, being naive, was that everything was going to be black, black, black, black. I was going to have an African-American bank, African-American this and that and the other, first to ever to that. And so I went to, man, I went to--at the time it was not Shore Bank, but it was-- Speaker 2: Independence Bank. Speaker 1: Encore Bank, Independent, but Encore Bank, and Drexel, and Alvin Boutte and all them cats. I went to Seaway, they all said no. They all said, no, you know. I said, okay. And then finally, you know, my relationships I had over the past, I finally hooked up with GE [General Electric] Capital [Corporation] out of Stamford, Connecticut, where I'm doing the deal. You know, I'm basically doing a $40-million deal, I'm still framing out a deal, you know. And after that, then all the banks want to come say, "Well, why didn't you come after us? Why you do that?" It was crazy. And then they wanted to put ATMs in the lobby and all that stuff. I said, "What are you talking about?" So, we had, man, we had some bad situations over there at Chatham, particularly at Chatham. If I hadn't done what I had done, I didn't think it would be pulled off. But, but that's how it got done, a $40 million deal with GE. And then a twin-venture with Cineplex Odeon out of Toronto. And then we did the deal and we joined with them because we didn't have the expertise at that time to know how to do the movies, you know. People thought it was, it wasn't about getting the movies; it's how you operate them. Because like anything else in life, movies are a commodity. You can buy them if you have the money. So, the trick was not how to get the movies. The trick was how to sell Hollywood on giving you the movies to do the deal. Otherwise, the trick wasn't like--okay, you know you got to pay for the movies. That's, you know, but the trick was, okay, convincing them to say, "Okay, we want to support you and get distributors to you." That was just where Cineplex came in, to say "Okay." Not only were they going to do that, we were going to be involved with them. I had to go to Hollywood, Alisa and I had to go to Hollywood to help sell that these areas could support movies. We just don't like "bang 'um up, shoot 'um up," we like all the crossover stuff. We had to sell that. They didn't want Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois] at all because Lawndale was a neighborhood, a West Side neighborhood. But we sold that. So that, we first had to convince Cineplex Odeon that this was something that had to be done this way. I mean, and that issue didn't mean it wasn't going to go--the issue was that these are the kind of movies we need to see to be successful. And I'm in Hollywood, you know, convincing them. So, there were a lot of conversations, and then of course GE. So you know, we're dealing with three parties--Hollywood which had the distribution houses--Paramount, Disney, Buena Vista. And it was Cineplex who was involved to get them, "Hey, you got to go to Toronto. You don't want to stay in this neighborhood. This is what we need to do." And it was GE saying, "Hey, we got all this wrapped up, let's do this." So, it was, it was--so my skill set, I was able to pull that off 'cause But you know, I'm a salesman. And at the end of the day, I'm an investment banker and a salesman. So, I went from the Bank of Montreal to convince Wells Fargo, first in the state, and Sanwa Bank to become part of the bank. But Alisa was very, she was--it was, you know, originally it was her vision. And I just began to share her vision. And then my thing, I know how to get it done when I understood her vision, you know. And then it too became my vision. Story_ID: 127215 Speaker 1: Okay. So you had like three sites, three projected sites? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you-- Speaker 2: The funny thing about it, the funny thing about it, the first site we had was 87th Street [in Chicago, Illinois]. That was the site we wanted. I lived over there. I lived at [E.] 91st [Street] and [S. Martin Luther] King Drive, 91st and [S.] Langley [Avenue], which is between King Drive and Cottage Grove. But I used to go over there, up there to shop. When I was up there, there was nothing but railroad tracks, you know. It was no malls and everything over there. Speaker 1: Yeah, that one Jewel [grocery store]. Speaker 2: Right, just a Jewel. Speaker 1: [Jewel] Grand Bazaar. Speaker 2: Grand Bazaar; that was it. I would go shopping there with my mom [his grandmother]. That was it. And, but, but it all started in terms of that site, was that I used to ask Alisa, I'd say, you know, I used to ask her, "You work with McDonald's so much, tell me about McDonald's. You know, you come home at midnight one, two o'clock." That's when I was--you know, the entrepreneur thing wasn't working out. And I was trying to start my company, our company. And I was like, she said something to me about it. I said, "Okay, okay, McDonald's, okay." So, I started getting it. Because when I was in grad school, I did a case study on Kroc, Ray Kroc, and the McDonald brothers. That's how it started, in Rockford or Rock Island, wherever, Illinois. And what dawned on me was that I said okay, are you going to tell me that McDonald's really is a real estate company? So, okay. Okay, so that's why--and they had, Burrell had a term called "me-too products." And they always said, "Me, too." I said, "What do you mean, me-too?" Well, "me-too" meant that when McDonald's would build, they would buy the land first then build. Location, location, location. And then Wendy's and Burger King would follow, and they would call them "me-too." And they would be able to just, I'm going to do it, too. So, they called them "me-too." I said, so you're telling me that all these burger things, they're really a real estate company? I got it. I said, "Okay, we got to find a site. I got it." I said, "It ain't about going to Hollywood and convincing them or anybody else, or GE or anybody. It's about the site." Speaker 1: Now, it's about the real estate first. Speaker 2: It's about the real estate first (simultaneous). Story_ID: 127216 Speaker 1: And now defying the kind of rumors you're going to get--because you're going to deal with the demographics, you see. And [E.] 87th Street was ideal, because of the fact that you had the expressway, several bus lines; you had a so-called middle class concept. You had everything there. And it turned out to be the best situation, so we did that deal. How Magic [Johnson], well, why people think Magic is involved in that is because I competed against Magic. I was on the cover of Crain's [Chicago Business]; I guess they missed that. I was on the cover of Crain's said, "Little Guy Beats Big Guy." Okay, and little guy beats big guy, but Magic tried to get that site. Magic went to the mayor's office. I went to the alderman and the people. And if you know anything about Chicago politics, definitely the mayor rules, but in those pocket areas of Chicago, the way you get back elected, you deal with the aldermen. And that's how I was able to get to that. I was from Chicago, and people--initially people thought, you know, well, again--got to be Magic's guy or got to be a drug dealer. You can't just raise $40 million. But people didn't realize the fact that, I mean, I have my master's degree. I did ten years on Wall Street. My wife [HM Alisa Starks] has her master's degree from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], and I went to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois]. So, we had those kind of combinations. I mean, it went so deep as the fact that we had private investigators in Hollywood to follow us. I know, because my bank would call me and say a private investigator called. You can't get $40 million dollars; you're a regular guy. Yeah, it was, I can tell you some stories about, I mean West Side. What, El Rukns and them, it was Disciples and the other gang over there, I forget, over there. They were fighting for territory. Speaker 2: The Mickey Cobras and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right-- Speaker 2: I don't know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it wasn't the Cobras, but it was the other one. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: What's the guys, what's the guy that just got shot? Speaker 2: The Vice Lords? Speaker 1: Vice Lords. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right there. They said "Well, we tired of, you know, guys like you fronting and coming in the community. This is going to be our territory." I met with them. I had to meet with them. "Hey, no, no, no, no, no. This is my territory. I'm buying this. Now, what do you want?" So, I can tell you a bunch of stories about that. It was crazy times. And at the end of the day, you say "Well, what--fool, what are you doing?" And my wife was like, "What are you doing going dealing with that?" I said "At the end of the day, we are businesspeople, but we still are in the jungle." So, I went back into my survival tactics, which was where I grew up. It wasn't, the people get fooled by the suit and tie in that particular area. But it wasn't so far removed that I was just walking down to Tuley Park getting a gun in my head saying, "Join." People didn't understand that; they don't understand that, the fact that I'm a hood guy, from the hood, too. So, that don't bother me. The issue was that I had to do it now. Because if I didn't do anything then, and the theater opens up and there's a shooting, I'm out of business. I got to take care of it right now. To this day, you go to them theaters--no graffiti, no broke windows, no nothing. All the gang guys know me, you know. And they respect that. Story_ID: 127217 Speaker 1: You know, and so that was-but the Magic [Johnson] thing came up because he was going for the site. All the paper, the whole PR thing like that. But I-- Speaker 2: So Magic was competing? Speaker 1: He was competing for the site. Now, what ward is 87th Street in? Speaker 2: The 21st Ward. Speaker 1: The 21st? Who was your alderman? Speaker 2: It was alderman, now it's Alderman Howard Brookins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was, it was a gentleman who went, who had to go to jail, Alderman Jesse Evans. Speaker 1: Jesse Evans, right. Speaker 2: Jesse helped me; Jesse helped me. Jesse said give this young man a chance. I'll never forget that. "Give this young man a chance." And he did. And the little old ladies in the churches, and everything like that. And Alderman Steele, the 6th Ward, all of them. You know, all of them. Because I mean, you know, the bottom line is the fact that if you try to look into my background, well, the guy spent ten years on Wall Street. The guy's a young man. The guy, you know, went to Hales [Franciscan High School in Chicago, Illinois]. I mean, all these positives. And the guy's got a master's degree. I mean, what are we talking about here? Give him a chance. You know, if he's going to fail, let him fail. Everybody believed that I could pull it off. But give him a chance. I was too focused, that was my chance. I was too focused. As I tell kids, when you're focused and you believe, in my mindset, the deal was done. The deal was done. It's like I tell people right now today--Sammy Sosa and Barry Bonds hit a home run. They hit the home run, and in my mind, I hit the home run. Now, I still got to go to first, second, third, and then the plate. But see, it's one to nothing, or whatever it is. I still got to go through the process. I had to go through the process. Part of the process was fighting with Home Depot. We bought the land from Home Depot, eleven acres. I remember going down there; basically it had to be about $2 million of contamination. Walking down there in tanks and all that stuff. I mean I did that whole thing. A lot of people, you know, you find a lot of people saying--again, I'm not one to, I don't hate on people, it's all good. I just listen, "Okay, that's great." You find a lot of people say--white, black, whatever--I developed, you know. Development is putting a deal together, that's one thing and development is another thing. I developed. You know, man, okay, okay. Hey, I was in a ditch. I was there, from Hollywood to Cineplex to $40 million GE [General Electric Capital Corporation], to buy the land from, and negotiate with Inland Steel, with Home Depot, from buying from Home Depot to buying, Maybe just the, The whole thing was a phenomenal concept. I could write a book on how to do something like that. It's a phenomenal concept. You know what I mean? It's something that's really almost unprecedented. And John Rogers said it himself, when they wrote a story about it, "It's that it's very rare when you find someone to start something like that and to finish it." It is rare, I mean, from just true, you can always buy something and say I'm going to do something. But to have a dream, and to start dreaming, then you, from the ground up. See, because these things were developed. They were all developed from the ground up, you know. And then we opened on November, we opened up on November 27 in 19, November 24, 1997, all three. Speaker 1: And the community was excited. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. We had a great--the first grand, the first grand, not grand opening, the first premier outside of New York and Chicago, I mean New York and L.A. [Los Angeles, California], 'Amistad.' And Debbie Allen and John Munster, Bill Dukes. It was a good day, it was a good day. Speaker 1: Yeah. And I think 'Eve's Bayou.' I remember going to 87th-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for 'Eve's Bayou.' Speaker 2: 'Eve's Bayou' came, right, right. It was a good day. It was a good--I mean this whole thing has been, you know, you look back on it, it's just a good thing. You know, I've moved on to some other stuff now, which we own and operate that now. And a lot of things happened between that. But at the end of the day, we own and operate the land and all that stuff like that. And you look back on it, you know, I get, I'm thrilled about that, but the thrill that I really get right now is I'm able to help others, and still help others through my foundation. I get a thrill out of that. Because as I give more, you know, the more I get, you know, and I'm really blessed about that. And more I get doesn't necessarily mean financial, in dollars. It means you know, hey, my son, you know. My son is the top ballplayer in the country, top ten in the country. You know, number one in the country--those kind of blessings. You know, he's there doing his thing and I'm there to watch him do his thing. You know, and he's taking up where I left off, and that kind of thing, you know. Those are, those are, those are big time blessings for me. Seeing a kid, I go to a game now, I go to Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School] or I go to Latin [School of Chicago], I got kids in those schools. I go see them kids play, or go to Lab or go to Morgan Park. You know, at the game, "Hey, hey, coach. Hey, Mr. Starks." Can I help, help that kid? Okay, that's a good thing. Story_ID: 127218 Speaker 1: That's a good thing. Those are the things that are really good blessings to me. Speaker 2: You coach basketball. You got like a-- Speaker 1: Yeah, a foundation. Speaker 2: You coach basketball on the West Side? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: With the foundation. Speaker 1: The West, South, and North sides. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you're on the South Side, too? Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 2: Now, what's it called again, your foundation? Speaker 1: Fundamentally Sound, Fundamentally Sound. You know, because I want the kids to have fun, but I want them to be mentally sound, fundamentally sound. I remember when people used to always say, "Well, what are you talking about?" I have a logo, and the logo--the ball is like a scale. I have a scale. And the ball is the scale, and the ball is here, and the books are like down there. And people say "Well, I don't understand. You got the ball, like the ball means more than the books." But they don't get it. No, no, no, you're not getting it. You're not getting the scale. The books weigh more than the ball. They don't get it, you know. So, that kind of thing, you know. People misunderstand stuff. Speaker 2: Now what sites, now you're on the West Side and the South Side and the North Side? Speaker 1: Yeah. I have, I do Lawndale, the New Lawndale, the park there. That's an area that I have, that I do. I have Sherwood Park, [W.] 57th [Street] and [S.] Shields [Ave.]. And I also I do a program at Palmer Park, 111th [Street] and [S Martin Luther] King Drive. Right, right around the park, right. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Palmer Park. Speaker 1: Right. Right next to, across the street from the old Mendel. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Which is now Gwendolyn Brooks, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, I got three locations. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. So, you actually coach at some of the locations? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Or all of them? Speaker 1: I coach at all of them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh, in terms of training, and this and that and the other. And through that, I form an A-U team, an A team and traveling team. We travel to Baltimore; we travel to California; travel to Virginia. I take maybe twenty-five kids and do that thing with them, do that thing with them--give them exposure, the whole thing like that. You know, talking to, I give them days at the theatre, the projection, I show them all that kind of stuff. I go in the schools, I go in the schools and talk to them and give them scholarships for Hales [Franciscan High School] and other schools, you know--Providence St. Mel [School], and all that other stuff like that. Speaker 2: Do some of them work in the theater? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, definitely, definitely. This year we had about, I think about four or five of them. We've had others, too. But you have to be a scholar; you just can't play ball. Your grades got to be together before you can come work for me. Speaker 2: Now, I know your wife is saying that on the West Side they find the, you have the better employees on the West Side. Speaker 1: Yeah, they, we have the better, because they're much hungrier. A lot of things haven't been given to them; much hungrier, yeah, and they want to work. They want to work. People always say these guys don't want to work. They've been wanting to work, given the opportunity. A lot of times, you know, some places you go to, like Chatham [a neighborhood on Chicago's South Side], you know--for lack of a better word, middle-class concepts, you know, pretty much babied. You know, "I ain't got to work now. I got my mom's house, old house." Those houses in Chatham have been around for so long you got histories of families there. "I'll just stay in the basement, I ain't got to work," that kind of thing. Where on the West Side, things are really broken down here and there, and the guys want to work. Speaker 2: That's funny. That's pretty much a scenario that is repeated over and over again. The guy's staying in the basement, you know, hanging around. You know, it's-- Speaker 1: They do, hang in the basement. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I know guys now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm sure you do, too. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Too true. Story_ID: 127219 Speaker 1: Oh, about the theaters themselves. I remember a hat controversy. I want your take on this. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At [E.] 87th Street. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was wild. Speaker 1: The first weekend it opened up. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was wild. Speaker 1: They were asking people to take their hats off. Speaker 2: Hats off. Speaker 1: I'm an older man-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and I guess I didn't, I kind of resented it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I took it off. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Another brother behind me had a, was a Muslim. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He said, "Look, I'm not taking my hat off," you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He said, so the management came, everybody came out, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Well, what we wanted to do, the concept was a good concept. We've changed it since that time, but the concept was that I thought about--and my wife thought about it as well, but being a man, you know, I was really emotional about it. I said, well okay, when I go to church, you take your hat off. When I would go in somebody's house, you take your hat off. So I wanted to, I wanted to, that was one focal point of the concept. The second concept, focal point of the concept was that you didn't want the gangs to have these kinds of signs--hats backwards, hats on the side. So, you wanted to eliminate all of that stuff. So, you know, I had them take their hats off. So, because, that was great, but we recognized the fact that the Muslim and the older, mature gentlemen like yourself come in from work or whatever. And also, it may be part of your uniform--the hat or whatever, you know. And I understood that and, you know, we just got a lot of complaints about it. You know, at the end of the day, this show is for the community. And if the community don't want that, then we're going to do what the community, it's for the community. This is really what it's all about. We were thinking about the community in terms of prevention of gang stuff, and all that stuff like that. But at the end of the day, the community voted that they were not going to have that. So, we eliminated it. Speaker 1: But for the most part, though, things have worked out fairly well. Speaker 2: Yeah. We don't have no problems there. You know, we have good security, no problems whatsoever. We haven't had any shootings, graffiti, breaking windows, no problems other than what Crestwood [Illinois] has--other than what any other downtown theater has. They got kids who're going to talk, they got kids who're going to hang around the lobby, the same thing. But you know, sometimes we African-Americans, they expect higher expectations than what normal, what normal society gives. And they, "I ain't coming back here. I'm going downtown." You know, you get it all the time. Our money, you know, this was broke, this was, yeah, it's broke because we got all the people coming through the door. And give us time to fix it. Yeah, the film messed up, we're going to start it over. I mean, I mean, I mean come on. I've been in theaters all my life, you know, going downtown to United Artists or McVicker's or Ford City when it was, when they had a theater. So, where we're at now, they had stopped, you know, something happened, and it was no big deal. You know, I mean but the key is that we, most time you come here, you're going to have a good experience. Yeah, some things go wrong sometimes. And it's not because you're black, because you're an African-American facility. You know, I mean, this is what happens. You know, and you go in there--I go in the theater and you meet some young guys and they work because you know, I mean I let guys do their work. And I come in there and some guys--I mean several times I came, "I need you to button up. Can you do that?" They look at me like I'm crazy. That's the kind of thing, you know, going on. Because I mean, you know, you have new workers, they don't know exactly who I am, or see the picture or whatever. So I have to, sometimes I have to--you know, like when I was growing up, you know, explain to them. I mean any adult, you respect. I just--maybe because I'm a, I don't want you to respect me because I'm the owner--any adult. Because if I'm not here, what you going to do if I'm not here? That's the thing we're trying to teach the kids over there, and sometimes you have a hard time doing it. So, I'm more interested about service. Service is a big thing with kids today. And they don't understand it. Story_ID: 127220 Speaker 1: Now, how hands-on are you with the theaters? Do you-- Speaker 2: We're very hands-on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No doubt, no doubt, no doubt, no doubt, no doubt. You got to be. Speaker 1: Because I know you have various management companies that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --work-- Speaker 2: Right, right, we do. But we're hands-on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're definitely hands-on. We, we, we're, I'm there, you know. I'm there, Alisa's there, and I'm there a lot, yeah, definitely. We, you know, all we do is outsource certain things. But we're still the owners and operators, and the responsibility comes to us. I still got that loan on my back. (Laughter). You know, so I got to be there. We're very hands-on. We make decisions, you know. We're involved in every decision of what movies are going to come there, decide what's going to come there, what needs to be fixed. We're all involved in every decision. The great thing about is we have a very strong management team now to consult us. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a dream for the future of these theaters or a dream for your, you know. What's your dream for the future of these theaters? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean I got to trace it to--one is that--one, I want to pay the debt off, that's one. But, but, other than that, though, I want it to be, continue to be a place that you can come because of the rigorous days of work; the insecurity of what's going on in our country; the insecurities going on in your local community; that you can go--and you've got two or three hours--to someplace you can go to and just say, "Hey, I got another experience that day. I laughed a little bit, I cried a little bit." And that's what it's all about for us, really, [HM] Alisa [Starks] and I--experience a getaway. "I got away from some other thing happening in my life that wasn't good." That's, that's what we're trying to do. The second part of that is that we want to--because of the successes of these theaters--to be able to go in there--we still have some expansion plans to give other people that same kind of concept. Because right now, there are no theaters in urban America. The Magic Johnson theaters are all on the outskirts, you know. And we want to go in the city. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a different concept. Speaker 2: It's a different concept. Speaker 1: Going in. Speaker 2: Right, a different concept--and right in the heart of it. Speaker 1: A lot of people didn't think it was going to work. Speaker 2: At all, at all, at all. In some cases it didn't and in some cases it did. In our case, we were successful. We went five years, going on six. The people will tell you in the "Harvard Review," or whatever, that you last three-plus years and you're going five--you know, you're here to stay. And we're here to stay. We're doing some good stuff in the community; we're very proud of it. I mean, one point about that which people don't really understand or really want to focus on it, Not only did-- and I'm saying this for the interview--but we don't go out, Alisa and I, rather than--the fact that we don't go out and broadcast. We don't go out, "We did a great thing, hey, ha ha." You know, you guys caught us, and we're here. You know, if you want us to tell the story, we'll tell the story. Because somebody down the line might hear the story and say, "Hey, I can do it, too" Okay, but, but [E.] 87th Street is the way it is today because of us. You didn't have a Cubs Food Store over there. You didn't have Marshall's over there. You didn't have none of that stuff over there. That stuff wasn't over there. Because we helped bring that traffic. The West Side, twenty years, Cecil Butler, undeveloped. That wasn't there. Twenty-plus years. You didn't have a Dominick's over there. I helped bring Dominick's over there. The chairman, before they sold to Safeway--but in the process of selling to Safeway he called me up and said, "Hey, how did you get this done over there?" The mayor's on my back talking about how did I get over there? How did I do that, you know what I mean? We talked one on one, because of the situation. That's where the mayor did his press conference. We helped the mayor get re-elected over there. He might even--could he have gotten re-elected without that? Possibly. But we know we influenced it, because he put a stamp on, "Hey, I helped do this theater." He had his press conference there. So, he got them votes. I mean, because the Starks of the movie theater, hey, they support this thing. You know, you got a lot of people--construction guys on their resumes--architects, you know, we did a movie theater. I requested Phil Johnson of Johnson and Lee. They did that, they did that stuff for over there, you know. You know, so I'm saying, you know, you got a major mall over there now, over there in--I wouldn't say a major mall--but a nice sized mall they put together over there with that Dominick's--two major anchors. So, we'll be able to do some things. I'm glad, I'm very, very excited about that opportunity--that guys gave people a chance to do things good over there. But that's the big recognition, if anything. You know, making a difference. You talk about HistoryMakers, and Alisa told me about it, I said, "Yeah, hey, sure we'll do it." Because you know, we are low-profile. But HistoryMakers, you're a history-maker, but what did you change? You know, what did you change? And to me that's what counts. Anybody can do something for money. But what did you change? That's what I like to, that's a big thing to me. Story_ID: 127221 Speaker 1: Do you have any future business plans beyond the theaters? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, you know, right now I'm doing some development stuff right now. You know, I'm doing, I do some things with LaSalle Bank now. I do developments with them, some properties for them. And, but the biggest thing right now, that I'm working on right now, and I'm very excited about. And the thing about Don Starks that he enjoys most of all--I always tell my wife [HM Alisa Starks], you know, we always talk about the terminology--but I'm a dealmaker. I love doing deals. I love doing deals to help other people. For example, right now I'm doing a deal right now: I'm building, I want to build a 100,000 square foot facility, a sports complex, very similar to Moody Bible [Institute, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: You know what I mean. I got, and they already got the drawings done and ready to go. I'm about to get the land and everything. And the concept is five basketball courts, three soccer fields, all indoor, a batting cage, a golf--what's the name--course there? Speaker 1: Driving range? Speaker 2: Driving range, I'm sorry, yeah. And it's going to happen. It's unprecedented. There's nothing like that in the city of Chicago. Speaker 1: Where's it going to be? Speaker 2: Sixty-second and Western, right by the theater. There's nothing up there, you know. We're in the process of building, bringing in a restaurant concept, Applebee's, right there on the South Side of Chicago. So, those things like that. But the biggest thing, though, is complexes. Just like, and people again, "Oh, no, it ain't going to be, it ain't going to work, it ain't going to be here." They're going to look up, just like those theaters, going to look up and it's going to be there. That's a big determination to make. There's nothing like that in Chicago proper. And you got the Sox Training Academy in Lisle [Illinois], you got Moody Bible; they do different things there and all that stuff. But nothing in the heart of Chicago where you can say, hey, go to and get it. Story_ID: 125472 Speaker 1: Got a lot of concerns. I mean, you know, we're in trouble. The culture's in trouble. Not just, not just--I mean the country is in trouble, but particularly those individuals of our culture are in trouble. I mean I think all people are in trouble, but specifically you asked me that question--because our young kids don't understand what it takes to survive. They think they do. What I mean by that--and it's not all kids, all cultures, all of our people in that culture. But let's say you got a drug dealer, whatever. You got that fast life. You got a dope dealer. Whatever you got, you already got it. And I'm saying I understand they typically do that. But I'm saying let's say that fast life, for lack of a better word. That's short term. That's a short term survival. You want to survive and leave a legacy. We got to leave legacies. That's the problem; you'll be extinct too soon. That's the problem. Say, the Indians, they're not here no more basically. They have a few little tribes here and there, but ain't here anymore. So, I'm saying that's the biggest fear--this culture not leaving a legacy. And it's too short term, a hit and miss kind of thing. And then we don't understand, we don't understand, we don't love each other. We don't love each other. We're the only culture that don't love each other. Speaker 2: What do you suppose the reason is for that? Speaker 1: Well, my opinion, my opinion--I mean, you know, we as a culture had over 300 years of slavery. And we haven't gotten over it. Two, is the fact that it stems from that. The other part of it is that--which I applaud what you guys are doing--we don't know our history. You know, if you don't know your history, you can't know where you're going. And when you know where you're going, you can get maybe a vision together. We don't have enough visionaries. Cats think they going to die when they get 25 now. You know, they have no vision, because they don't know their history. If you knew back in the day, Pharaoh, and you're a king. And you're a king, I mean you're a queen. Because right now, if you talk to a young lady, she really believes she's a bitch. Every record is "Bitch this, bitch that." I mean, they think they're a bitch. You know, so therefore they believe that. They don't believe they're queens. You know, the young men don't treat them like queens. You know, they don't treat them like kings. So, so, with that kind of mentality, you, you, you're going in the wrong direction, because there's no respect for mankind. It's changed drastically. Because in the day when I was growing up, you might have a guy pull a gun or trip like that, but he wasn't doing nothing really. But you'd have a guy, the best thing, you'd have a fight. You'd have a baseball bat. But your partner would say, "Man, put that down and fight him with your hands." Now, you get points for shooting people. You start, so I'm saying the mentality has changed toward hatred. And the third thing that is my biggest concern is the fact that for those who are trying to do something positive, there's no support staff there, no support. I mean you can't go--and people, you know, might be upset with me saying this, but I'll just say what I'm going to say. The George Johnsons of the world, the John Johnsons of the world, they should all--the Dempsey Travises of the world--they own a bunch of real estate and there's a lot of things they do out here which is a positive thing they did. They should, to me, in my opinion--because that's what a legacy does. They should reach back and help others. I know they didn't help me. They didn't help me. There were other young men, you talking about a young man, my wife and I, a business plan. I mean a business plan on paper, homework, and you still say no? You won't even look at the idea? I ain't talking about the money. I'm talking about just the concept, "Hey, give me some thoughts." And I mean, I went to all these cats. I'm not bitter. I'm just saying that's the reality of it. I'm just saying the fact that they didn't help me, and I was together; I was together. I obviously had to be together to get $40 million dollars from GE [General Electric] Capital, okay. They didn't see that vision. And forget about the vision--just, "Hey, help my vision," you know. They don't reach back. Story_ID: 125473 Speaker 1: You got to reach back. So, my point--all the slavery, the black-on-black hate crime and all like that--those that are even doing positive stuff need support. If you can't get that, and you're doing something positive, your whole culture is in trouble because you got this crab in the bucket thing. And you got, you know, "me, my, my, my" kind of thing, you know. And that's why I choose to stay in the community and help these young kids out. As I said earlier in the interview, you know, they need to see somebody out there doing, the kids, they get a kick out of me. That's why all my kids come to me because their concept with me is--hey, I'm in the car, I'm listening, okay, okay. We got Fifty Cent, we got here and there. You know, and I don't dig some of the stuff they say, but that's what they listen to, okay. You know, and I had to train them, "Hey, listen, that ain't cool." But some things, okay, '21 Days [sic, 21 Questions]' okay, I'm with that. So I'm saying, I'm kind of a balanced guy. I tell my son, you know, my son, I say "Listen, you have to be the, you can't go to sleep here. You got to be, one day get up on a plane and fly to New York and go to Wall Street and say, "Hey, how're you doing? How's your family? How's that stock trading?" The next day, you got to go to the hood, the inner city, and say, "Hey, what's up, man, how you feel? How you feel, dog?" It's the same thing as saying, "Hi. How you doing? How's your family? What's up, dog?" It's the same thing. You can't be too far to the left too much. You can't be too far to the right. It's like a brother that they call too white an Oreo. You got to have a balance. That's the key to success, a balance in life. It's not about how much you know. It's about who you know and what role you playing that day. That's the key to success. That's what I tell all those kids, it's a balance of life--meaning that if you go downtown for an interview, take your earrings off. Pull your pants up. Put a tie on and knot it. Go home and put the earring back on, put the chain on. Pull your pants down. That's the role you're playing in the hood. Downtown it's a different role. I am not one to--like I tell young kids when I talk to them, I am not one to criticize or--that's God's role, to talk about what you should do and shouldn't do. That's God's role, it ain't my role. But as a role model or a positive person, I want to tell you your options, how you should handle them. That's what we need to be doing with the kids. That's why I reach out to kids. That's why they listen to me, because I'm a balanced guy. I'm, you know, I'm probably the coolest guy they're going to meet in terms of a real, I understand the business, and from Wall Street to the hood, I give them that balance. And also, I help them understand the game between the line. See, a lot of the games they play is illegal games. There's another game you can play--can you see between the lines? And that's the game, and they need to learn that. You know, they don't understand that. So, that's, that's what I'm saying, that we as a culture are in trouble. We don't understand the game. We don't understand the game. And that's going to be, that's going to hurt them big time. People think--it's like being in a basketball game. Okay, you're on the bench, okay. The coach say, "Okay, you're on the team." The coach says, "Get in the game." So you get in the game, but you don't know the play. "Okay, time out, you back on the bench." It's, you're in the game, but you ain't playing the game. Getting left behind--the super highway, the whole thing, you know. So that's my fear for this culture--why, the reason why we're in trouble. Story_ID: 125474 Speaker 1: Now, you were saying off-camera that you, you and your wife [Alisa Starks] owned Water Tower Theater. Speaker 2: Yeah, we owned several-- Speaker 1: The Hyde Park Theater. Speaker 2: Yeah, we've owned some other ventures. And I brought that up because of the fact that, of what we tried to do in our business career and we're trying to really have a cross-over concept. We want to reach out to everybody. And I wanted to state that because people--"Okay, Inner City Entertainment, oh they just do that black thing. They do that inner-city stuff thing." No, no, no, no, no, no. Our concept is a cross-over. I call it the Will Smith concept, you know what I mean. Our concept is a cross-over. That didn't work there, but we're going to be back with something else. And we believe this thing on this complex we're working on, it's going to be a tremendous cross-over concept, where all cultures come in there and play ball--soccer, basketball, golf, the whole thing. And it's going to happen to be in the hood. That's, that's, because our goal is to really cross over. The whole goal, objective, is to cross over. Not just, that's a focal point, this Inner City Entertainment. But it's a cross-over concept as well. And that's why we did the other stuff, you know. So, that's why I briefly brought that up. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 125475 Speaker 1: Now, at this juncture when you look back at everything you've done, do you, what would you, and you're still young, too? What would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: I haven't did it yet. I got to, I got a, I got a foundation. And I've got so much more to do, man. I have so much more to do, quietly. I don't want to, I don't want to--you know, I remember Tom Burrell, you know, talking to me about--because Burrell Communications was doing our PR [public relations] stuff. And they'd be mad at me, my wife would be mad at me because, "I don't want to interview. I don't want to talk to nobody. I don't want to do nothing, I just want to do deals. I want to do deals." And I remember talking to Tom one day, and Tom said, "Man, you got to go out there and tell what's going on. Because if you don't, they're going to think you're a drug dealer or something like that. Tell what's going on." And that's when I, we started talking to Crain and like that. But, but I wanted to do it quietly. I don't want no, I don't, I just, I was just keeping it real. I don't want no pat on the back, I don't want to do nothing. All I want to do is do deals, help people, raise my son, and the other kids can go for the ride. That's, that's, that's, that's kind of what I want to do. And that, and that way I leave a legacy of--okay, he built this for kids, his team won championships. But in that process he educated someone and said, "Hey, go to school." To me that's--and it's more than just a tangible asset, it's also an intangible asset, you know. "That was a good guy. That guy really did for people; that was a good guy." That's, that's the kind of thing I'd like to leave-"that was a good guy." "He really meant it when he said he really helped a lot of people out." I really believe that's what we're here for. I really believe in that today. I really believe all, everybody's here to help other people. God will give you avenues to choose whether you're going to do that. They come at you all the time. And when people tell me they don't want to help these kids out, think about it. Think about it. If you really think about it, read your Bible. And I'm not getting biblical, but you look at it and you say wow, all these are God's kids. They're all here to do something--you know, from Adam to Eve, you know, to Moses. They're all here to do something. Now, Cain and Abel, whatever--they all were bad or good guys or whatever, but they all were here to do something. And if you didn't do it, you were extinct. So, we're God's kids, we're all here to do something. And before your time runs out, you've got to figure it out. You've got to figure it out. I think I've figured it out. These things that I'm doing--because a little young man from the South Side of Chicago raising 40 million dollars, that's pretty unheard of. Not being in that kind of scene, it's pretty unheard of. I didn't go to Harvard. I didn't have that kind of relationship like that, you know. But, but at the end of the day I was here to do something. So, then you go, you dream of doing one theater, and the next thing you know you own eleven theaters. You know, then you know, then you do that, and then the next year you got, then you're doing that. So, so, I mean you're here for something. It ain't just you doing it. And that's why, the kids, I got the kids and I got the foundation. And this whole thing, you know, this whole, this whole, another great concept--hey, let's build this complex. It's not been done before. So to me, I'm doing, I'm doing things that no one's really doing. Story_ID: 125476 Speaker 1: Now, the theater deal. When you finally got the loan for the theater deal, what do you think made the difference between, you know, those who turned you down and those who--what was the major thing that made the difference? Speaker 2: I'm be very frank with you, you know. I was too dark, wasn't light enough. Speaker 1: I mean when you didn't get the deal-- Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying. Speaker 1: --because of-- Speaker 2: I believe that, I believe if I was white they would have listened. I believe that. I believe that in my heart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe that in my heart. I mean I'm not saying nobody was a racist or discriminating, I just believe that--that old school situation. I was young, come on. Young and black in America, and talking about needing 40 million dollars. Uh-uh, that's almost a 'no' every time. The GE [General Electric Capital Corporation] thing was because of a combination of both. One, they needed something to happen in the inner city. They'd never did the inner city. The timing was right. Number two, I was African-American, or is African-American. And that was another punchline. So, the timing was right. So, they used me and I used them. It's all about timing. It's okay to be used as long as you're not abused. And if both two parties work it out together, you can accomplish what you got to do, and some kind of positive will come out of it. I understand that. People don't understand, "They're using me." Well, everybody used, I think, I think, I think that the best scenario you can say if somebody's being used--and then I think you're now, you're going to get it now--is Michael Jordan. The same with Abe Pollin in Washington. The Washington Wizards was nothing. They would have, you couldn't even get them on ABC [American Public Broadcasting] or ESPN [Entertainment and Sports Programming Network]. They wouldn't, you'd have ESPN games or what happened that night before, and they wouldn't show the Washington Wizards. When Mike [Michael Jordan] came out of retirement, boom, the whole thing happened, okay, it exploded. He gets out without signing a contract. "Oh, we don't need you no more." He was used and abused. Now, these teams make a hundred million dollars a year. Yeah, but I'm saying the concept, though, it happened. People need to learn from that. It's the second time Mike got used like that. And they used Mike, because Mike is probably your most modern day hero-- not just sports hero--a hero that black and white can relate to. I know Mike from the club. I used to play ball with Mike, you know. And he's a great, you know, Mike's a great, he's a great person, a good man, a good guy. I like Michael a lot. But I'm saying when you look at using someone--you know, and that's the clear understanding I got. I say that because athletes are used every day. Okay, their benefits are getting the money. Story_ID: 125477 Speaker 1: Now in terms of, along that same line, though--you were saying off camera before we even started the interview, you were talking about Michael Jordan's restaurant and the situation around that. And you say he's now lost the use of his name. Speaker 2: At this point he's lost his name because of--I mean, you know, it's been my understanding, you know, and I'm using that, because I don't know the contracts and reading it and everything. But to my understanding, he can't use his name because--and it further confirms my thought from what I'm saying--because if I'm a businessman, because if you got, What I think it's 106 Blue or whatever it's called. If you got that, why wouldn't you use your name? You're the most marketed name in the world. They're going to come because it's Michael Jordan's restaurant. Speaker 1: He's got a restaurant that has a different-- Speaker 2: Name. Speaker 1: --name. Speaker 2: That further confirms the thought. Speaker 1: And some deal was made where he can't even use his own name. Speaker 2: I do, I do know he lost in court. And I'm just saying that I brought that up to say that we got, we're being used. You got to be careful. And it's okay to be used as long as you're not abused. Some situations are abusive. I'm saying these young athletes have got to be very careful. Hey, I ain't hating him, get that money. I mean, if my son was the top five player in the country, LeBron James or whatever, a hundred million dollars. Hey, people ask me all the time about that. "Well, why would you do that? Why would you have, why would you,?" Because, you know what? Because I understand. "What do you understand?" I understand the fact that I go to school to do what? To get a job. Not just a job, I go to school to get a good job. Well, damn it, if a hundred million dollars isn't a good job, I don't know what is a good job. Okay? You know, you can always, you can buy a school. Why should LeBron James stay in school? It makes no sense. People expect people, that's why, you know, I'm kind of like a loner. People be talking, and it bothers me, like, they be talking. I know and you know that if your son was the top five player in the country, and he's going to come and sign an instant 90 million dollar deal--what are you talking about? Your worries are over, his worries are over, everybody's worries are over, (laughter), you know, in terms of that. I mean that's silliness, I'm saying. That's what, we're not realists. A lot of people are not realists, you know, that kind of thing like that. Now, I mean if you're a second round pick, okay, that's a totally different concept. Or, a second round pick and you got a million dollar deal--well, I say that ain't $90 million. You know, those kind of things like that. Stay in school. Speaker 1: People have done more for a million dollars, I mean, you know. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. So, I'm just saying athletes are being used, and they need to understand that. I have athletes come to me, "Don, I want to do a deal. I want to do a development deal." "Well, let's do something. What you want to do?" They like the man in the moon--don't know what they're doing, you know what I mean. "You know, send me to the agent. I want to be able to talk to my agent." I ain't doing that. You know, I'm not going to mention their names, but that happens to me quite often. Because when people talk about--what people don't realize in Chicago--some do and some don't--you know, that in terms of a commercial deal, commercial development deals, you know, probably the largest--because I'm doing more than this theater stuff I'm saying--this is probably the largest. And people hear about it and they come in, you know, pretty real about stuff. And you know, and we will talk. I meet a lot of guys about that, but they don't get it. But the point is that they're being misinformed. And you talk about--again, adding to our culture being misinformed. I mean, I'll give you an example. The guys who are--these pro-athletes with all this money they're making--they should form something. Do something positive. I know they, I know they, I mean you know, they do certain things, but they can do much more. Speaker 1: Yeah, there hasn't been anything like that since Jim Brown formed the Black Economic Union. Speaker 2: There you go. Speaker 1: You know, back in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: There you go. It's more than just you throwing your money out. It's, form something positive that's going to be longer lasting, a legacy. Now, and the people say, "Oh, he's hating." No, you know, I'm blessed. I'm just trying to tell you what you can be doing, those that are making much more money. You know, and you know, so you just got to be very careful. And people, money is a, I wouldn't say money, money is, and people say money is the root of all evil. Money ain't the root of all evil. If you think money is the root of all evil, you ain't had no money. The issue about money is you can't, you cannot, you got to manage it, you got to control it. You got to do what's right, if it means give it up. If you try to keep it for yourself all the time, that's when it becomes evil. Story_ID: 125478 Speaker 1: This is slightly different from legacy. But sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think it's slightly different, but it kind of, kind of goes with it. Because as you build things, tangible and intangible, you know, you want people to say, okay, you want people to say, "Yeah, that guy made a lot of money." That's not what I want, you know. But whether you make money or not, it's all perception because you really never know. It's all perception. What I'd like to be remembered by really is that this guy helped people. Whatever he did from a business point of view, he always helped people so they also could do good things. And that's really what I believe I'm here for. And that's part of the legacy, part of, okay, whatever he built, whatever he did, you know what I mean, he helped people. And the theater in terms of helping--meaning for that two or three hours I was talking about before--you can go and relax, have an experience, and not go too far to have that experience. You don't have to go to Lombard. You ain't got to go way--you can go right in the community and have that experience. You know, that's the kind of thing I want to be, I want to be remembered by--"he helped somebody." Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you sir. Speaker 2: It's been good man. Speaker 1: All right. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: It's been good...