 Story_ID: 169134 Speaker 1: This is a HistoryMaker[s] interview. The interviewer is Paul Brock. The videographer is Matthew Hickey, and observing is Ed Anderson. Our interviewee is Mr. Vern Smith, and if we can begin by asking you to give us your name and spell it out for us? Speaker 2: My name is Vern Smith, V-E-R-N, S-M-I-T-H. Speaker 1: Okay. No middle initial-- Speaker 2: Middle initial is-- Speaker 1: -or name? Speaker 2: --E, middle name is Emile, E-M-I-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay. And Vern is the correct name or is it Vernon? Speaker 2: That's my byline. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My sister [Yvonne Smith] gave me that byline when I was very young. My full name is Vernon-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: -E. Smith, named after my uncle. Speaker 1: Okay, good. And where are we doing this interview? Speaker 2: We are in Atlanta, Georgia, on Auburn Avenue. Speaker 1: That's good enough. Okay, and today's date? Speaker 2: August 2, 2005. Speaker 1: Good. You're one of the few people who've gotten that right. Story_ID: 169135 Speaker 1: Okay, now a few People magazine questions just to loosen up the brain cells and memory, first of all, your favorite food? Speaker 2: I'd say grilled salmon. Speaker 1: Grilled salmon, okay. And your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Okay, and the favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Actually it's a toss-up between Christmas and summer. Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Lately it's been Gulf Shores, Alabama. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, and your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying is, how's my boys? That's my most recent one. I have two grandsons, so I'm always asking that question: how's my boys? Speaker 1: Okay, good enough. Story_ID: 169136 Speaker 1: All right, we're going to begin the interview with your earliest memories. Well, we'll, we'll get your date, place of birth and your date of birth. Speaker 2: I was born February 13th, 1946, in Natchez, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, and your--we're, we're going to ask you about your earliest memories, and how much do you know about your mother's family, and how many generations can you go back. Speaker 2: Well, I can go back on my, on my father's side to my-- Speaker 1: Okay. Let's, let, let's go with your mother first, and then we'll-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --come back to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to your father, okay. Speaker 2: My, on my mother's side I, I can go back to her father-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --whose name was John Valentine. And he was a preacher and a businessman in Natchez. And he married her mother whose name was Dora, and they had-- Speaker 1: Dora, her maiden, Dora-- Speaker 2: Dora Stewart. Speaker 1: Stewart. Speaker 2: --Valentine. Speaker 1: S-T-- Speaker 2: S-T-E-W-A-R-T. Speaker 1: Okay. And what are some of the stories that your mother may have told or the, or that you may remember about them, your grandparents? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I remember, I remember my grandmother. I don't remember my grandfather. I remember his nickname was Papa John, and, and we, growing up we had a, we had a great photograph of him, one of those sort of (unclear)--graph. It was in color. It wasn't a real color photograph, but it as in color and sort of an oval-shaped frame. And he looked very stately in his little string tie and you know, had a little mustache and Papa John. So, so-- Speaker 1: Do you, do you remember what, was he a farmer or-- Speaker 2: No. I know he was, he was a businessman. And I don't know whether, whether he had a little store or, or what, but he also was, was a, was a minister as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother, who we call Mama Dora, I, I remember her. And she was a handsome, you know, very fair-skinned woman with very long hair. She worked primarily as a housekeeper in and around Natchez. Speaker 1: One thing that I know is my grandfather, Papa John, died when my mother was very young, like six or seven years old. And as a result of that, my mother, who was not the oldest, she was the second oldest-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but she stopped school and worked with my grandmother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you know, they-- Speaker 2: Now, now let's get your mother's full, full name. Speaker 1: Her name is Rosetta Valentine Smith. Speaker 2: Rosetta. Could you spell Valentine? Speaker 1: V-A-L-E-N-T-I-N-E. Speaker 2: Okay, Smith, okay. Story_ID: 169137 Speaker 1: Your grandfather, John Valentine died when your mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith] was just five or six years old. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And your mother, grandmother, Dora Stewart Valen--Valentine, the--tell us about her. Speaker 2: You know, she was just, just, just a wonderful grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She took care of us when we were young. I had two siblings, one older and one younger. And when we were growing up, we spent a lot of time at Mama Dora's, you know. She'd play games with us, and you know, we just, stories and you know, read us from the Bible. Sort of reading to her from the Bible was one of the ways that I started reading and sort of begin to appreciate language. She was a very devout Christian lady, attended Beulah Baptist Church. She was on the mother's board there for many years. And, and my mother later became a member of the mother's board at Beulah. That was when we went to Sunday school. That was really our home church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you know, she was just a woman with great charisma. People liked her. And we used to have a family saying, and she sort of set that about us that, that, that there was, she called it loadstone. And I took, I understood that to mean that it was a kind of innate sort of quality which people came towards you rather than moved away from you. And we used to talk about this growing up. And my mother would tell me that Mama Dora would say, you know, it was loadstone. And it's kind of a thing that we talk about in our family a lot, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Could you give me a better understanding of the loadstone 'cause that seems to be very, very important. Speaker 2: Well, I mean I, I think, you know, I think it was, it was kind of an in the context of the times was which was Mississippi in the, in the, in the, in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], and even younger. And you know, there was just a, just a, a quality, a kind of an aura about her that, you know, people that normally might be mean, they weren't with her, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And she just kind of had a way with people. She just kind of had a way of-- Speaker 1: Handling them. Speaker 2: --tampering down, you know, what-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --may have been aggression, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, and, and so, people liked her, you know, in, in spite of the times. And, and, and you know, it's a kind of quality where my mother used to say, you know, she never met a stranger. You know, you probably heard that phrase. You know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it's like people, you know, they see somebody that they never met, but yet they're, they're drawn to them by some sort of, you know, inexplicable charisma or whatever. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, it was, it was difficult to put your finger on it, but I understood it, sort of going around her and, and seeing how she handled people, you know, and, and you know, sort of protected us in, in a way that, you know, I didn't fully appreciate until I, I got older. Story_ID: 169138 Speaker 1: Okay, the--and I just wanna go back for a moment. Do you know when they [Smith's maternal grandparents, Dora Stewart Valentine and John Valentine] got married or how John Valentine met-- Speaker 2: How they met? I do not know that story. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know that, that it was probably in, in Washington, Mississippi, in Adams County, which is a little town right outside of Natchez [Mississippi]. And, and I know that that's where my mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith] and Mama Dora came into Natchez from. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I, I think it was out in, in Washington, Mississippi. But I, I don't know how they, how they met. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 169139 Speaker 1: Any more stories that you remember or thoughts that you remember about your grandmother [Dora Stewart Valentine]? Speaker 2: She, she--I, I remember her wearing these big hats, you know, going to church, you know, and, and, and, and her pocketbook, and everybody walked everywhere in those days, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I remember her, you know, walking with her pocketbook and her big, you know, pretty hat, you know, going to church, you know, and and as I say, I remember she had his big four-poster bed, you know, which we used to love to, to play in when we were, when we were kids, you know. She lived in a, in a house. It was one of those, it was a shotgun house exactly, but it was a, it was a two-sided house, you know, where you had one family on one side and one family on the other side. And then, there was another house like towards the front of the street. This was, this was on a street called Union Street in Natchez [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Union Street, there was a white family that lived in the big house that fronted the street. And then alongside there was another street that went alongside it and where you had these houses in the back, this one house actually. And that's where Mama Dora lived. She was a widow by then. She lived on one side, and the McCurry [ph.] family lived on the other side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We lived some blocks away, but we were up there a lot growing up, you know, five, six, seven years old we could, we could walk up there. And you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --she had this big four-poster bed, and you know, we used to jump in there and, and, and play and hide, and, and she'd play a game with us called Old Horse, you know. And you know, she'd say old horse, and--no, we'd say, "Old horse" and then she'd say, "How many miles?" And you'd have to guess how many miles. And you'd play it with like soda top, you know, sort of like a, like a, like a game of, of accumulating the, whoever accumulated the most, whoever could guess correctly how many miles you'd ride the horse would win, you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and so, we'd play that. And you know, she was a very religious lady, but you know, we'd, we'd have the radio on all the time. And I, I still remember this [Delores] LaVern Baker song. It's called "Jim Dandy," you know, and you know, we'd be singing that song. And Mama Dora picked up on it one time, and we'd, you know, it was, it was, it had a line that said "Jim Dandy to the rescue," you know (laughter). And she'd-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --she'd recite that line with us in spite of her, you know, just, you know, just, just-- Speaker 1: She was a lot fun. Speaker 2: --just a wonderful, wonderful-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --grandmother, you know. She'd cook of course. You know, she'd cook, cook cornbread in these big black skillets and you know, fried chicken. And she had a garden behind her house, and she'd have fresh vegetables and you know, corn, and tomatoes, and greens, and okra. And you know, it was-- Speaker 1: Sounds like an ideal-- Speaker 2: It was, it was. I mean-- Speaker 1: --childhood with the grandmother Speaker 2: --you know, when you, when I look at the context and the times it was, there were terrible things happening around us racially and economically too, but in our little world, you know, we were pretty happy. Speaker 1: And protected. Speaker 2: And protected. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The--let's, let's now go to John and Dora had how many children? Speaker 1: Let's see, they had three daughters, Gabriella [ph.], the oldest. We called her Aunt Gabe; my mother, Rosetta [Valentine Smith]; and Mary [ph.], the youngest-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and one son, William [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 169140 Speaker 1: Rosetta [Valentine Smith], your mother, she was born there in Natchez [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: She was born in Natchez. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the date she was born or approximately? Speaker 2: She, I, she was born September, like 1908 or '9 [1909]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I forget exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as I said, she was the second, I guess she was actually the third oldest, 'cause I think Uncle Son [ph.], William--we called him Son--Uncle Son was, was next to, to Aunt Gabe and then my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, I'm sure your mother told you some stories growing up, what her life was like. Do you remember any of those stories that she may have related to you? Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it was, it was pretty tough. I appreciated it later that it was pretty tough. As I said, when, when, when Papa John died, they were pretty much left to fend for themselves. And I never understood, because Aunt Gabe [ph.] was the oldest, but either she was either further along in school or, or what, or, or I think maybe my mother had sort of, even at that age, like, and this is like, I think she was seven years old or something, you know, really a baby herself. But you know, she evidently had sort of like a go-getter kind of attitude and where she just kind of seized the bull by the horn. She knew that Mama Dora needed help, you know, and in sort of feeding (unclear). And so she left school and started working alongside of, of, of her mother [Dora Stewart Valentine]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, and-- Speaker 1: Her mother, Dora? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, doing housework? Speaker 2: Doing housework, yeah. And Mama Dora I think got seven dollars a week, and my mother got six dollars a week. And-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's, it's pretty amazing. Speaker 1: That, that is amazing. Speaker 2: It, it, it's pretty amazing. Speaker 1: 'Cause she was around seven or eight at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: So that was--and your, your Aunt Gabrielle and-- Speaker 2: Mary. Speaker 1: --Mary, they, they stayed home to take care-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --of the house? Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, and they, and they also stayed in school, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, they went on to school. Speaker 1: So your mother had to leave school? Speaker 2: My mother had to leave school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, any other stories that you remember your mother telling you about what life was like? Speaker 2: Well, I, well, yeah, I, you know, I remember her telling me about getting like a charge account at like one of the department stores in Natchez, you know, when she, it was like a coat she wanted, you know. And she'd go, and it's like the lay-away. Are you familiar with the lay-away, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --like the staple of buying stuff on time, you go and then put a little bit on it at a time. So there was a coat that she wanted, you know, and you know. And she's like, maybe, maybe's ten now. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, so she goes in and, and, and you know, she has this conversation with the white folks running the store, you know. She wants this coat. And so she gets to the counter, and she goes by and puts, you know, $0.50 cents a week or whatever she could afford on there, and you know, she bought this coat. And you know, through this, she established like credit at these stores, you know, this little girl, really. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And you know, it was the kind of relationship that she had her at all these stores, even as we grew up, you know. We, we later came to understand how mama had all of these relationships with all these people in these stores. And it went back to these many years. Story_ID: 169141 Speaker 1: And there was a woman that, I guess she [Smith's mother, Rosetta Valentine Smith] was hired to be like her companion maybe, like a little girl who was maybe either a year younger than her or the same age, you know. She was sort of like a little babysitter. Her name was Janice Tremble [ph.]. And you know, even when we grew up, you know, years later, there was, they still had this relationship, you know. And I under--I didn't understand it until years later in my life, after I was grown like. 'Cause my mother would--she'd get Christmas cards from, from these people. They lived in Chicago [Illinois], and you know, they were from a pretty wealthy family there. And my mother would write these long letters. I mean when you, when you think about how I became to be a writer and where I think I got my-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --talent from. I mean it was a gift. I inherited it from my mother, because I just told you she left school at six or seven years old. Speaker 2: And yet she was a prolific writer. Speaker 1: She was a prolific writer, a prolific writer, I mean great detailed letters. When I was in college, but even before I left, you know, I would see her writing. She, she, she wrote with a fountain pen. And she'd get these letter writing notebooks. You know, back in the day before computers, you know, they'd have like stationary stores where you could get like letter size pads. And she'd get these, these pads and you know, she'd, she'd write, you know, cursory, you know, and she'd write like pages of letters. And I would read them later, after I understood narrative and detail, you know, how incredible that was. I would get them from her myself when I was in college. But she would, she would write them, and they'd go on the, start on one page, and they'd be--when she'd be done, there'd be ten pages. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And they would have great details. One of, one of my great regrets is I didn't save all those letters she wrote me when I was in school or the letters that she exchanged with her sister, because, you know, she'd have great reportage in there, you know, what had happened and you know, who had said, and she'd have dialogue. And it was just, you know-- Speaker 2: That's incredible, and, and-- Speaker 1: It's, it's pretty amazing stuff. Speaker 2: --and-- Speaker 1: And, and, and I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --you don't do that unless you enjoy-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --writing. Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly, exactly, and she really, she really would do his very religiously, she and her sisters, 'cause her sisters later moved to San Francisco [California], the Bay area right before the war. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so when--after we came along, you know, these letters would come. And it would be, you know, it was years before we actually met our aunties in California, because all of us were born after they moved to California. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: But those memories of my mother sitting at the kitchen table writing and, and you know, with her, with her fountain pen and you know, those are sort of my great moments and-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: --yeah, they have to. Speaker 1: Yeah, I-- Speaker 2: And you-- Speaker 1: --I look back at 'em. Speaker 2: --and you've saved those letters. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right? Speaker 1: Some of them, most of them, no. We've been looking for them. My sister [Yvonne Smith (ph.)], who still lives in Natchez [Mississippi], we've been tearing up the house trying to find some of them. I have, I have a, a few of them-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but not nearly--the ones, the ones that I really wish we could have had were the ones that she wrote to her sisters in, in San Francisco [California], because those were really journals of, of that time period I know, just from the letters that I would get from her after I left Natchez to go to college. You know, they would be great--they would--she would bring me up on everything that happened and who said what and you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --just, yeah, just, just wonderful, vivid reporting basically (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what she was doing. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: That's exactly what, what she was doing. And all the time she was, she was keeping Ms. Tremble, Janice Tremble [ph.]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --company-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --a, a companion-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --and doing the houses of the people there-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in, in Natchez-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: --and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and teaching herself, I mean she learned how to read I'm sure, and learned how to write obviously. You know, I don't know whether she, she learned it before she left school enough, or a lot of it obviously had to be just innate, you know, because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a lot of the language, you know, was just sort of naturally-- Speaker 2: It was beyond a seven or eight-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it-- Speaker 2: --year-old. Speaker 1: --exact, exact, yeah, absolutely. Speaker 2: So she had to learn it afterwards. Speaker 1: She had, yeah, absolutely and you know, just-- Speaker 2: That's amazing. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That is amazing. Story_ID: 169142 Speaker 1: Your aunts now, they stayed in school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And how far did they go in school, because I know in Mississippi-- Speaker 2: They, they graduated. My, my Aunt Gabe [ph.], actually before she married and, and, and, and went to California, she actually taught in, in a school in Washington, Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where they, where they grew up at, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah. Story_ID: 169143 Speaker 1: When your--your mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith] was fairly old when, when she had you as, as a son. Speaker 2: She was, she was. They, my mother and father [Eddie Smith] married in '28 [1928]. Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-eight [1928], okay. Speaker 2: But they didn't have any children until '43 [1943]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when, when, when, when my sister [Yvonne Smith (ph.)] was born. Speaker 1: Okay (unclear). So during, during that period, she continued to be a companion to Ms. Tremble [ph.], do the house and so forth? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --yeah, they--I, I think that they worked, they probably worked a number of those jobs before she, she and my dad married, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how did she meet your father? Let's--do you know that story? Speaker 2: You know, I think they had sort of mutual friends, my--because there three of them, the Valentine girls, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And you know, they were all pretty girls, and, and you know, they, they had a lot of suitors in the little town. And-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my father, Eddie Smith, was a mechanic. He's been a mechanic all his life. And they met and started dating-- Speaker 1: Auto mechanic? Speaker 2: An auto mechanic, yeah. And you know, as I said, got married in, in, in 1928. And- Speaker 1: His father was a, was a farmer and a businessman. His name was Peter Smith and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know, I remember a lot more about the family history on that side. Speaker 2: Okay. And we're gonna go-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --go, go, go to that. So they, they met and, and got married in 1928. Speaker 1: Twenty-eight [1928]. Speaker 2: And lived there in Natchez [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 169144 Speaker 1: Any stories that your mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith]-- Speaker 2: Well, it-- Speaker 1: --told you before you were born? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, yeah, I remember that she, she talked about, you know, where they lived. You know, and right after they got married they lived in a place in Natchez [Mississippi] called Purnell, Purnell Hill I think was the first house that they had in, in--you know, the house had no electricity, you know, no running water. You know, I remember her talking about, you know, kerosene lamps. And nobody, no, no black folk had electricity during this period. This is like, I guess like, you know, before the [Great] Depression or during the Depression, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And the, and the, the curious thing then, and even when we were growing up, was, although everything was segregated, the neighborhoods were integrated. Story_ID: 169145 Speaker 1: We are trying to look at what, what that neighborhood where your mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith] and father [Eddie Smith] lived, prob--probably before you were born, but what, what that neighborhood was like and the interesting aspect of that neighborhood, of Natchez, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Well, the neighborhood was pretty much, you know, what, what we would probably called substandard housing today, you know, no electricity, no running water. My mother used to talk about, you know, turning up those old fashion kerosene lamps for light, you know, potbellied stove for heating and also cooking, you know, slop, with just, just actually slop jar by the bed, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --outhouse in the back and just pretty--even though this was in the, this was in the city, if you will, in, in Natchez, but you have to, what you have to understand about my hometown in, in terms of contrasting what I just described is, on the other hand it is the locale of the largest collection of antebellum mansions in America. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Before the Civil War Natchez was the place where the planters built their-- Speaker 1: Queen city almost. Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--yeah, basically. I mean it's the oldest, it's the oldest settlement on the Mississippi River, 200 foot bluffs, a very picturesque place. And these houses, you know, were phenomenal in terms of the architecture and everything where you could--you could see that I sort of grew up really understanding the, the, the economic engine that slavery was, because I, I grew up in the, in the shadows of all of these opulent homes on the one hand. But where my, where my parents first lived, on Garden Street, you know, two-sided house, you know, wooden, wood frame houses, was in a shotgun house, the way I remember my mother describing it. I think that they, they paid seven dollars a month; in fact I, I know this because I, I've been doing some research. And I looked at the census figures for, for 1930, and I found all of them there, and they were paying seven dollars a, a month for this house. But you know, it wasn't much to look at, but it was their home, and you know, they kept it up. Probably within a street over from them were white families, pretty much the same straight living and pretty much the same housing, you know. And that was kind of a, of a, of a, an aspect of Natchez during that period, and even, you know, years later when, when I was growing up, you know. Everything was segregated. You'd see the white, white only signs on the, you know, the theaters and everything, but the neighborhoods were integrated, you know. They didn't call it that, but that's what they were. And so you know, you'd, you'd see four or five houses would be black families and then like in the middle of the block there may be two white families, and then on the other side there may be two more black families. And so you had this kind of polyglot living condition, even though everybody sort of went their separate ways. And even when I was growing up, years later, you know, every neighborhood that I lived in there were white families. I grew up playing with, with, with white kids all my life. It was one of the great contradictions. Speaker 1: Because you were all in the same economic-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --sometimes like you would--maybe the white families lived in a bigger, better house maybe down at the end of the street say, but since there were no other kids, you know, they wound up playing with the black kids and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, vice versa, you know, until they got a certain age. It was one of the things that you noticed. They got a certain age and sort of moved out, then all of a sudden they would start calling you names. But-- Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 169146 Speaker 1: --During my mother's [Rosetta Valentine Smith] era when, you know, there was not much money, there was a box factory there [in Natchez, Mississippi], and I think my mother worked there for, for a while. My father [Eddie Smith], for most of his life, worked for the, for the, the Chevrolet dealership there. It's called Jordan Auto. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it was an interesting sort of relationship which I learned about later. I don't know if you wanna go there. Speaker 2: Yeah--(unclear). Speaker 1: But Jordan Auto was owned by the Metcalfe family. The president was a man named Orrick Metcalfe, and he also was the big banker in town. He's the president of Britton & Koontz Bank. And he liked my daddy, you know. They had a relationship there. And, and how we, how we got our house--we were living--when I came along in the, in the, in the early fifties [1950s], after I was four or five years old, we were living in a house on Marine Avenue, which, which was, you know, across from the, from the Mississippi River, not right on the river. My uncle lived right on the river, but we lived across from the river. It's a-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --two-sided house. And so around '55 [1955], they built what really became the first sort of neighborhood of single-family homes for black folk in Natchez [Missippi]. It was called College Heights subdivision. Speaker 2: College Heights, all right. Speaker 1: And it was, it was called College Heights because it was right down the street from a junior college, Natchez Junior College [Natchez, Mississippi], which is run by the Baptist. And it also had like a, a pre-K, and a kindergarten, and really up to the second grade. It's where I first went to school. In fact, in fact, the first school I went to was a private school at Natchez [Junior] College. This, this is my, my mother's thinking. You know, back then I think you started to school when you were like six years old, which is very old. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And a lot of this came from the fact that in the rural, you know, black kids would start later than white kids because black kids traditionally had been used to like round up the crop. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: But--and so the public schools wouldn't start early. But Natchez College, which is this private institution and had this private sort of secondary section as well, and it was like right down the street from us, so, so my mother started me there when I was four years old. Speaker 2: And they had--there was a tuition for that, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was a tuition for it. Speaker 2: Which meant she put a, placed a high premium on education. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, oh yeah-- Speaker 2: She was, yeah, she was, she was very, very adamant about us all going to school and finishing school. Story_ID: 169147 Speaker 1: But how we got our house, I later learned this story from my mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith]. Because Orrick Metcalfe--the bank was the, was the, was the place that would give you a loan for the house. And my daddy [Eddie Smith] worked, worked for the man that owned the bank. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, and he--I, I think, I think he came to my father to say, you know, their getting ready to build these really nice homes for Negroes over there. Maybe you might wanna check it out. And so my mama, and dad, and Mr. Metcalfe get in a car one day, and they ride over to College Heights and started looking at these houses, you know. And, and the houses were very nice. You know, they're like three or four bedrooms, and a kitchen, I mean (unclear)--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --you know, just kind of amazing stuff. I mean they're very quaint now. The neighborhood is still there. Speaker 2: And we're still in the thirties [1930s], right? Speaker 1: No, this is, this is much later. This is-- Speaker 2: Oh, the, oh, oh-- Speaker 1: --this is, this is after I'm-- Speaker 2: --in, in the-- Speaker 1: This is in the fifties [1950s], like-- Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: --like, like-- Speaker 2: --in the fifties [1950s], okay. Speaker 1: --fifty, fifty, fifty-three [1953], fifty-four [1954], something like that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Maybe--yeah, because the, the, the school that I graduated from, this must have been '54 [1954], because the school that I graduated from was built in '54 [1954]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --right after the "Brown" decision [Brown v. Board of Education, 1954]. It was, you know, their way of dealing with, you know, (laughter)-- Speaker 2: What, what the "Brown" decis-- Speaker 1: --yeah, and how we really ought to give them a great separate but equal high school. And it actually turned out to be not bad. But, so my mother tells this story of, of riding over to this house, and so they look at these places. She comes to the, you know, 427 College Street, and she--that was the house that she liked. And so she says--you know, they're standing there, and she says to my daddy, she said, Eddie, she says this is our house I want here, you know. And, and so, you know, Orrick Metcalfe is there too and, and, and so she say--he says--she says he says you sure this is the one you want, Rosetta? And she says yeah, that's, that's the one I want. So, then he says okay, and he rips up the "For Sale" sign and you know, put it in the back of the car. And they go down to the bank and get their, their first home loan. And the significance of that for, for us, for our family is that these, these houses--what you have to understand is these houses--everybody in Natchez [Mississippi] is looking for a decent place to stay, including all of the middle-class people, educated people, the teachers, the preachers, the principals. And so, how we wind up in this neighborhood is because of that story. So, the neighborhood that I grew up in was people with, you know, those kind of people, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --teachers, preachers-- Speaker 2: Upwardly mobile. Speaker 1: --upwardly mobile, yeah, all of the, all of the sort of--that was the neighborhood during my childhood. Because as I say, the housing was so atrocious, most of it for black people, that this was, you know, if you lived on College Street when I was growing up, you know, you were sort of like high cotton kind of black folk. And that's-- Speaker 2: Exactly-- Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: --exactly. Speaker 1: And I always wondered, like, since my dad [Eddie Smith] was a mechanic and you know, how did we get it, get on this in here with all these folk, you know, sort of the glitterati of, of black Natchez [Mississippi] and, and how we got there with that story I just told you-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --you know-- Story_ID: 169148 Speaker 1: And that's, that--(unclear)--let's, before we go too far, I want to just go back and capture your dad's [Eddie Smith] history. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: You say you know that a little bit better. Let's, let's start with how far back in your dad's family history can, can, can you go? Speaker 2: Well, I can go to his grandfather-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Adam Smith [ph.], who was born in 1881. Speaker 1: Adam Smith, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, in, in Adams County [Mississippi]. And he was a farmer, and he, he married a woman whose name was-- Speaker 1: Adams County was a, a part of--in Mississippi, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, Adams County is just right outside of, I mean that's, Natchez [Mississippi] is basically the county seat of Adams County, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Natchez is really the big, the biggest city there. When I was growing up, it was a city of about 25,000, which made it the seventh largest city in Mississippi. At that time, Mississippi, as you know, was made of, of small cities. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so there were a number of sort of unincorporated areas of Adams County, Roxie [Mississippi] and Washington [Mississippi]. I mentioned Washington-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Doloroso [Mississippi], all in the, in the rural Adams County area. Speaker 1: Let me just ask you this: the date of birth for Adam Smith was--did--I know 1880--'81 [1881]-- Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-one [1881]. Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1887]-- Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1881], eighteen eighty-one [1881]. Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1881]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, do, do you have a more definitive date for the date of birth? Speaker 2: You know, I do. I don't remember it exactly, but I know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause we've, we've done like the family history for a family reunion and stuff with, with that-- Speaker 1: Good enough. Speaker 2: --on it. Speaker 1: Good enough. Speaker 2: Okay, and your grandfather, what, what was your grandfather like? He, he was living in Adams County. Speaker 1: My, my grandfather, Pete, Peter Smith--we called him Pop Pete. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. Your, your grandfather was--oh, okay-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --we're still talking about Adam Smith, though? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, well, Adam, Adam Smith-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --was, is, is my what, great-great-grandfather, my, my-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --my, my, my father's father, father. What's that, the great-- Speaker 2: Yeah, your great-grandfather would be your father's great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay, well, Adam Smith would have been my father's grandfather. Speaker 2: Okay, your father's-- Speaker 1: That was Pop Pete's-- Speaker 2: --grand, grandfather. Speaker 1: That was Pop Pete, who was my grandfather. My daddy's-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --daddy is Peter Smith. Speaker 2: Okay, and Peter Smith, okay, which would be your grandfather. Speaker 1: That's my grandfather. Speaker 2: Right, okay. Let's, let's go with Adam Smith. What kind of work did Adam Smith-- Speaker 1: He was a farmer, and, and he was also a small businessman. He, he ran some kind of store in Adams County. Speaker 2: Okay. And do you remember his wife's name or your great-grandmother? Speaker 1: His, his wife's name was, was Mary [ph.] as well. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was also my grandmother's name. Speaker 2: Okay, and small businessman. Do you remember what kind of business? Speaker 1: You know, I just think that it was probably like a little general store, you know. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, and some of the memories of, of--not memories-- Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: --but stories that have-- Speaker 1: Well, I just, just-- Speaker 2: --been passed down-- Speaker 1: --(laughter) what--he, he was, you know, he, he was sort of extravagant. My, my, my Aunt Mary, who was sort of the, the family historian on my father's side, you know, they used to tell a story of him lighting his, his pipe or his, his cigar with like dollar bills, you know. And Aunt Mary would joke that yeah, that was why we didn't have any money, you know, 'cause he was (laughter), he was too busy showing off, burning it. Story_ID: 169149 Speaker 1: Any other stories? Speaker 2: Those--I'm, I'm trying to think of the, the story involving--you know, I really, I really can't-- Speaker 1: That's okay. That's a long way back-- Speaker 2: Yeah, re, re, recall. Speaker 1: --you know, since you were there (laughter). Speaker 2: Exactly, you know, there, there, there, there's one (unclear)--(unclear)--I don't go into 'cause I can't remember it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I have more stories about Pop Pete [Peter Smith]. That was my grandfather. We called him-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Pop Pete. We called our grandmother-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Ma Mae and our grandfather Pop Pete. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you know, he was, he was, you know, short, sort of barrel-chested guy, but, but he was a real go-getter. My, my earliest memory of him, he had what, what we called the, the home house on Claiborne Street [Natchez, Mississippi], which is big two-sided house that, that he had for, for many, many years. He had it when I was growing up. And I think my father grew up there too. But he sold ice. He had like an ice box out front. You know, back in those days, you know, when, when people, if they had refrigerators, you know, you had the big chunk of ice that you would-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you had the iceman, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He sold ice and coal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he also had a little store out in, out in, out in Washington [Mississippi]. And he had a, he had a horse, and no, actually it was a mule. He had a, he had a, a wagon, which he would hold the coal in and mules; he had two white mules. And you know, in the fifties [1950s], you know, we'd be somewhere, and you know, we'd see, you know, this wagon roll up. And it would be Pop Pete, and he'd be going somewhere taking coal or ice, and we'd stop, you know. He'd pull up, you know, and you know, we'd say hey, Pop Pete, you know. And you know, we'd be over at, at the house and you know, somebody would come by and you know, order some ice. And you know, we'd go down with him and watch him get the, get the, those big-- Speaker 1: Tongs. Speaker 2: --those tongs. You know, he'd go in there and you know, get a big block of ice and take it out and put it in somebody's tub, and they'd take it home and you know. Speaker 1: Now, let me, let me ask you this about Pop Pete: date of birth or the--and I'm sure he was also in Adams County [Mississippi], born-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --born in Adams County. Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, you know, I-- Speaker 1: If you don't know it-- Speaker 2: Yeah I don't remember it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I just don't. I do, I know we got it. We know it, but I just don't remember it, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 169150 Speaker 1: Now, he [Smith's paternal grandfather, Pop Pete] was married to-- Speaker 2: Her name was Mary-- Speaker 1: Mary. Speaker 2: --what was Ma Mae's maiden name? Haywood. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Mary Haywood Smith. Speaker 1: H-A? Speaker 2: H-A, H-A-Y-W-O-O-D. Speaker 1: Okay, good enough. Any stories about Mary Haywood Smith? Speaker 2: My grandmother, she was a, she was a very tall, thin, you know, you know, striking woman, you know, very dark woman, you know, you know, very sort of direct, you know. She had, let's see, she had--let's see, my dad [Eddie Smith], Uncle Otis, and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Your dad was the first born? Speaker 2: My dad was the first born, then there was Uncle Otis, then there was Aunt Katie [ph.], Aunt Carrie [ph.], Aunt Lottie [ph.], and Aunt Mary Louise [ph.]. Aunt Mary Louise, she's the last of the living siblings on my father's side. She lives in, lives outside of Chicago [Illinois] now. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, so your father was the, was the oldest of the seven children? Speaker 2: Seven children. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Story_ID: 169151 Speaker 1: Any stories your, your father [Eddie Smith] tell you that, about his mother and father [Mary Haywood Smith and Peter Smith]? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, just, you know, basically, growing up, Pop Pete, you know, was always working, always had them working, you know. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember this, this story my Uncle Otis [ph.] told me about Pop Pete. He said that Pop Pete had told him and, him and my daddy--and, and, and this, and this story came about because of Uncle Otis. He had a, he had a broken little finger. I was asking him about this, this little finger that was kind of crooked on his, on his, on his right hand, how it happened. And he told me how it happened. When he was a boy, he was, he was downtown at a furniture store. And he got into this altercation with this white man who hit him. And Uncle Otis hit him back, you know, sort of cold-cocked him. And, and he said that Pop Pete had told him, you know, that if anybody ever hit you, you know, hit him back, you know. And, and, and, and, and you know, he'd deal with it. And he said the only thing he wouldn't get him out of jail for was stealing and messing with a white woman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If he did that, (laughter) he didn't have (unclear). But, but if they hit you or they attack you, you were supposed to go after 'em. So Pop Pete was a no-nonsense kind of a guy. He was, he was, he was just kind of a, a, a, a hustler back in those days, you know. Like I said, he, he farmed; he, he had his coal; he had a, he had a little store. You know, he just sort of did everything he could to, to make money. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he sent all of his girls, all of his girls went to college, you know, were teachers. Two of my aunts were, were schoolteachers when--and when I was growing up, you know, that was also sort of drummed into our head from that side of my family too, you know, this, this thing about education. And somebody was always, you know, in college, or working on a degree, or graduating or something. It was just kind of all around us. Speaker 1: Highly valued by both-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --your dad, mom and dad-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --because they had those models in the background. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 169152 Speaker 1: Now let's go ahead; we're gonna skip ahead back to where we were now, and you were born nineteen-- Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946]. Speaker 1: --forty-six [1946]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And what are your earliest memories growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I, I know that I was, I was delivered by a midwife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith]--I was born under a full moon. My mother, my mother told me that. The, the, the midwife was a woman named Ms. Fannie Shaw [ph.]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And you know, and a lot of people were born by midwives during that period. You know, there were-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --doctor, there were doctors there, but there were--you know, Ms., Ms. Fannie Shaw, this was her, you know, profession. You know, she would--the doctor would--the way my mother would describe it, the doctor would, you know, tend to the pregnant women, you know. But at the time of birth, you know, Ms. Fannie would be the one to, like, serve as a midwife, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I was, I was born like that with Ms. Fannie serving as midwife. My sister was two years older than me. Her name is Yvonne [ph.]. I remember the Marine Avenue [Natchez, Mississippi] house, the one before we moved to College Street [Natchez, Mississippi], so I must have been--actually, I must have been younger than that, 'cause when we moved to College Street, as I said, in the, in the, in the mid-'50s [1950s], '50-'53 [1953], '54 [1954], '55 [1955], something like that. But I, I have memories of Marine Avenue, of this, again, this two-sided house. We lived on one side, the, the Ford [ph.] family lived on the other side. And it had, it had a wide porch with big wooden steps, and the steps, they were up off the ground. The house was up off the ground, and I can remember playing like under the steps and under the houses as a kid. And there was a little porch on the back of the house and steps going down to the, to the backyard. And then behind us was sort of like a bayou, bayou, with sort of like a swamp. It was ground and it was sort of go off down a hill sort of. And Mr. Ford had horses. People had horses then. I grew up sort of around horses and riding (unclear)--cars, but there was also horses everywhere. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I grew up riding horses, and Mr. Ford kept these two white horses. And I can remember us playing on this blanket outside the house, outside the steps of the house and-- Speaker 1: And when you say with blank--you mean you and your sister, 'cause you-- Speaker 2: Me and my sister and my-- Speaker 1: --you were close. Speaker 2: --and my, and my younger brother, Ray [ph.]. He was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --he was born a couple of years after me, born in '48 [1948]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was the baby. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so we're sitting here on this blanket, sort of playing one day in the summer. And the horses were sort of tethered down the hill, and something spooked them. And you know, we could sort of hear this sort of neighing, pawing, and then suddenly you could hear these horses galloping like mad, coming up this hill. And, and so we're sitting there, and we look and we see these stallions sort of bearing down on us. And you know, we're trying to beat them to the steps. And my, and my sister tells the story of my little legs kind of (laughter), you know, trying to outrun these stallions. And finally we make it to the steps, and the stallions sort of like galloped past us at this, you know, kind of breakneck speed. And you know, I remember that vividly. I, I, I must have been four years old. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: The other thing that I remember about the Marine Avenue house--well, I remember the McDaniels [ph.], 'cause they had an older brother named Dike Willie [ph.]. And you know, he was much older than, than I was, but you know, we'd sort of play ball and stuff together and, and the McDaniel girls; there were three daughters, and so we all kind of played together. But again, it was one of those neighborhoods where-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --black and white sort of lived together. Story_ID: 169153 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about some of your early childhood memories. And we heard about the horses that stampeded and almost there not be a Vern Smith. But the--you were talking about Dike [neighbor Dike Willie (ph.)] in that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --next door. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dike was one of the older guys in the, in the, in the neighborhood that, you know, I grew up sort of admiring, you know, playing ball, and you know, shooting marbles, and just kind of hanging out. I was, I started to tell you about the, the, the white family that lived in the neighborhood and, and, and, and my earliest impressions are--I guess at this age I wasn't really aware of, you know, the racial dynamic of which Mississippi was at that time. But, but I, I, I was also--this incident I'll tell you, tell you about, made me aware that white folks weren't superior, you know, to black folk and, and that they could be just as crazy or whatever. And, and, and, and this is because of every afternoon during the summer--Marine Avenue was sort of like in the valley, and there was sort of like a hill across the street. The Mississippi River was behind that hill. And every afternoon about two o'clock, this-- Speaker 1: What year are we talking about approximately? Speaker 2: I would say we're talking about 1950, '51 [1951]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --something like that. Every afternoon this white girl--she was a teenager, you know--would come down to the bottom of the hill. And you know, there was a telephone pole there, and she would go there and just sort of butt her head against this telephone pole. And it would, it would, the sound would like ricochet across the street. Remember this is--she's not very close. She's not close enough really as, as we are, or, or, or even a house or so away. She's really like a street away. There's a street running in between us, but was just, it was close enough so I could hear this sound reverberating, you know, know, off this telephone pole. And I thought, you know, man, that must hurt, you know. But it always stuck in my mind as I got older, when people started talking about, you know, white supremacy and black inferiority and this. I mean I, I knew that, you know (laughter), there was at least one girl who I-- Speaker 1: That you, you were smarter than. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). I didn't have to go hit my head against the telephone pole, you know. That kind of stuck with me, (laughter) you know. Speaker 1: Wow, and you were just about-- Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: --approximately five years old (laughter). Speaker 2: I was about five years old, yeah, yeah, yeah, and, and it didn't, it didn't dawn on me. But later, that was kind of like a, a, a, an anchoring sort of moment whenever I would see these signs that said white only, and you know, hear these people railing against (laughter), you know, the mental inferiority of black people. You know, I would always sort of chuckle at, (laughter) at that. Story_ID: 169154 Speaker 1: Any more incidents like that, because we're talking about a period, you know, the early, late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] when racial segregation is still very bad-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --especially in Mississippi. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And if people got out of line, they could pay for it with, with their life, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in, in southwest Mississippi, which is where I grew up at, was, you know, among the worst of the worst. I mean, you know, as I, as I got older, I became aware of the lines of demarcation; I mean I could see the signs, I could see, you know, the big white only signs and, and, and you know, the, the--we went to the movie theaters, and you know, we, we had the--we went to the Star [Theatre], which was on the, on the black business, business street. But, but the, but the, the, the thing that I remember, too, about growing up, and I alluded to this earlier before we started talking, in terms of the sort of lack of in--of an inferiority complex growing up in Mississippi was, you know, all around me in our world, you know, in, in, in, in our all-black world. You know, there was a lot of achieving, and, and you know, all our doctors and dentists were, were black. And then at Franklin Street, there was a part of Franklin Street in downtown Natchez [Mississippi], which was like the black business district, you know, black laundries and drugstores. I remember Dumas. My, my, my doctor was Dr. A. W. Dumas, and his, his family had a drugstore there. And it was a drugstore, sort of electronics place. They sold televisions, and furniture, and washing machines, and they had like the classic soda, soda fountain, you know, with the leather bar stool, swirling counter stools. And they had a little upstairs place where you could go and sit down. And we'd--our ritual would be we'd go to the Star and go like to the balcony, you know; and then we'd go watch those cowboy movies all day; and then we'd go to the Dumas and have a soda and a, and a, and a pressed ham sandwich afterwards. So, it was the best of times. It was, it was the worst of times. But it was very dangerous. I, I, I, I understood that it was very dangerous. And there was an incident. I wrote about this in, in 'Emerge,' you know, ten years ago, sort of a, a memoir of growing up. And I remembered this very clearly. This must have been 50--'56 [1956], the year after Emmett Till. And I remember the Emmett Till incident. We were living on College Street then, and, and one of my mother's friends, we--my, my, my family, and this was interesting to me later just looking back at it, we, we, we got two newspapers in the house. We got the, the local Natchez paper, and then we got the, The Times-Picayune out of New Orleans [Louisiana]. And you know, so, you know, it was all these newspapers, and my, my mother's [Rosetta Valentine Smith] best friend, Ms. Helen Marvel [ph.], who lived across the street from us was a subscriber to Jet magazine, you know. And I remember looking in Jet and seeing that, that horrible picture of Emmett, Emmett Till. It gave, gave me nightmares. But about a year later something happened in Natchez that also made Jet. And it was these two or three black men from Natchez who had gone fishing. One was named Pink Duck, and that was his real name. His, his sister-in-law, Pearl Duck, had been my Sunday school teacher at Beulah [Baptist Church]. And so I remember one day my, my father [Eddie Smith] came home, and, and he said to my mother that, you know, they were saying uptown that Pink Duck had disappeared. And, and my mother said disappeared? And, and he said yeah, you know, they'd gone up fishing, and you know, they're overdue. And so they, they, they later launched a search for, you know, these miss, missing fisherman. And you know, they found them dead in their, in their boat. They, they had been killed. And you know, that was one of those cases, that you know, you never heard of. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But there were incidents like that. And then that incident-- Speaker 1: Had they been shot? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they'd been shot. And, and I remember Jet magazine had a story about that, and, and, and it quoted--a man named Bob Lee Williams [ph.], who was one of our neighbors, he was sort of a community leader, sort of my first Little League Baseball coach. And you know, there was just this kind of aura of you know, what had happened to these men, and what had they done, you know, to, to cause this? You know, so you--that kind of haunted me for a long time because-- Story_ID: 169155 Speaker 1: Did Natchez [Mississippi] have an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time? Speaker 2: At that time, the Natchez NAACP started probably after the "Brown" decision [Brown v. Board of Education, 1954], 'cause I, I know this because I've done a little research on it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Actually, actually, there was a chapter before the "Brown" decision. No, and, and then after the "Brown" decision, when there was this effort to, to get people to sign up and say they agreed with it, there were a number of, of black folk in Natchez who, whose, who lent their names to a petition saying that, you know, they would be prepared to go to schools if they were desegregated. And, and this list wound up being printed in the paper, and a lot of the people who signed it had to leave town. I, I remember-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that growing up. A lot of this stuff was, was whispered. Parents kept the sort of gory details from kids, but you know, you could sort of pick up on stuff. And I, I could sort of just remember some of those times when you could just sort of watch the body language and the whispers of mother and father and neighbors, you know, that there was something going on that had to do with race. And this was one of those times when you know, you know, Dr. Mackel [ph.] or, or some of the other people that had signed that letter, you know, they had to leave town. And so-- Speaker 1: So these were doctors and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I, I-- Speaker 1: --because they, they would be the initial people that the NAA-- Speaker 2: The initial people that, that started it. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: But, but, but you know, there, there were--I like to say this about Mississippi civil rights, you know, 'cause a lot of people, you know, don't quite get it, in terms of the courage of the people there. Because, you know, I just reviewed a book, the 'Autobiography of Medgar Evers' by, edited by Myrlie [Evers-Williams] and Manning Marable. And a lot of it contains personal letters and correspondence from Medgar Evers. And reading that book, you know, where Medgar Egars--Evers--starts off in the early '50s [1950s] organizing chapters in the Mississippi Delta, you know, the very first chapter's there in '50 [1950], '51 [1951], '52 [1952]. And I was reminded of the courage of, of those men like Medgar in those days because, you know, Myrlie has a line in there about being behind the cotton curtain where (unclear), you know, before Montgomery [Alabama], before like the spotlight on the movement came. And so what happened during those days, you were literally on your own. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And you know, my father [Eddie Smith] and, and all the men in our neighborhood had weapons, shotguns and rifles. And, and, and, and this was their, often their only line of defense, you know. So, you know, you have this sort of popular image of these sort of cowering Mississippians. But in fact, they didn't take a lot of stuff, and, and, they were prepared to die. This is one of the things that I remember most about growing up is, you know, the presence of guns in the house for self-defense, you know, in, in case, you know, the neighborhood was attacked by the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] or just sort of white kids cruising, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: This, this was kind of a phenomenon that was always present. Story_ID: 169156 Speaker 1: But you know, I gotta tell you that, that, you know, the sort of the contradictions of, of that period. I, I mentioned to you Mama Dora, my grandmother on my mother's side, you know, we, when we were growing up. And she lived in this house on a street behind this bigger house that was occupied by a white family, the Andersons [ph.]. And the oldest boy was named Talmadge [ph.] Anderson, and he was a big, strapping guy, dark-haired, you know. We used to say he reminded us of Elvis Presley. But this guy, to this day, treated me the same way. He, he later became the president of that bank, Britton & Koontz Bank, and we were just friends. Throughout the years he never--throughout all the racial stuff, and you know, we've never even had a conversation about this. I've often wondered. Maybe one day I'm gonna interview him and say Talmadge-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --how did you get like this? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Because I don't think his brother, David, who was younger, was like that. But I'm gonna, I'm gonna flash forward years later to sort of prove this point about Talmadge. I'm now working for Newsweek, and I'm back in town, and I need to cash a check. And so I go to the bank that he's now the president of, Britton & Koontz in this big ornate building downtown. And it's got like two floors and the executive offices are on the second floor with like a balcony overlooking the first floor. So I come in, my brother [Ray Smith (ph.)] and I, and you know, we're looking just like two Negroes who don't have nothing 'cause it's summer. And so we go in to the, to the desk. And by now the, the bank is, this is like in the eighties [1980s] probably, so the bank is not like the bank that I grew up with where you have all the all-white employees; you got some black tellers and stuff. So I go to the bank and I ask for, "Is Talmadge Anderson in?" You know, so they sort of looked me up and down. And so they say, "Yeah. Who shall I say is calling?" I said well, tell him Vernon Smith, you know, wants to see him, you know, so. You know, this is like the big boss. She's a little bit reluctant to do this, but she picks up the phone and she calls him up. And it's a few minutes, and so, you know, Talmadge comes out on the, the sort of veranda. He looks down and he says, "Hey, brother." That was my nickname that my grandmother (laughter) called me. You know, the bank, you know, you could hear a pin drop in that bank, right. So he comes down and he hugs me, and I--and he starts introducing me to the teller. He says, "eah, this is Vernon Smith. He and I grew up together (laughter)," you know. That's sort of a great rarely heard Mississippi story, but I like telling it because-- Speaker 2: I love it. Speaker 1: --it just sort of shows that human nature is just what it is, you know. And, and, and in like the worst kind of circumstances, you can find people that just kind of connect on just a human level. And, and that-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: --kind happened there with Talmadge and I. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Story_ID: 169157 Speaker 1: And this was kind of weird to me too. This was when we were on College Street [Natchez, Mississippi] now. This is like in the, in the '50s [1950s], and there's another--excuse me--there's another--these lights are hot--family that lives behind us, the Flanoyds [ph.]. And I don't know when we discovered that Mr. Homer Flanoyd, the, the daddy, is a Natchez [Mississippi] cop. I don't--we don't know it for a while. And there's like a fence. They had like a lot of property, and there was a, a fence that ran down behind our house. Their house was sort of like up, up the hill a ways, and then they had like a lot of sort of land 'cause they had animals and stuff. And, and then Willard [ph.], who was a kid about my age, he would come down. And you know, we were ten, twelve years old. We would play through the fence, like exchanging cap guns and, and, and, and so forth. And--but Mr. Homer, who was his daddy, was, he was nice as heck in the neighborhood, but when you saw him in that uniform, and, and as I say, I don't, I don't exactly--'cause we'd see him in his pickup sort of with just civilian clothes on. And they would always wave and stuff, and he had another older brother. But I saw him like light into somebody once, like downtown Natchez on, on something, I mean just sort of like verbally, just abused the heck out of him, you know. It sort of totally--'cause we thought they were sort of nice, as white folk in Natchez went, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But, but seeing him in that uniform and seeing him go off like that just really impressed me that, you know, Mr. Homer (laughter) is one of those bad guys, you know. Even though Willard and I are getting along okay over this fence-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, his daddy would probably shoot me in another circumstance, you know. Speaker 2: Did--I imagine that, that verbal abuse was delivered to a black person. Speaker 1: To a black person, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And did he ever use any of the n-words or anything during that? Do you remember? Speaker 1: Yeah, and I-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I remember another incident I mentioned in my Emerge piece about Mr. Homer. This, this just kind of really got me because it was so--I mean it, it just spoke to the sort of racial sort of etiquette of the time. College Street was sort of the neighborhood, the area where everything happened, because Natchez [Junior] College was there, and then it was like the, the black swimming pool was within this sort of area too. And Mr. Homer's house faced the street that the swimming pool was on and that Natchez College was on. And Natchez College was sort of where I learned to play basketball growing up. They had outside courts, and I would go play with the older college guys, 'cause they had a, they had a, they had a scholarship basketball team there. And so one day we were all playing, and, and one of the sons of one of the most prominent black businessmen, who was also a great basketball player in his own right, drove up, but he was in one of dad's Cadillacs. And he happened to park this Cadillac across from Mr. Homer's house, not directly in, not on his side of the street, but on the Natchez College side. And so we were up there playing and all of a sudden we hear Mr. Homer like, "Get that car from in front of my horse--my house--horse," horse was like a, a term that the police would use to address black folk, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --horse. And you know, he just gave (unclear). And so, you know, I later was thinking about this, going why did he go off like that? And then, and I concluded that, you know, it's just this black guy in a Cadillac that set him off, you know (laughter). But "horse" was one of the, one of the, one of the--I grew up listening to cops call you horse, "Where you going horse?" Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And there was another friend of mine (laughter). He was an older guy. He was a basketball player too. His nickname was Mule. His name, his real name was Gene Thompson [ph.]. And one day the cops stopped him and said, "Where you going, horse?" And he turns around and said, "My name ain't horse, it's Mule," you know (laughter). Of course cop just had a fit, you know. And everybody said "No, no, his name really is Mule, you know (laughter)." Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause they were about to kill him. Speaker 1: Would have, you know, would have. Story_ID: 169158 Speaker 1: The--I don't want to go too far before we go back to your Uncle Otis [Smith]. Now he has cold-cocked this guy in the store, and he's gonna have to run home to your dad [Eddie Smith]. Speaker 2: He ran home to, to Pop Pete [Peter Smith]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my granddaddy. Speaker 1: Your granddaddy. Speaker 2: And, and you know, you know, they, they, they settled it because it, you know, as it turned out, it was basically self-defense, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He, he was assaulted first by this guy, and he hadn't done anything, and so, you know, they, they, they, they worked it out, you know. There, there was this weird kind of thing in Natchez [Mississippi] that, you know, as I grew up and, and, and, and started to look at some of the other parts of Mississippi, you know, you know, there was a, there was a kind of genteel kind of thing going on there too. I mean you, you had, you, you had, you had a lot of Jews there during that period than when I was growing up. A lot of the merchants, the Abrams [ph.] and the Burns [ph.], you know, ran the, the stores and stuff there. We had a lot of Italians. And, and you had sort of, as I say, you had this kind of landed gentry kind of background. Even though when I did my research I found out it wasn't really landed gentry. They were all faking it, you know, since the people that actually settled Natchez all came from the Upper South, and, and really the place was settled by the French. And what the French did was, was, because it was all wilderness--this is like in the 1700s--and, and, and they gave these people, that, that, that had been in the Upper South, Virginia and so forth where their land, they had overplanted tobacco. And so they were, they were poor as church mouse. And the French wanted people to settle the Natchez territory. And so what they did was they offered anyone who would come into the territory these generous land grants, which included credit with the Jamaican Slave Company. And so-- you didn't have to pledge fidelity to the, to the crown. You just had to settle the territory. And so, you know, all these people suddenly became like landed gentry. And they created this whole sort of aura about them being born to the manner, when in fact they weren't. And then when you look at the history of how the place was settled, you know, most of the, most of the land was cleared by these French granted--land grantees with one or two slaves sort of working side by side to clear all of this piney wood and stuff, so, you know, that whole thing is kind of a myth too. Nevertheless, by the time I came along that generation was fully believing it. And so, whereas you had the, the, the typical kind of racism of the day, you had a, there was a, there was somewhat of a benign kind of element there who thought that, you know, the, the really overt sort of burning, it was just, it was bad form. You know, they, they appreciated that, you know, there was this imperial superior kind of thing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so you had this kind of--I'm getting at to say that that's, that's probably how, instead of Uncle Otis being shot, which he may have been in, in another part of Mississippi, say-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --quite likely he would have been, from all that I know about, you know, you the transgressions. I mean just like twenty-five miles south of where I grew up they had a rule where black people couldn't wear white shirts on a Sunday. I never knew that. They were (laughter)--if you had a white shirt on downtown, then they'd make you-- Speaker 1: Take-- Speaker 2: --it was like in an affront-- Speaker 1: Take it off. Speaker 2: Yeah, they'd make you take it off, you know. You were, you were an affront to the social order. So, Natchez was a, was a little bit different in that regard. It was a little--it was a river town, and I found out that river towns are different. You know, there's a greater infusion of culture and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --sentiment and people. Speaker 1: Cincinnati [Ohio] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you just-- Speaker 1: --so forth. Speaker 2: --you, so you, you so, you had like a, like a, like a different kind of--there was almost kind of a cosmopolitan flavor growing up there. And I used to tell people--you know, I went to college in San Francisco [California]. You know that, you know, until I got to San Francisco I didn't realize that bars closed at two o'clock. You know, in Natchez growing up, you know, the bars just, you know, they stayed there until people (unclear), you, you know. It was-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So and you know, it was a dry county, but you know, everybody knew that the bootleggers were-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, where they were. Story_ID: 169159 Speaker 1: And my daddy [Eddie Smith] used to tell me this story. There was a sheriff that came along when he was growing up. And the joke that he was the, the dumbest sheriff that they had ever had 'cause (laughter), you know, he kept shuttin' the bootleggers down. (Laughter) Everybody else would just take their pay and let them flourish, you know. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So, it was a place of, of--you know, I mean growing up-- Speaker 2: Contradictions. Speaker 1: --in this--yeah--growing up in this, I mean it was really a great education. I think that was one of the reasons why when I left there I had a real sense of confidence and also a sense that, you know, the world was different than what people were saying to you that it was. I remember just kind of little things, you know, like these blended families, these families in which there were white fathers, you know. And, and I remember thinking--well, you know, this is before I even knew where babies came from, but, but I had this sense that, you know, if you had to have a baby by a black woman, you had to get pretty close to her. And so this whole sense of you know, white people not standing to be around black people, I could see was, you know, there's a contradiction there too. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 169160 Speaker 1: Let's continue where we were going about the contradictions there in the South in different parts of even Mississippi, where they could, some people could be mean-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and others who were more genteel-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --more educated might-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --try to find a way-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --to alleviate-- Speaker 2: --and, and, and some were, were, I mean they knew better, you know, the, the, the, the, the thing that, you know, you can't find there now is anybody who actually supported the way of life that was going then, but of course-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --they had to, you know. But I, but I will say, too, though that, that the, the other thing that I was struck by growing up is, you know, the political leadership. You know, there was not one person in government that I had any respect for, you know, and, and felt that they all had my worst interest at heart, in the governor's-- Speaker 1: Now how old when you were when you sort of discovered this or it dawned or started-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --dawning on you. Speaker 2: --you know, my father [Eddie Smith] would, would talk about [Theodore G.] Bilbo, you know. And, and you know, they would, they would tell these jokes about--but they would laugh about, you know, that sort of gallows black humor, you know, that kind of sort of vitriol that Bilbo would spew on the stump, you know, about nigger this, and nigger that, you know, and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and this was the way you got votes there. And so you know, it just, I just knew from him. You know, my, my era was people like Ross Barnett and, and Paul [B.] Johnson [Jr.], you know. But, but these people were, were the governor. And, and I remember even as a, as a kid this sense of, of no recourse, you know. I probably couldn't articulate it like that, but I'm thinking gee whiz, you know. I know here that the worst thing you wanna do is call the police (laughter), you know, or the sheriff, you know. Now I see the governor (laughter), you know, what I mean? You know, it, it was like where, one reason I was probably always geared towards getting out of there soon after high school, was this stifling sort of-- Speaker 1: But as you-- Speaker 2: --atmosphere. Speaker 1: --as this started to dawn on you, approximately how, how old were, were you? Speaker 2: Maybe, well, I-the Pink Duck experience that I mentioned, you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that was about '56 [1956]. I was maybe ten years old-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --then. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And so, from that point on probably. I was, I was aware that the sort of, you know, the government sort of thing, the system sort of thing wasn't for you. That, you know, that was not where you were gonna get any relief, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, and the Mr. Homer [Flanoyd (ph.)] incidents-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know. And so, you know, we were, we were, we were terrified of the police because, you know, they had guns. But you know, they just had a, a mean attitude about them. You know what I'm saying, you know, "Little nigger this, ya'll get off the street." You know, you know what I mean? You just had this sense that they'd shoot you, just as soon as shoot you as, as look at you. You didn't have to do anything, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And you know, who are you gonna call, the governor? You know, so this, this sense of being--you know, when, when, when Myrlie Evers [-Williams] talks about behind the cotton curtain and this sense of being, even though I couldn't articulate it, I was internalizing it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then I could see, as I said, these kids that were, that looked white, you know, that were like our neighbors and stuff, and, and you know, and they had white fathers, you know. And, and then there were places where you would see, you know, white men--actually I remember cops coming through some of the neighborhoods and like, you know, picking up women and, and stuff. And, and so all this stuff is, is in the back of my mind as I'm growing up because I'm trying to process it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: 'Cause on the one hand they're telling us what a terrible set of people we are and blah, blah, blah. But on the other hand I'm seeing like this kind of taking up with black women, so, so, and then I'm seeing the result of it, 'cause I see these little half white, half black kids, so I know something is up. Speaker 1: You're processing all of this. Speaker 2: I'm processing all of this-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, as ten, twelve years old, and, and I'm watching how my dad interacts with these people, you know. Story_ID: 169161 Speaker 1: Now are you still in private school at this time? And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, by then, I'm--I only went to private school until like the second grade, then we to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --public school. My, my-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --my first public school was Prince Street School [Natchez Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was actually right down the street from my grandmother's [Dora Stewart Valentine] house on Clai--on, on Prince Street, really. Claiborne sort of crossed it. Speaker 1: Were all of the teachers there black? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, principals, teachers-- Speaker 1: Everybody. Speaker 2: Yeah. And the thing then was they were all people that we knew, or they went to our church, or they went to somebody's church, or they were somebody's mother or grandmother, you know. And you couldn't get away with stuff, you know. They would look at you and go like, "Yeah, you're, you're Eddie and Rose's boy," you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 169162 Speaker 1: And you know, then I went to Thompson, Sadie V. Thompson High School [Natchez, Mississippi]. Sadie V. Thompson High School was named after a black educator there, a woman, Sadie V. Thompson, and it was built in '54 [1954]. And as I say, when I later looked back at the construction of, of, of this school, and, and it was a magnificent plan. We, we, we were probably the envy of black students around Mississippi, especially outside of Jackson [Mississippi]. You know, Jackson they had Lanier High School, and Jim Hill [High School]. They had a lot of black, historically black schools, but-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, in most of the places, you know. We had a big gym, big cafeteria, auditorium, and it was unheard of. We used to say that, you know, it was supposed to have been a white school, and they mixed the plans up. And they, you know, built it on, on our side of town, which is, which was, you know, sort of, kind of true. I mean it was, it was actually, it had to be built as a kind of last-gasp attempt to stave off-- Speaker 2: Integration. Speaker 1: --integration. And in fact-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it did, because you know, I didn't go to integrated schools. My--none of, no, none of us did. My brother [Ray Smith (ph.)]who graduated three years after I did, you know, also graduated from segregated schools. But you know, we didn't care because, as I said, we had a great plan; we had a great facility, and it was like for us, it was like, you know, a block from our street. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, everything sort of revolved around there. When I was in fifth grade, the school was so big that you had the high school classes on top, and then in the, on the lower level you had elementary classes. And so I went to, to elementary school at, at Thompson as well and I went to high school there. Story_ID: 169163 Speaker 1: The thing that I remember about those years and the, and the kind of influence that it, it had on me was how all around all the guys were that I admired, you know, I admired, of course, the athletes. But the athletes were all like student council presidents, and you know, they got good grades and stuff. And one of my, one of my heroes was, was, was a guy named Willie Woods [ph.], you know. Willie was like a three-sport athlete, you know, baseball, basketball, football, you know, and he was like a straight-A student, you know. And you know, I would tag along behind him, you know, playing ball. And then when I found out that, you know, he really liked the books, you know, that was something that I aspired to as well. And so, one of the things that the guys that I grew up with sort of incorporated into our lives is, is getting good grades, you know. And if you failed a class or you got the lowest score, man, you just, you were the laughing stock of the group, you know. And so even though we did all these other things, getting good grades and, and like being smart was something that we aspired to, you know. Speaker 2: I was looking to see what made that such, or era--area--unique, because so many areas you'd be a great hero-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --if you are a great athlete but don't care about-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --studies. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But there was a premium-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --on learning-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in your, in your area. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a premium on learning, on, on doing well, you know. And you know, the girls didn't like you if you were dumb either. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was, that was the other thing that, that I remember. You know, if you were like getting a lot of Fs and stuff, you know, it was like you couldn't talk to like (laughter), you know what I mean (laughter)? Like get out of here, you know. I mean the worst thing you could be called was a dummy, you know. I mean people really took that to heart. Man, and I remember we would compete, man. If you got like, you know, an 89 and somebody else got an 80 or a 92, man, you were ticked at yourself. You know what I mean? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: 'Cause they would like it. What'd you get? That would be the first thing. I got a 92. Ah, man, you know, how'd you do better than me? You know, and these were the same guys that, you know, would do all of the sort of things that you do, you know, as I say, play ball and you know, when you're old enough, you know, drink cheap wine and stuff. You know, all this stuff and yet, you know, there was this aspect of being rounded. A lot of it came from, as I, as I, as I said, and then when I look back at it, I think a lot of it came from the community. There was sort of like--if especially my neighborhood, but I think this was kind of true. This was interesting too, that although there was a class thing, as, as there was everywhere in terms of, you know, some people's parents had more money than others, but one of the sort of--and that didn't mean that you could actually be the better student, you know--and so one of the sort of great equalizers was for the kids who maybe didn't come from like the most means, but you know, they were smart-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, and so you could sort of like level that playing field in that way. Story_ID: 169164 Speaker 1: Now you were going through all of that, and things were happening on the downtown area [of Natchez, Mississippi], over in the white areas, blacks getting into trouble, getting beat up. Were there any lynchings occurring? Speaker 2: There were--the, the, the '60s [1960s], you know, during, during the '50s [1950s], I think that there was more, there was more stuff going on than realized. As I say, in many ways we were sort of sheltered from a lot of the, the harsher stuff, you know, and then we also had our own little world in which we could do everything. So, so when you came across white people, other than the ones who were living in your neighborhood, who you all knew-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, it was in the stores downtown. And I can remember, you know, you know, we would like go to a store, and you know, we'd see the white, colored drinking fountains. And we'd just take a drink out of the white fountain just, you know, you know to be contrarian. You know, we knew that this was like striking a blow just because obviously they don't want you to drink out of it or-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --they wouldn't have these, these signs there. You know, and so you were aware of the disparity, you know, the--I mean you could see, you know, how people were living, you know, the white neighborhood and the black neighborhood. It was stark, you know, and, and also the jobs. I mean it was not until the protests of the '60s [1960s] that, you know, the first black store clerks were hired and, and, and you know, police officers, that, that, that kind of thing. You know, I can remember the first police officers. This was probably after I had left there and went to college but this was still, this was still going on. You know, they could only patrol certain parts of the, of the, the community, the black part. But the violence there and the, and the, and the, the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] activity was, was strong all through the civil rights era. Speaker 1: But it seems that Natchez [Mississippi], unlike some of the things I've read from Richard Wright and so forth, it seemed that there was a certain amount of protection because they were a little bit more genteel. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Whites did not want the reputation-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of just being harsh, bullying-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --and so forth. Speaker 2: Yeah, you had, you had--you didn't, you didn't sort of have that, that rawboned, redneck, if you will, kind of, kind of quality there within Natchez. Natchez was, when I look back at it, it was kind of a little enclave-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --although it, it had its mean people. But you know, that area that Bob Moses talks about between Natchez and like Jackson [Mississippi], sort of McComb [Mississiippi], Brookhaven [Mississippi], you know, Magnolia [Mississippi], you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --these places, because they, they were more rural--these are, these are little, little towns in which, you know, everything is sort of tied to the, to the plantation kind of economy. And, and so even though black people were predominant, you know, they were, they were disenfranchised largely because of the violence. Story_ID: 169165 Speaker 1: You know, since I've become a reporter, I mean I've talked to people through there about lynchings and this kind of thing that you never heard of. And just last year when I was working on The Voices of the Civil Rights Project, and I was in, in Jackson [Mississippi], and there was a, a woman from Centreville, Mississippi, which is about twenty-five miles or so from where I grew up, and she started to talk about a murder in the fifties [1950s] that I had never heard of. And I'd done quite a bit of research on, on the civil rights violence. And this was a, a murder that took place in Centreville in like 1951 or so, a man by the name Sam O'Quinn, who was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] head there. He was, he was a businessman too. He was assassinated, and it sort of chilled the whole community, which, which a lot of these, these killings were all about. Now, when I came back in '65 [1965] to Natchez, after I had gone off to college, the, the NAACP had then, who was a man named George Metcalfe. And the summer of '65 [1965] he was blown up in his truck. He wasn't killed. He was, he was maimed. But I remember it so well because I remember after this happened, all of the sort of black men in, in the town had, had come to this funeral home down on, downtown on, on Pine Street. And I remember going down there, and I, and I saw all these guys that I knew, you know, Harrett E. Gaylor [ph.], you know, A. J. (unclear) up on the roof of this building. And they all had these long guns, and they were patrolling. And the people were in the streets. And you know, I remember the National Guard came in and this went on, and I left at the end of August to go back to college. But the protests, I remember marching that summer. Story_ID: 169166 Speaker 1: There was a grocery that was not far from where we lived called Nassau City [ph.]. It was firebombed. And I remember participating in a, in a march there, in a, in a--with, with picket signs. I remember this guy, this painter, white painter, and he had a station wagon, and he had like a German shepherd at the, on the tail part of it. And you know, as we marched, he kept backing that station wagon up to the line. Of course the dog is snarling and you know, drooling, and you know, he's, you know, brings it sort of like--and, and, and so, you know, as he moves forward, we sort of shortened our circle, you know. He keeps, you know, backing across the lot, and behind us is sort of this rubble where this, this firebombing had taken place. And, and, and this, this sort of cat and mouse game went on for like, you know, thirty-five, forty minutes before the guy just kind of got in his car and drove off. Story_ID: 169167 Speaker 1: The other thing that I remember, it's kind of coming back to me now in terms of kind of the, the, the duplicity of some people. There was a man my friends said they called, they used to call him the "door-to-door man." You ever heard that, that, that term, the door-to-door man? Speaker 2: Mm-mm. Speaker 1: It's like a peddler; it's like a peddler that would carry his wares in the trunk of his car. And this man, his name was Mr. Mack. And I remember him coming through out neighborhood over the years with stuff to sell. He'd have like clothes, and he'd like come to our house and--or somebody else's house. And like all the ladies in the neighborhood would come out, and he'd spread out his shirts and whatever he had, and you know, they'd buy. Then later on he became--he sold insurance. And I even once--he even took me out to rake the leaves on his yard. And I remember sitting on his--it was like out in a white neighborhood, and I remember he left me there. And I was--and nobody was there with me. And I remember sitting on the steps going, man-- Speaker 2: And he was a white peddler? Speaker 1: He was a white peddler. Yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --he was a white man, tall, thin, white guy, used to wear a straw hat, and suspenders, and a white shirt, Mr. Mack. And I remember sitting on his, on his steps wondering like, man, I hope he hurry up, hurry, hurry's and gets back here, 'cause I don't wanna be sitting on this step. Somebody think I'm doing something in this neighborhood. But when the, when the violence started and the [Ku Klux] Klan [KK] started to marching Downtown Natchez [Mississippi] in, you know, July, where it gets to be in August, where it gets to be 98 in the shade-- Speaker 2: And the, and the, and the date was Jul--July, August of? Speaker 1: Just, year of '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 1: And so, you know, the Klan's having a big march there in all of their regalia. And so it's so hot there that, you know, one of the men keels over from the heat, you know, and so you know, he's about to suffocate under this hood. And so when they pull the hood off to give him air, people recognized him. It was Mr. Mack. Story_ID: 169168 Speaker 1: Let me just take you back a little, because let's put, put you in high school [Sadie V. Thompson High School, Natchez, Mississippi] your junior or senior year. And you've decided that you might want to be a writer or journalist. And you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, actually, I actually know by the time I'm about twelve that I wanna be a writer. Speaker 1: Okay, because of the influence of your mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith]? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, and I, I had an aptitude for it, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean it was a gift. I had a facility for words. I could string words together. I could recognize words before I really knew what they meant. My mom [Rosetta Valentine Smith] would tell me later. And as I say, obviously I think I inherited that from her, if you can inherit a talent like that. And so I was always writing. At first I started reading. I was a voracious reader, mainly because of my sister who was a voracious reader. And so I would read everything that she would read, and she was reading like a lot of those soap opera, like 'Bronze Thrills' and you know, it was a company out of Houston [Texas] that would publish like those 'Sepia.' You know, they were like, sort of like black romance, you know, "my husband-" and I would read all these things. And then I started to read books, you know, sports books and--at some point, you know, reading was not enough, and I wanted to make up my own stories, and I would do that, you know. And so I would write sports stories. And when I was about thirteen, I told my daddy--I bugged my daddy [Eddie Smith] to get me a typewriter, and so he got me a typewriter. He bought it from a place called Kimbels [ph.]. It was like an Underwood. No, it was a Royal, black, heavy Royal, you know. And I remember he brought it home, and it, and it was, it was a typewriter that, it didn't have the letters on it. You remember those? Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: (Unclear) so I said "Daddy, it doesn't have any letters." So he took it back, and they put like the letters on like. And so, that was my first typewriter. And I was about thirteen, and I would make up little stories. When I got in high school, one of my teachers, Mrs. Dunan [ph.], Annette Dunan, her husband--this is so you--sort of like the community thing. Her husband was my barber, Lee Dunan, and so we'd go there every Saturday. And one of her daughters was also my classmates, Susan. And so, she was like my homeroom teacher when I was a senior. You know, I told her, you know, what I wanted to do, and she said well, you, you know, what you wanna do is you wanna study journalism, you know. And so, you know, that kind of set me on the path to that. And in high school we, we had a paper my senior year called 'The Victorian.' And I was the sports editor for the, for my high school paper. You know, we, we published maybe like three editions of it, and I would, you know, write about sports teams and, and stuff. And so that was kind of my--so when I left there I knew when I got to San Francisco State I knew exactly what I was gonna major in-- Story_ID: 169169 Speaker 1: How did you select San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California]? Speaker 2: Well, remember I told you my Aunt Gabe [ph.] and Aunt Mary [ph.] had moved out to San Francisco [California] before the war? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so they were there. And my mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith] had gone out there probably when we were, in, in the fifties [1950s]. And my sister had gone out in sixty-one [1961] and stayed a couple of years and came back before I got out of high school. But I knew that I wanted to be a writer, and I didn't think that I could do it, I could study it at the black colleges, you know, 'cause none of them had, had English programs. They didn't have journalism programs, and so I couldn't go to Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] or any of the other schools. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So that was the main thing. I wanted to go to school where I could study writing, and I wanted to go to California, you know. I just wanted out of Mississippi, you know. I knew that there was a bigger, larger world out there, and you know, and I said to, to my dad [Eddie Smith], I said dad, you know, if you just get me out there, you know, I'll take care. You know, just get me a bus ticket and get me out there, and, and, and I'll take, I'll take care of the rest. And so, you know, they did, and they bought me a ticket. And I was, I was eighteen when I left Mississippi, and I went out there in, in the spring of 1964. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I rode the Greyhound bus. And I remember riding the Greyhound bus, and I remember sort of when we, when we got like beyond the Mason-Dixon [line]. You know, she like took like three or four days to get out there, you know, and then, and I remember sort of the, the sense of being able to sit anywhere on the bus I wanted to. I mean I was like leaving Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --leaving the South, you know. And I'll never forget like we finally got there and went to ari-- you know, Arizona. I remember getting out, out of--off the bus at Gila Bend, Arizona, and (laughter) I had a Hershey bar. And between the bus and the little cafe, the Hershey bar had melted, man. It was hot, you know. But I remember the bus pulled in to like San Francisco Market Street, and I remember, you know, thinking and imagining what a big city would look like, you know. And you know, I'm riding through Downtown San Francisco, and I'm saying yeah, you know-- Speaker 1: This is it. Speaker 2: I'm gonna like this place. Story_ID: 169170 Speaker 1: There was a port--portion that we left out about your Uncle Otis. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I wanted to get that in. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I mean when, when I think of growing up, I mean Uncle Otis was, was such a, a big part of, of, of the fun of growing up. He was a musician, and when I was growing up, he had a band of about ten instruments, ten pieces. He was a singer. And--but I--before that he had a really big band. It was a contemporary of [Duke] Ellington's and [Louis] Armstrong and sort of traveled all over. But when, when we were growing up, he would play around Natchez [Mississippi], you know, and we'd see signs, you know, Otis Smith and His Orchestra will be, you know, at the Savoy Grill. You know, and, and we'd go, even though we were kids. You know, we'd go, tagging along with, with our parents, 'cause whenever he'd play, like, you know, all the aunts and uncles would go, you know, places like the Horseshoe Lounge and so. Twelve, thirteen years old, we were in these clubs and we're, we're backgrounding Uncle Otis's band, and, and, and just, it was just great. And the musicians would, would come--when he would come into town he would rehearse at his, at his house, and we'd go down and listen to them play. It was just great fun, you know, having a, a big--around all that music, and having an uncle that was a musician-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was a lot of fun. He would always talk about, later as he got older and, and as [President] Bill Clinton became prominent, he would talk about how he, how he knew Clinton. You know, when, when he would play the clubs in Hot Springs [Arkansas], that Clinton would come and play his saxophone. 'Cause you know Clinton was a, was a saxophone player. And so, you know, we, we, we didn't have any reason not to, to believe him. You fast forward to Bill Clinton, the president of the United States and, and Uncle Otis, who's now up in, up in age, and he has a doctor that he sees and you know, doctors talking to him about his career. He sees Clinton and he says "Yeah, you know, I taught that boy how to play the sax, you know." So, the doctor writes Bill Clinton and says, you know, I've got this patient out here in Natchez, Mississippi, Otis Smith, and you know, he says that, you know, he, he knew you back when you were born in Hot Springs and used to play his horn, you know. And so Clinton writes back, says "Oh yeah, you know, I know Otis" and you know, yeah--(unclear). The, the tragedy, and I don't even know if Clinton knows this, maybe he does, was the letter arrived the day after Uncle Otis died. Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. Speaker 1: You'll be able to tell Clinton that tomorrow? Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I have a CD with two songs that Uncle Otis recorded. And it's, it's funny that Clinton is gonna be here, because when I, when I got 'em and I sort of made this little thing, I said you know, Clinton would have probably loved to have these songs. One of the songs is called, 'You're So Good Looking,' and the other is, 'Sunday School Woman.' And I remember listening to these songs and singing them when we were growing up. And somebody got a hold of it and converted to, to a CD and sent it to my cousin, one of Uncle Otis's daughters. And she sent it to me, and I made some copies of, of it and made like a little cover, Otis Smith and His Orchestra, with a picture of Uncle Otis with his sax, you know, and I sent it out to, to some friends. But when I saw Clinton was gonna be here, I, I was gonna make a point to-- Speaker 1: Give him a copy. Speaker 2: --give him a copy, 'cause I figured he might-- Speaker 1: I think he would appreciate it. Speaker 2: --really appreciate that, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 169171 Speaker 1: Anyway, we're back now to your arriving in San Francisco [California]. Now you know what a real city looks like. Speaker 2: Now I'm in San Francisco and you know, I can't believe it, you know. One of the first things that I discovered is the San Francisco Public Library, you know, and you know, I, I haunt this place because, you know, I just can't believe all these books you can check out for free, you know. And so, this is before I started college, because I worked, when I got there I worked like--I got there in the spring, and I worked until like fall, you know, to earn money to get in school. And I met some basketball players 'cause I was a basketball player, and so they hooked me up with the basketball coach. And so he helped me get into San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California]. And then I got there and it was a wonderful university. It had just, you know, everything that you could possibly wanna study. And then in my area, which I, I majored in journalism and in radio/TV production. And so I was the sports editor of the, of the, the campus newspaper. And one of the things that I had done, I--that I found which made me really proud of my little school in Natchez [Mississippi], because you always wonder, you know, like, can you measure up. And so, you know, I got there and I found out that yeah, man, you know, I can do this stuff. You know, I made, I made the dean's list I think my, my sophomore year, you know. Story_ID: 169172 Speaker 1: --But the people at the, at the student newspaper, Bud Lebitz [ph.], who was the chairman, and Leo Young, who was one of my instructors [at San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], and, and Bud Lebitz was really instrumental in pushing me along as a, as a, as a writer and, and as a reporter, you know. I think he recognized, you know, I had some ability, and you know, he, he really nurtured it. Another key person was San Francisco Chronicle reporter, Lynn Ludlow. He was like a part-time instructor there, and so I got to know him and sort of really--I, you know, when I, when I got to State, I was also always interested in other kinds of writings, you know. TV and, and film writing was another area that I was interested in, you know. And I got into journalism because I say I liked it, you know; it was easy; it was fun. Writing had always been fun for me. Story_ID: 169173 Speaker 1: I got serious, really, about being a, a reporter though after I got a chance to go to the summer program at Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism [New York, New York]. And I got into that program because I was working at the San Francisco Chronicle. I was a copy boy; I was a sports copy boy, which was a real distinction. Because if you remember like in the old days of copy boys-- they probably called them copy clerks. They probably don't even have them now. But then copy boys, especially on the city side of a big daily were indispensable, not the least of which because they made those little booklet that the reporters type their stories on, you know. And they put the carbon in, and it flipped over, and they would like, this the city side, guys. And I didn't do that as a sports copy boy. There, there had been a tradition at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California] in the, in the journalism department that the editor, the sports editor of the Golden Gator [ph.], this job, was sort of like a perk of, of being there. I didn't realize it until later. The sports editor was a guy named Art Rosenbaum. He was another key person in sort of my evolution. That's how I wound up at, at the, at the Chronicle. And because the sports copy boy was really sort, sort of plunged in, you did reporting; I took the dictation from the, the traveling guys, the guys that covered the [San Francisco] 49ers, and the [Golden State] Warriors, and the, and Cal [California Golden Bears] and Stanford [University, Stanford, California]. You know, they'd go out and you know, I'd put on a headset, and they'd dictate their copy to me. And then I would take like the scores for like the, the sports line agate for like all the lay--the high school scores and the, the golf scores from like the, the neighboring sort of amateur links. I'd take those over the phone. And occasionally I would get a chance to write, so I wrote a couple of the profiles of San Francisco State athletes. And Art Rosenbaum was, was good about giving me my head and letting me get in the paper. Story_ID: 169174 Speaker 1: And then one, one day in '69 [1969], right before I was to receive my degree, Ken Wilson, who was the assistant news editor, came into the sports department one day. And he, and he had this brochure from the summer program from minority journalists that was just starting up at Columbia University [New York City, New York]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --headed up by Fred Friendly. And so I looked, I looked at it, and, and you know, it was a program that they were trying to increase. And really I later learned it grew out of the, the Kerner Commission Report of 1968 [The National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --which, as you know, when it started to pinpoint reasons for the civil disturbances that had--like clockwork, from '64 [1964] to '68 [1968], it happened in urban areas all over the, the summer. And Otto Kerner [Jr.], who was this governor of Illinois I believe-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --had been, created this commission to study the cause of the riots and what could be done. And one of the things that they concluded was that the press, the mainstream media, had fallen way down in terms of preparing, covering all of America, I guess is one way to put it. And, and so, the, the conditions that spawn the riots apparently hit like something out of the blue, you know, had I but known. And, and, and out of, out of this came this effort to like better cover minority communities. And since there was--they weren't gonna do it with who was already existing. They created this program to train people who had aptitude for journalism or who wanted to be journalists, and then you were guaranteed a job after the program. And so Ken came to me and he said you know, why don't you apply to this thing, you know? This sounds kind of interesting. And so I looked at it, and you know, and I remember the test was, was I thought simple for me. It was like a James Reston column, and you had to like, like summarize what Reston was talking about, and then you had to sort of write your own kind of counter to it. And so I did that, and I was accepted into the summer program-- Story_ID: 169175 Speaker 1: --And it was there that I really go serious about becoming a journalist and, and, and, and understanding that journalists could have an impact. I mean I, I, I really left Columbia [University, New York City, New York] with, on a mission, and that was kind of part of it. And one of my--the key people there--well, there were, there were several people there, but one of the guys that, that I really looked up to, and I really learned a lot from, and who really was a guidance to me was Joe [Joseph] Strickland. And Joe at the time had just come off his Nieman Fellowship at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And he had been a reporter for a long time and was with The Detroit News. And Joe had been the reporter that broke the Algiers Motel incident, that, that case, you know where the, where during the '67 [1967] riots in Detroit [Michigan]. And he was sort of my faculty advisor along with Mel [Melvin] Mencher, who was, I think was the dean of Columbia. Story_ID: 169176 Speaker 1: And, and so, you know, it was there that I started to read the, the New York Times every day and the Wall Street Journal and, and really got turned on to being a reporter. And at the end of the program I got a couple of offers. Joe [Joseph Strickland] had just come back from the Nieman Fellowship, and the person that he was on the Nieman Fellowship with was a man named Larry Allison. And Larry was the managing editor of the Long Beach Independent Press-Telegram. And Joe thought that that would be a good place for me. I actually really wanted to go back to San Francisco [California], but neither the [San Francisco] Chronicle or the [San Francisco] Examiner offered me a job or had--I never figured out why. I actually did pretty well at, at Columbia [University School of Journalism, New York City, New York]. And (unclear)--I had jobs. I had job offers from Newsday and the Cleveland Plain Dealer and several other papers. But I really wanted to go back to the West Coast, 'cause I thought I was a West Coast guy by then. And so I went to Long Beach [California], and that's where I started. That was my first full time reporting job and was hired there as a general assignment reporter. I wasn't the first black reporter there. I think I was the second one. But I was the only there at that time during the period that I was there. And you know, Long Beach is, you know, in L.A. [Los Angeles] County [California] we're like thirty miles-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --twenty-five miles from, from L.A. And so, you know, I was a general assignment reporter, and I was there a short time, relatively, before I went to work for Newsweek. And what happened was serendipity as much as anything. I got a hold of a story that got me on the front page a lot. Story_ID: 169177 Speaker 1: This was, this was in the summer of '69 [1969]. And what had happened was--this was during the, during the height of the Vietnam War protests. And there was a marching rally in East Los Angeles [California], Mexican-American community, organized by the, a Chicano political organization. And during that march, a disturbance erupted, the melee occurred, and sheriff deputies--there was a riot basically. Sheriff's deputy, the L.A. [Los Angeles] County [California] sheriff deputies, you know, swarmed in. And there was a journalist, Ruben Salazar, who was killed during the height of this disturbance. He was a, he was seated at a bar. He had been covering the riots, and he was seated at a bar called the Sil--Silver Dollar. And it was, it was in dispute as to what had happened, but the upshot of it was Ruben Salazar was killed when a sheriff deputy fired a tear gas projectile through an open door, and it pierced his skull. And so there was a great (unclear) cry over what had happened, and a coroner's inquest was held into the cause of his death. And I had covered the press conference that, after Salazar's death. And they liked the way I handled it, and so I got assigned to cover the coroner's inquest. So I would drive up to L.A. every morning, and I would--you know, we had, we had--and those were the days of an afternoon and a morning edition paper. And so I would, I would file a story for the morning paper when I got back, and then at midday I would come out and put a new lead on, and I would have to dictate it--so--but this was a big story in Southern California. There were two big stories during that time, two big trials actually, the coroner's inquest that I was covering and the Tate-LaBianca murder trial. That was the, the case involving Sharon Tate and the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Charles Manson case. So there was Mary Neiswender, who was covering Tate-LaBianca trial, and, and, and I was covering the [Ruben] Salazar hearing. And she used to joke that between she and I, we were putting the paper out, because every day for about two weeks either she or I had like the lead column story. And so, you know, I, I got, I got noticed. I later found out a friend of mine, Stan [Stanley] Williford, told me this. I, I said this because I had no idea, but apparently I--my stories were driving the L.A. Times editors nuts because I just had more details than--they had, they had two guys on it, and, and Stan, Stan Williford, who was, who was a black reporter for the L.A. Times, said hey, man, you're driving 'em crazy up here with your coverage (laughter) because they wanna know where you're getting all these details from. I was like, I'm just taking good notes, man. And the L.A. Times was the place that I really wanted to work at, by the way. And so I would send them great Xerox clips and stuff and some--had some guys there who were trying to get me on, but nothing happened. Story_ID: 169178 Speaker 1: One day I was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I was on a panel. We're talking about maybe the [Ruben] Salazar case with a guy named Roy Aarons, Leroy Aarons. And Roy was the West Coast bureau chief for the Washington Post. And so, after the panel discussion, Roy said, "I wanna take you upstairs to Newsweek so you can meet the bureau chief there." It's the first black bureau chief at Newsweek. His name is John Dotson. And so Roy takes me up to the Newsweek bureau, and I meet John Dotson. And so John and I started talking, and, and so he says "Well, you know, what do you wanna do?" And I says well--'cause I had, I had had a, a job offer from Time magazine, a guy named Bill Trent [William Trent]. You probably know that name. Bill Trent was like a recruiter for Time magazine. And so I don't know how he got wind of me. It wasn't through my coverage, but somehow he--somebody had given him my name. And so he had, he, he called me up and, and I met him, and you know, he wanted me to apply for Time magazine. And so I'd send him all of these clips and so forth, and then, then I got a, a call about the same time--they say when it rains, it pours, right-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --from Charles Sanders, who was the managing editor at Ebony magazine. And so, I sent him a bunch of stuff. And so, and so I, so I told, I'm telling John Dotson this, that, you know, well, I, I had these feelers from these two publications, but you know, so far they haven't gotten back to me. And so John was kind of non-committal. But a couple of days so he calls me, and he says "Hey, look, have you heard from these folk yet at Time?" I says, "No, I haven't heard anything." He says, "Well, look, I want you to send me like a couple of your best clips. Just you know, don't bother Xeroxing them; just like put 'em in an envelope and send 'em to me with like a resume. And I'm gonna send 'em back to our chief of correspondent in news--in, in, in Newsweek in New York." And so, I did that, sent, you know, my [Ruben] Salazar, a couple of my Salazar trial stories and a couple of other things. I think I even sent something from my Columbia [University, New York City, New York] summer program publication, 'cause we put a paper out there every day. And so about a week later, Dotson calls back and he says, "You know, they like your clips, and they wanna bring you back to New York for an interview. Can you get away?" You know, and I said, "Yeah, sure; you know, let me work it out," you know. And so now it's, it's, it's like February in California, and you know, I'm a California guy so I don't have a winter coat. And, and, and I'm saying to my wife, I says, "Gee, you know, I gotta get a coat to go back for this interview. You know, and, and if I don't get it, you know (laughter), we're gonna have a charge at the May Company, you know, that--you know--" Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: "--we're not gonna have any use for this." So, so, so she said, "Well, you gotta have a coat." So, so I go out to the May Company, and I get this, you know, trench coat with a lining. And Newsweek sends me these first-class tickets, you know, to New York. And so I'm flying out to New York, and I'm like man, this is kind of unbelievable. Story_ID: 169179 Speaker 1: You know, I forgot to tell you, as I talk about Newsweek, it just, just, just, just occurs to me that when I was at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California], you know, the six degree of separation thing, one of my feature writing teacher was a man named Bill Flynn, who was also the San Francisco bureau chief for Newsweek. And so I did a piece for Flynn, like a class assignment that he really liked. And he didn't have anybody in his bureau--I was a sports editor for the paper, and he didn't have anybody in his bureau who covered sports, knew that much about sports. And he had a sports story he wanted to do, and he wanted me to do it. And I also did some reporting for Newsweek for his bureau on the Black Panthers. I did an interview with, with Huey Newton. But this, this story, this was, this was in, this must have been '68 [1968]. And the story he wanted me to do was to go to San Jose [California] and do an interview with Tommie Smith, who was gonna be in the Olympics. And so I went to--did the story. Now at the end of the summer--at the end of the school year, Flynn wanted me to apply for an internship--and this was '67 [1967]--an internship with Newsweek. He says, you know--Flynn was like this great old-fashioned, little short, gnome-looking guy, you know, perpetual smoke with like the, you know, classic sort of old school news. He called me kid, you know, kid. She says he said you know they, they got some guy--he's talking about the Newsweek guy. He said, "They got some guy from Stanford [University, Stanford, California] they wanna give me, but I want you to do this," you know. And--but I didn't want to do it. Remember I told you I wasn't really serious about becoming a reporter because I wanted to go back to Mississippi. You know, I wanted to participate in that stuff. So, you know, I basically turned Flynn down. You know, that was pretty cheeky of me when I look back at it. I turned down-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --a Newsweek internship 'cause I wanted to go back to Mississippi. But I met my wife, the woman who later became my wife, so it was all good. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 169180 Speaker 1: But anyway, so all of this is kind of like rattling through my mind as I'm flying first-class to LAX [Los Angeles International Airport] to LaGuardia [Airport]. So I go into New York [City, New York] and you know, and I, I have this interview with Rod Gander, who was then Newsweek's chief of correspondents, and Harold Bruno [Harold Robinson "Hal" Bruno, Jr.], who was the news editor. And so we, you know, they talked about my clips and you know, and then basically they offered me a job on the spot, you know and you know, said you don't have to decide now, but of course, you know, it was like double what I was making at--double, when I say double it was like $15,000 dollars, but you know, (laughter) that was a lot of money-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --in, in-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --in '71 [1971], you know. Speaker 2: Now did they want you to work, work in the New York bureau, or you were gonna work in-- Speaker 1: In Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: In the Detroit bureau? Speaker 1: In Detroit. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so and then I--while I was on this trip, they routed me through Chicago [Illinois] because the Chicago--the Detroit bureau chief, a man named Jim Jones, was happened to be in Chicago. And so they flew me out there, and I met Jones in, in the Chicago bureau, and you know, we had a nice little chat. And I also met with Charles Sanders while I was there, you know-- Speaker 2: Right, with Ebony. Speaker 1: --talked to Ebony. But you know, the Newsweek thing was, I was just so impressed with how quickly they moved after having waited, you know, all these weeks to hear back from Time magazine or Ebony magazine, you know. And I liked the fact that here was John Dotson, a black bureau chief-- Story_ID: 169181 Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: And before, before we go too far, we don't want to forget how you and your wife met. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Because we're a little past that point now, so we can just drop back a little and-- Speaker 1: Okay, well, it was, it was the, it was the summer of '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And maybe I, maybe I knew her or had seen her, but, before, but I saw this summer at, at a street dance, what we, we call block hops. There was not much-- Speaker 2: This is back in Natchez [Mississippi]? Speaker 1: This is back in Natchez, yeah-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --yeah. There was not much--I was still in college, and I was like a sophomore I guess, and she had just started at Alcorn [State University, Alcorn, Mississippi], so we were both home that summer. And I saw her, you know, and you know, my wife is like about 5'9", you know. And you know, she, she had like a way of walking. She had this sort of haughty ways of holding her head that, you know, I just had to see who this woman was, you know. And so, you know, it kind of started from there, you know. And you know, we got married two years later when I graduated from State [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and right before Columbia [University, New York City, New York]. Basically, what happened was, you know, she went back to school, and I went back to school, and we sort of kept this relationship going. And then in '69 [1969] when was about to go to Columbia, I said, "Hey, look, you know, I'm getting ready to get out of here. And I'm going to Columbia, so do you wanna get married (laughter) and go to New York?" And she said, "Yeah." And so I graduated in May, closed down San Francisco, flew to Natchez [Mississippi], and we got married like one--we got married like that Saturday and went to New York that Monday. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 169182 Speaker 1: You're now are a married man, and you've just been hired by Newsweek, and-- Speaker 2: Just been hired by Newsweek, hired in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and but sent right away to the Detroit [Michigan] bureau. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I arrived in Detroit in the spring of 1971, March of '71 [1971]. And I was a junior correspondent. We had, we had a three-correspondent bureau, bureau chief and two correspondents, and I was the, the third correspondent. And I learned how to be a news magazine reporter from Jim Jones and, and Jon Lowell. Jones was mister automotive reporter at that time, you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know new Henry Ford and all of the titans of the industry by first name. And you know, he was sort of like the guy, so he was a great guy to be under because, you know, the respect and the cache of being like one of Jones's guys rubbed off on, on me. And you know, I, I sort of took to the news magazine business with, with great relish. And you know, I had, as I said, I had that earlier experience reporting for the San Francisco [California] bureau, but I remember this, the, the sort of the story that kind of crystallized for me like how you approach reporting as a news magazine reporter. And I--because, you know, there was no--you sort of got plunged right in, you know. When I got there, Jones was like yeah, hi, hi, how you doing? Here's your desk, and here is some queries, you know (laughter). Now I don't have to worry about trying to find somebody to reporter 'em, you know. And so, it was like no kind of like learning curve. You just sort got, you sort of plunged in. And so, I approached it like, particularly on a, on a story like, doing those days, a lot of times you were contributing to a bigger piece, like an education story. And so I wrote it sort of like that, sort of almost like a memo rather than a news story. And so I had all the reporting there, but I just, you know, didn't write it like you would do a, a story. And so Jones took my copy, and he, and he rewrote the top of it, and he said, he said you have to write it like they don't know anything about it, you know. And that was like a revelation to me because I'm getting this query. You know, you get queries from editors of Newsweek, and they've got like eight questions and a series of like what the story is. So I'm reading it, going well, okay, they know everything. That's why readers sort of--but it, but the approach was, as he said, you reported it and you wrote it as if it was gonna be published just like he wrote it. And that was like such a, a freeing for me, because then I realized I could do it just like I did it all of the other times when I was at a newspaper. I just had a, had a--everything was like more of a feature than a hard news kind of lead. And so, you know, I didn't have any problem like getting it. And, and you know, the thing about Newsweek was, you know, you had all of these different sections. And so I found a lot of, of interest that I could wet, that I couldn't do as a general assignment reporter at a newspaper. You know, I could never do a sports story; I could never do, or rarely do a cult--a cultural story, a science story, you know. And so I sort of did like straight breaking hard news when I was a newspaper reporter. Here, I could--if I could come up with a story that would fit into any of those sections, you know, I could sell it. And so this was like a great place to be, you know, if you had like a lot of interest, which I did, 'cause I had a bit of sports reporter, you know, when I started out. And so, they had a sports section. I did a lot of sports stories, and you know I had a television, and you know, education, you know, just everything. And, and, and I got it in terms of how you served up a story suggestion to win an editor's interest. And so, you know, I was getting into magazine a lot real, real quickly. Story_ID: 169183 Speaker 1: And I remember when I first got to Detroit [Michigan] from California, and I had this sense of Detroit, you know, the home of Motown and, and the cars and all of that, and so, but, but when I got there, the local news was full of these stories about, you know, people being found bound and gagged and you know, in a dope house. And you know, and then, then I would--you know, I had some friends there, high school friends, who had migrated to Detroit after high school in Natchez [Mississippi], and so I had kind of like a little natural kind of community there when I arrived. And you know, I would ask guys, you know, like, you know, "What is it with--you know, what are they talking about here, you know, these dope houses?" And, and, and I go into a, a, a convenience store, and you know, the entire front of the store would be like in Plexiglass (laughter). You know, what I mean? And there would be like a little window that you would put your money in, you know. And I'm like, "What is going on here?" And so, you know, I started like trying to figure out what this was all about. And I realized that there was a big heroin ep--epidemic in, in Detroit, and so, I started researching it. I sent this long story suggestion to, to the national affairs editor, the front of the book section, and it was long. And most, most story suggestions are, you know, wanna be a page or less, you know, 'cause they got a lot to read. But this stuff, I was like so taken with this subject that it was like two pages. And [Jim] Jones wasn't there. Probably if Jones had been there, it wouldn't have run that way, so-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but it's running. So when Jones gets back from some meeting, you know, this story suggestion is running, and I--and Jones went to the, to the room, the teletype room where we sent copy. And he said, "What is, what's all this?" You know, he's holding, (laughter) he's holding this up, you know. He was like, "It's too late now." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's gone. And so the next week, story suggestions went in on Friday, Thursdays and Friday, Thursdays for the back of the book; Friday's for the front of the book. So, and then, then on, on Monday the editors would meet and they'd go over all of it or Saturday probably look at 'em, and then they'd like decide what to put in the book. So, we get in Monday and I got this query from the editor of the nation saying, you know, we're planning the schedule, you know, you're great, 'Jones.' I, I called it Jones. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was, that was, that which was, which was a slang for the drug, heroin, and also the habit, you know. And actually I called it, I think I called it the, 'The Jones Men.' I did call it 'The Jones Men,' because I, I--the, the way I set the story up was, was to, I talked about it as the Jones men were, were a different kind of a new kind of ghetto gangster; you know, they're the Jones men, the men who supply the heroin to, you know, the, the junkies. And so they liked it, and they scheduled it, and then I went out and I reported it. And then it ran in, in the national affairs section. I forget the, the, the title of it. No, I know the title. It was called 'Detroit's Heroin Subculture.' And that was really like my first big national affairs story. Story_ID: 169184 Speaker 1: And out of that story came my novel, which was also called 'The Jones Men.' Speaker 2: Right, your first. Speaker 1: My first novel, and, and, and basically, it, it--after that story ran, there was great hue and cry in Detroit [Michigan]. And I remember that the Detroit City Council had a hearing on it, and, and you know, there, there was--the, the Free Press, I remember a guy in the Free Press wrote a column about it, you know. And then they, and they had all the, the narcotics people, and then they said, "Yeah, you know, he got it right. We, we got a horrendous kind of problem here." And, and, and so-- Speaker 2: They were trying to make you the bad guy though. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean they, well, they were like, "What is this?" You know, and of course the, the elements of it had been written in the, in the local press, but I had really sort of zeroed in on the lifestyle of the people that were supplying it, and it sort of gave it another kind of angle on the story. I also talked about the addiction as well. And then I wanted to write more about it. Because of course after the story ran, I would hear from a lot of family members, you know, I had great police sources. And you know, the, the--what ran in Newsweek was basically a fraction of what I had turned up. You know, it was like a three-column story, which was pretty good size story for Newsweek standards, but you know, word-wise, it was like maybe, you know, 1200 words, you know. And I probably had, you know, 3000 words worth of stuff, so I had a lot of stuff and, and it's stuff that I can put in the file. So, I was trying to like freelance, like another sort of longer version of it. It wasn't--I approached Ebony and other people and you know, nothing happened. And then one day I got a call from this publishing company. They had seen the book, the story and you know, they, they wanted, they wanted to know if I had more material, could I--I say, "Oh, yeah, you know I've, I've been wanting to do more on it." And they say, "Well, we'd like to assign you to do a book," you know. I said, "Okay, great." And he said, "Well, well, we, we're, we're, we're thinking of a novel based on this source material," and so I said, "Okay." You know, I had, I had written television scripts when I was in college and, and, and then even afterwards 'cause I was living in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at the time, you know, in L.A. [Los Angeles] County [California], and I always had that interest. And so I said well, you know, I, I never read the book, but sure (laughter). So they came in and you know, they, they, you know, I signed the contract, and, and I started to work on this book in my spare time. And I finished it up, and it, it was, it was pretty well received-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --which, which was kind of, kind of interesting to me because I sort of didn't know what I was doing in a sense. I, you know, I never took time off to finish it. I just kind of did it spare time, and weekends, and vacations, and, and I remember I finished the last chapter. By then, by the time I finished the book, I had transferred to the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau. This is like in, in 70--'73 [1973]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I remember by then I was, I was covering Hank Aaron. When I got, when I got to Atlanta, the big story was Hank Aaron's chasing Babe Ruth's career home run record. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I got assigned that story. And so I was traveling with Hank, and, and I had my little Olivetti, and, and I was still finishing up my novel. And I was in a hotel room in Texas, in Houston, when, when I wrote the last pages. Speaker 2: Of 'The Jones Men?' Speaker 1: Of 'The Jones Men,' yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 169185 Speaker 1: And you know-- Speaker 2: Now you received quite a few awards I remember-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you know, the-- Speaker 2: --on, on that. Speaker 1: --the magazine story won an award in Detroit [Michigan]. It won the Detroit Press Club Magazine Award that year. And then the, 'The Jones Men,' the book was nominated for an Edgar Award by the Mission Writers of America, and (laughter) the New York Times had it as a recommended book. I remember getting this letter, whatever. There were two--there were a lot of great reviews. It really was, it was, was astonishing to me. But I remember getting two really historic letters from my point of view. One was from a, from a man named Richard Elman, who was a novelist and was a Columbia University [New York City, New York] creative writing teacher. And he wrote me a letter. He said you know, "I got your book, and I really like it. And I'm going to pitch the--I wanna review it, and, and, and I'm gonna send it to the New York Times Book Review." He says, "I don't, you know, I haven't done anything for them in a while, but you know, I really like it and so I don't know. But you know, I wrote a really strong review, and so I'll let you know." And so, then I got another letter from Richard Condon, who is the author of 'The Manchurian Candidate.' And he was in Italy I think. And certainly I wanted him to get this note in it. It said, it said: you--it said--but it was really sent to the, to the, to the editor of, of Regnery Books, which is a small publishing company out of Chicago [Illinois] that signed me to do the book. And the, the, the, the letter from, from Richard Condon said you know, "You may use this note in any, in, in anywhere you wanna use it." And you know, it was like a rave review in it. And he, and he said it was the, it was the, the best street novel he had ever read since 'Little Caesar'-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --which is a book by W. R. Burnett-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --published back in the '30s [1930s]. And I was familiar with the movie, 'Little Caesar,' which is this great crime gangster film star, starring Edward G. Robinson-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --as, as Rico. And so, you know, I did not know that 'Little Caesar' had, had, had been a novel before, you know. And so that sent me scurrying to the library to see what he was talking about. So, so that was great. And then, and then Richard Elman's review ran in the New York Times Sunday Magazine. It was like a rave review. It, it was like a two-column review, you know. And you know, I was like too, basically too young and green to like understand the significance of that-- Story_ID: 169186 Speaker 1: And, and really, I, I was also too wedded to what I was doing as a reporter. I mean I really liked being a Newsweek correspondent, you know. It was a good life. And I had come back to the South in route to California. That was my deal, you know. My deal was with Newsweek-- Speaker 2: Had you--had Hank hit his historic home run yet? You, you were, you were on that beat following Hank Aaron. Speaker 1: Had it run during this time? Speaker 2: Yeah, had, had he hit his historic-- Speaker 1: No. He hit it, he hit it the next year, but, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but, but, but my cover story, that was also my first Newsweek covers story. It was called 'Chasing the Babe.' Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it ran in, it ran that summer of '73 [1973]. Of course Hank-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --broke the record the following year in '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Okay, I just-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --didn't want you to go past that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --past that point. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Go ahead-- Story_ID: 169187 Speaker 1: But I was about to say about, about my--coming back to the South, having grown up here, and when I went to work for Newsweek, I, I really wanted to stay on the West Coast, but Detroit [Michigan] was where they had the opening. And so my deal was if you go to Detroit and you work out okay, you know, when we get an opening, you can go to San Francisco [California] or L.A. [Los Angeles, California], okay. So I was thinking okay, cool. So, but while I was there, no openings, and we were ready, ready to, to leave Detroit. And so they had an opening in Atlanta [Georgia], and so this is supposed to be my weigh station, you know, back to the West Coast. But I got here in the, in the spring of '73 [1973], when the big story was Maynard Jackson's running for mayor, first black mayor of Atlanta [Georgia]. And so, you know, that was a big story and then the sort of changing South. The other story that I wrote very early was about the remigration of, of black folk to the South, you know, the generation that I had left in. This was only about a decade ago. I had left in '64 [1964]. And then by '73 [1973], you know, after the Voting Rights Act, and all these changes that had been wrought by the Civil Rights Movement, you know, a lot of people were coming back home. And so, this was a, a story, the, the sort of New South, you know. There was even talk even there, and Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter] talking about running for president in a couple of years, and you know, a lot of those stories that I knew about when I was going up there. They were still alive, and I wanted to write about that stuff. And I liked living in Atlanta. I sort of liked the, the ferment that was going on here, you know, the sort progressive kind of black community, and, and, and you know, the Maynard Jackson story was a big story. And so I thought, boy, this is a pretty good place to be a national reporter right now, you know. And so, you know, and when an opening came up, I, I really was interested in staying where I was. I liked where I was working. As I said, it was like I could drive to see my mom [Rosetta Valentine Smith], you know, in, in, in a day; you know, my brother was still down here, and so, so it was like coming back home. And so, even though I was having this success as a novelist, I was also just kind of getting into my career as a journalist. And so, people said well, I know you're gonna quit now and write books, you know, you got these rave reviews, but I, you know, I was like no, I don't wanna do that just yet. I don't, I don't think I wanna like get away from reporting, you know, I don't think I wanna go sit off by myself and like write note novels, not just yet. I think I'll still, I'll, I'll still like to do that, but reporting is really what I, I saw myself as, you know. I like going out and talking to people and getting stuff, you know. And I also like chasing the news you know, being like, there, when big, important stuff happen, you know, sort of like you either, you either like this stuff, and you realize that early on, or you, or you, or you get out of it, you know. I mean I think talent is part of it. Talent and energy is what I think, you know, 'cause you can get a lot of people that have talent. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: If you don't have energy because, you know, being a reporter, being a, a national reporter is, is pretty demanding. There's a lot of-- Speaker 2: Very taxing. Speaker 1: --you know, a lot of travel and stuff. But you know, it was also exciting, you know, and, and, and, and I really would go for great stretches, and then I'd be like, man, I gotta get off this treadmill. And then when I got out of it for a while, and then I was a like okay, there's nothing happening, you know, there's nothing breaking here, you know, I wanna go back and get into the saddle again, you know. And, and so, that's kind of the way it was for me, you know. Story_ID: 169188 Speaker 1: Now you came down to the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau in 1973. Did they take you off of that beat before Hank [Aaron] hit his-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: --record-setting-- Speaker 2: No, actually, you know, when, when Hank hit his, hit his home run, I was just not there. I was on some other story, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause we, we had pretty much done sort of the Hank Aaron story with, with that cover. I, I--that interview with, with Hank, I actually spent more time with Hank than any other reporter. And I remember Eddie Matthews, the [Atlanta] Braves' manager, he looked at me one day outside the batting cage, and he was--I don't know, I, I don't know why he was upset, but he says, he said, "Don't you have enough on Hank yet?" You know, and he said it in a very sort of mean-spirited way. I didn't know whether was like envy, because, you know, he was a big home run hitter too, but he was not managing, and Hank was--he played with Hank, as you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Hank was about to go into immortality. But, you know, I, I, I was one of the first reporters to get Hank to talk about his, his family, because Hank, you know, is a very private person, you know. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And you know, I just kind of, I, I remember him going to Mobile [Alabama]. And his mother [Estella Pritchard Aaron], who was still alive then, you know, she--I said you know, I, I was trying to catch Hank on a fishing trip, but he had already left, and I was pretty despondent. And his mom said well, you know, don't, don't worry about, you know; you just, you just stay at it, you know; you, you go get up close to him, you know (laughter). And over time, you know, and the, and the thing, the thing about the, the, the sort of intimate stuff that he talked about, you know--well, I remember the, the, he told me something that I had never read before, which is, which is how he, he hit, where, where his power came from, you know. And you know, if--Hank had like, you know. He wasn't a big guy, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was like 180, 185, what he, he--but he was about 6'0, 6'1, 185, but his upper body--and he said--so I said, "Hank, where do you, where do you get this speed from, you know, and this power from?" And he said, "I turn my wrist over," and then he dem--and, and, and what happened, he told me how that happened, because as a kid playing ball, he started out battin' cross-handed. You know, when you bat cross-hand, you got your hand here, and you do like this. So when he started to bat the correct way--he had these powerful wrists; he had these huge wrists, and so his bat speed and his power-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --came from turning his, his wrists over. And so that was like, you know, I really got him to sort of talk about how he did it. And then I remember it was a photo session and which he talked about the pressure on his family. You know, Hank went through hell chasing the Babe, chasing the record. Man, you know, a lot of people didn't want him to do it, man, and the hate mail and stuff he received was just-- Speaker 1: Catcalls and everything. Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was amazing. Toward the end he had, he had an Atlanta, a police officer permanently assigned to him. He would travel with him and stuff. Man, and he, and he, and he--I remember he, him talking about naming his, his son and how he wished he had maybe named him something else, other than, than, than Henry Aaron, Jr. because of the pressure. And you know, his daughter had gotten threatened. His daughter who was a, who was in, in college in Nashville [Tennessee] at the time had gotten threatened, you know, this, this kind of, of, of Hank that, that you didn't really read-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --a lot about it. And, and I was wanting to get things about re--reporting sports stories for Newsweek. You know, you didn't just do it like the X's and O's and the stats, but you really sort of--it's like a human interest profile kind of thing, you know. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And so that was my first cover story. Story_ID: 169189 Speaker 1: And then getting up to the end of '73 [1973] now and going into '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: Yeah, 70--'73 [1973], '74 [1974] was really sort of the Maynard Jackson, the rise of Maynard Jackson, and you know, the rise of black politics in the South. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Oh, that, that was kind of a continuing important story, you know. You know, [HM] John Lewis was still heading the board of edu--education project, you know. [HM] Vernon Jordan had just left that post, you know, and, and the, and the, and the, the sort of-- Speaker 1: [HM] Charlayne Hunter-Gault-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were down here then, getting into the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that would, that had, that had happened earlier-- Speaker 1: Than you? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because you know, Charlayne, Charlayne, that had happened like in the, in the '60s [1960s], in like '62 [1962] or so, with Charlayne and-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: You know, 'cause by then, Charlayne was probably at the New York Times. In fact, I know she was at the New York Times. 'Cause Charlayne and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: -- [HM] Paul Delaney and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Earl Caldwell, C. Gerald Fraser, Tom Johnson, [Thomas A. Johnson] Bob Maynard [Robert C. Maynard], these were, these were all sort of my heroes. I met all those guys at a national Urban League convention when I was still with Newsweek in Detroit [Michigan]], you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And, and you know, Bob Maynard was really sort of a mentor and, and a role model to me. You know, he's like, the first national reporter for the Washington Post. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And we're gonna get into all of those people. Plus, I wanted to ask you and I kept forgetting, while you were at the [San Francisco] Chronicle, Bob Hayes, who was a sportswriter there [sic, San Francisco Examiner] and I didn't know how-- Speaker 2: In, in-- Speaker 1: --those (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I don't remember-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Bob. I remember Mike Mills. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mike Mills was on the city side there, and he later went to KRON-TV in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was--he was, he was another guy in my early upbringing. Story_ID: 169190 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Observing is--I'm sorry, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Katherine Beard, and- Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Chairs. Speaker 1: Chairs. Okay, Chairs, Chairs. All right, sir could you please state your name for us? Speaker 2: My name is Vern Smith. Speaker 1: Okay, it's not Vernon? Speaker 2: It's, the full name is Vernon, middle initial is E. I was named after my father's youngest brother, Vernon. But my byline was always Vern, Vern E. Smith, so most people call me Vern, but I, I, I answer to both. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And well, what is today's date. Speaker 2: August 25th, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present? Speaker 2: We're in The HistoryMakers office on Auburn Avenue in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 169191 Speaker 1: And now, now this is a, what we're doing, this is a continuation of an interview we started about a month ago, correct? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. And so, let me just--you were telling me some interesting things about college before we--and you born in Natchez, Mississippi, and your birth date is? Speaker 2: Is February 13th, 1946. Speaker 1: Okay, and so, so you, when you were at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California], you were there--we were just talking about some of the--it was like a, a kind of a cauldron for the black student movement. It was the first black student union ever formed in the United States--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I, I came to San Francisco State in, in the fall of 1964, having moved there from Natchez. My mother [Rosetta Valentine Smith] had two sisters [Aunt Gabe (ph.) And Aunt Mary] who had moved to the West Coast during the, World War II, actually right before World War II, and stayed out there. And so when I came along I wanted to study journalism, and I wanted to leave Mississippi. And so I went out to stay for a while with my aunts to get established, and then I enrolled in San Francisco State. And San Francisco State was a school of about 18,000 students at the time, you know, small black student population, you know, one of the sort of your great urban campuses in American, you know, just a, just a, just a really eclectic--offering great liberal art program. And San Francisco at that time, was, was, was pretty much a cauldron of, of, of radical politics of, of Black Nationalism and the, the free speech movement across the Bay at the University of California Berkeley was in full force, and it was just kind of a time of rebellion and of, and of, and it was the sort of the black consciousness, the black awareness movement, sort of the, the really beginning of that in, in 1964. And San Francisco State, San Francisco in and of itself, was always a, a, a countercultural kind of town, you know, the Haight-Ashbury, the whole hip, hippy thing began there. But also out of that, even though San Francisco had a, a relatively small black population, it was very learned. And when I first came to State in the, in, in '64 [1964], there was a black student organization there. It was called the Negro Student Association, NSA. And by the, the spring of next year, it had become reorganized, and there was a, there was a more of a black consciousness; Black Nationalist aura to it, and it became the Black Student Union. And it was really one of the first organized African-American student groups that advocated black students program. It, it advocated making college available not just to [W.E.B] Du Bois' "Talented Tenth," but also to the indigenous black community in and around San Francisco. And the black student union created what we call the off-campus tutorial program in which we went out and actually cultivated and recruited black students. Speaker 1: That's kind of like an Upward Bound in a way--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It, it really was. It was, it was a very far reaching, far thinking program really ahead of its, head of its time in terms of the whole concept of, of a college education being not just for the privileged, but for whoever wanted to, to better themselves. And that was kind of like what we, the black students there, kind of developed. And it, it, it, it's ironic that in the fall of '64 [1964] there was not a black student union anywhere in American on, on predominantly white college campuses. But by the, the spring of 1967, they were cropping up all over the country. And I can remember us sitting back in San Francisco State kind of being aware that, you know, what we had created then in terms of a black consciousness raising element on college campuses was sort of taking off like wildfire-- Speaker 1: Now, now do-- Speaker 2: --across the country. Story_ID: 169192 Speaker 1: Do you remember the discussion about renaming the organization "Black"? 'Cause-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --this was a, this is a turning point, when things become-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --cease to become Negro-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and become black. Speaker 2: Yeah. You, you know, I don't remember the, the initial discussions. I was not, I was not involved in the, in the actual transformation. I was just aware of it. And as I say, it was a pretty much, it was a sprawling campus with a student body of 18,000, and you sort of, you know. And I was a basketball player, so the guys that I knew, the black guys that I knew were athletes primarily, and, and then there was like one other--two other black students in the, in the journalism school, a woman Walterine [ph.] Swanton [ph.] and a woman named Doris Worsham, who later worked for the Oakland Tribune. And so it was a kind of a small diffused kind of student body until the black consciousness movement took hold. And I remember, you know, people began to grow afros, you know, and began to assert a pride in being a black person, of identifying more with Africa, you know, and, and coming from, from Mississippi, where black had been such a denigrated word-- Speaker 1: Well, look, all over the country-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --if you called a, a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a brother or sister black-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --especially if they were dark-skinned-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --you almost had, you had a fight. Speaker 2: You had a fight. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, you had a fight. So, I mean it was, you, you could sort of feel the transformation, the mindset sort of transformation come on students and, and a kind of solidarity. And it was interesting that this was happening on the West Coast at the same that the, the Civil Rights Movement was happening across the South. And I remember in, in, in '66 [1966], since '65 [1965] I had, I had gone back to Mississippi to visit my family and gotten involved in the, in the, in the Civil Rights Movement that had taken place that summer, and there was, there was a, there was a great confrontation there. And I remember the following summer of '66 [1966], after the James Meredith March Against Fear from, from Memphis [Tennessee] to Jackson, Mississippi, when Meredith was, was wounded and-- Speaker 1: And shot in the back by a sniper, yeah. Speaker 2: --shot in the back by a sniper. And, and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and the civil rights, other civil rights leaders came in to restart the march, and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Council] came in, SNCC, of course, Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, which, which was the college student, the Southern college student organizing group, you know, that were, that were more militant. And I remember this, this moment, of watching this on, on the nightly news of, of Stokely Carmichael, you know, uttering, "Black power, what do we we want? Black power," and, and you know, seeing that mindset sort of take off, and then you saw it in the music, you know, the Curtis Mayfield songs, you know. James Brown had a song called 'Say It Loud - I'm Black and I'm Proud,' you know. And you just sort of, you can, you can really trace this metamorphosis to a different kind of black thought in America during those, those years, sort of like from '64 [1964] to '68 [1968] to sort of the, the long kind of period. But the really, the sort of really caldron, when I look back at that period, I see from '66 [1966] to '68 [1968] was really when things were just happening, boom, boom, and-- Speaker 1: That's right. I think after 1968-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the Negro wasn't even used in the media anymore. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right. Speaker 1: We didn't use the term anymore. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, and then the whole sort of, of misunderstanding of the term black power, you know, how the media distorted it, really, and, and made it something far more sinister than I think any, any, any of us at, at that time who were embracing it were thinking. You know, it was more of a love of self rather than a, a rejection of anybody else, you know. And this was especially true in the Bay area, where the Black Panther Party--I remember when the Black Panther Party evolved, right during the same period. And you know, when, when people look back at the Panthers, they think of it, think of it as this militant, armed, anti-white group, but it's, it's--the, the, the original political sort of entity that the Panthers were was, was a much more all-encompassing thing, you know. And we sort of embraced that multicultural view at, at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California]. You know, there was a group of, of Chicano, Latino students that we coalesced with. There was another group called The Third World Liberation Front, which was, which was made up of both of, of white radical students and, and other students. So the concept, far from being this sort of separatist thing which really is an all-encompassing kind of world view, you know, identifying with oppressed people around the world, and the media totally missed that, you know; they never got it. Story_ID: 169193 Speaker 1: While I was at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California], I really was not concentrating on becoming a mainstream journalist. I mean I, I loved to write, you know. I, I had a, a gift for it I discovered I college, even before that, but in college it sort of flowered. And I was the, the sports editor for the student newspaper and wrote a lot. But I was just sort of--it was something that I loved to do, almost like, you know, I love to play ball; I love to write and, and make up stories. Speaker 2: So, so you played basketball for San Francisco State? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --what did you play? Speaker 1: I played guard, shooting guard; I played--excuse me--for two years I played on the freshman team. On the varsity team I broke arm the, my junior year or my sophomore year. I broke my arm like in a, in a practice, and I, I missed that whole year. Speaker 2: How did you do that? Speaker 1: It was a freak accident. It was a scramble for the ball. I fell over, and my elbow was up like that. And another player coming into the pile caught my elbow between his knees. And he was going one way, and I was going the other way and you know. I, you know, I didn't realize it was broken. I got back into the, to the scrimmage, but then I realized I couldn't do anything with it, so they took me to the emergency and you know, I came out, you know, I had a cast like from here to here for, for about, I don't know, three or four months anyway. So that, so that missed that year. And then the next year the, the student strike started, and all the black students were participating in it. And I was one of the people that helped organized the athletes to participate in the strike, and so-- Speaker 2: And San Francisco, that was a school that--well, long before you, Bill Russell [William Felton "Bill" Russell] was, was there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, actually Bill Russell went to the other, the Jesuit school, the University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the one they call--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: All right, different-- Speaker 1: --call, called-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --USF [University of San Fransciso, Sn Francisco, California], right. Speaker 2: Okay, you're at the state one? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was at the state one. Speaker 2: You were at the San--okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, we used to play them every year in basketball, sort of like a scrimmage for them 'cause, you know, they were really good (laughter). Story_ID: 169194 Speaker 1: But I was just saying about I wasn't really thinking of myself as a serious journalist. I really wanted to be probably a, a television writer or a, or a movie writer. I, I took, my minor was radio-TV film, and you know, I wrote some screenplays and, and, and scripts while I was in school. And that's where I really thought I wanted to go, although I was still doing journalism. Speaker 2: What did you write about? Speaker 1: You know, I wrote, one of my lectures was Rod Serling, who was the Twilight Zone creator. So, you know, I wrote like a couple of Twilight Zone things, and I wrote just some sort of half-hour dramas, and then I wrote, la--later after I, after I got out of school, I wrote a, I wrote a, a script for Bill Cosby's old show, when he was playing a teacher. And then the one thing that I sold, which is right before I went to work for Newsweek, I was in a writer's guild class in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] 'Cause I, after I got out of State [San Francisco, California] and I went to this summer program in journalism at Columbia University [New York, New York] was where I really got serious about being a reporter, and my first job was in Long Beach, California. And so I was right outside of L.A.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So you worked for the Long Beach (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Long Beach Press-Telegram. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was a, it was a Ridder paper, then owned by the Ridder family. And it had later merged with Knight Ridder and is now part of what is known as the Knight Ridder chain. And--but at that time the Press-Telegram was sort of the flagship Ridder paper, and I came there as, as a general assignment reporter after Columbia in, in, in 1969. And, and so I--at, at Columbia it really sort of wetted my appetite that there was a need for African American journalists in the program. The summer program had been created out of the ashes of the urban riots, where the Kerner Commission had indicted the mainstream press for having ignored the plight of, of ghettos and, and, and sort of giving short shrift to minority communities. And so, you know, I saw the-- Speaker 2: Who were some of your teachers in Columbia? I mean did you-- Speaker 1: Joe [Joseph] Strickland, who was a reporter at the Detroit News, was probably one of the guys that really convinced me that that was something that I wanted to do. Joe had been a ver--veteran journalist, and he had covered the Algiers Motel incident in Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --during the 1967 riots. And his reporting had uncovered that, the incident at the, at the, at the Algiers motel in which some black youth were killed by some police officers, that, that it was not as the official report had made it seem. And, and so he would talk about that and, and the power of investigative reporting and I, I was really struck by that; Mel [Melvin] Mencher, who was I think the dean but certainly one of the mainstays of the summer program; and Fred Friendly, who had been the president of CBS News was really sort of the, the brains behind starting this program in, in 1968. I came in in '69 [1969], which is the second year of it--very instrumental; Ken Wilson, who was a, a news editor at the San Francisco Chronicle, and was a friend of mine, and was really that guy who brought the summer program to me, and got me interested in applying, and, and he was one of the editors during that summer; John Jackson [ph.] was a black professor there, was also somebody that I learned a lot from; Pete Steffens, who was a writer, who's, who's, was the son of a great muckraking journalist, Lincoln Steffens, you know, was the name that people know. He was also a key guy. But Joe, Joe Strickland was probably the guy that really kind of was sort of my role model. I mean I like--he was a two-fisted news--nonsense--guy, a lot of fun, and he was the reason that I wound up at the Long Beach Press-Telegram. Story_ID: 169195 Speaker 1: Because he had, Joe [Joseph Strickland] had just come of a Nieman Fellowship at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] the year before, and one of his Nieman Fellows was a man named Larry Allison, who was the managing editor of the Press-Telegram. And at the end of the program I had, you know, several offers, but I wound up--I wanted to go back to San Francisco [California] really, but I couldn't get a job there. But Joe suggested going to the Press-Telegram might be good 'cause, you know, I sort of have somebody, you know, in the, in the editorial hierarchy that, that I, you know, was sort of a sounding board, 'cause he and Joe were friends. And so that's how I wound up there. And then it really was, was, was a good move. Story_ID: 169196 Speaker 1: Well, the last session, we took you all the way to Detroit [Michigan], you know, your, your assignment. Well, we went, we went through-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --the riot in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], the--where Ruben Salazar was killed. Speaker 2: Ruben, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: We talked about that. We talked about-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you getting married. We talked about you joining Newsweek and the bureau in Detroit [Michigan], then coming back to Atlanta [Georgia], I mean coming to, to Atlanta. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we had you, we're, we're around nineteen seventy three [1973] or four [1974] when we-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: --left off-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --I think, and that's what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was, I was, I think I was saying that I was--after I had been in Detroit for a couple of years I was, you know, anxious to move on. My wife was ready to move on. And I wanted to go back to the West Coast, but those bureaus were like, you know, everybody wanted to go to San Francisco [California], L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and stay back then, and so nothing was open. But there was an opening here, and so I came here just, you know, sort of like a way station back to the West Coast, so I thought. But, you know, when I got in Atlanta, I think I mentioned that it was, it was right during the beginning of Maynard Jackson's-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --campaign as the first African American mayor in Atlanta and in a major Southern city. And you know, being back in the region, one of the things that I've found that I actually wrote about not long after I moved here, I'm happy to say I spotted this trend which later was actually codified by the, by the social sciences, and that was this gradual move of African Americans to the South. I wrote a piece in Newsweek that talked about after I got here I realized that I was part of a trend. There were other people coming here from the West Coast and from Chicago [Illinois], other places in the Midwest, East Coast, you know, all sort of (unclear) by roots and the sort of the ferment that was taking place as the a result of the Civil Rights Movement. And the Voting Rights Act had been passed in '65 [1965], you know. Right when I left here, right out of high school, you know, there were hardly any black elected officials. And here now, you know, sort of the, the evolution of black political power and, and black, sort of, economic rising was really one of the big stories in the, in the country, and so I realized that, you know, I had sort of been thrown right into the catbird seat here in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Yeah, you absolutely got now that black people, that's what they were doing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The col--the college students were going to Atlanta [Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --Atlanta, Houston [Texas]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --and some other Southern cities. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the-- Speaker 1: They, they were-- Speaker 2: --migration that I was a part of and that really predated me, you know, were, were African Americans' move North and East and West, you know. Now it was reversing. You were having young people who had never been and had no Southern connections other than maybe a first generation now moving back, and you had people like me who had roots in the South, you know, and sort of a come of age elsewhere who were now, you know, coming back to see what the region was like in the wake of, of what the movement had changed-- Story_ID: 169197 Speaker 1: Do you think it was easier for you than it was for blacks who, who came from the North and had no real connection to the South? Speaker 2: You know, I think, I think it was, because, you know, people who, who had never lived in the South, you know, just had no clue other than the really hor--horror stories that they had seen on TV, and read about, and heard from families, so there was a lot of trepidation, you know. Whereas, growing up in the South, I knew that there were really kind of two Souths, in the sense that you had the rigid segregation in the, in the overt racial violence, but on another level you had this kind of close interaction between the races that really was quite different than the communities in the, in the, in the rest of the country. You know, one of the, one of the interesting things about my upbringing I told people is that growing up in Natchez [Mississippi], a city at that time about 25,000 people, about half black, half white, all of the accoutrements of the Jim Crow South were in place, the white only signs, the dual drinking fountains, etc., the dual entrances, the dual bathrooms--but in every neighborhood that I lived in, from like as far as I, back I could remember, until I finished from high school, there were always white families there. I mean they didn't call them integrated, but they were. I mean sometimes there were white families next door, across the street, over the back fence, down the street, but, you know, the proximity was always there. And so, one of the, one of the ironies is that I always had these black or these white playmates, black and white playmates growing up even though legally everything was, was segregated. So, you know, I knew that about the South that, you know, a lot of people who didn't grow up down here knew, you know. And so it was always, it, it was easier because I just, I guess I kind of could walk the walk and talk the talk in a lot of these little communities where the stories were, especially in the early seventies [1970s], you know, outside of Atlanta [Georgia] it was still pretty much the bad old days. There still was a lot of fear, you know, a lot of intimidation. It took, it took a long time. And you can actually find pockets of this sort of minority rule in, in little communities across the South today. Speaker 1: That's what I've, I've heard-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that outside of here, you, you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you going into Georgia--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, exactly, yeah. In South Georgia, you know, there's, there's, you know, they still got a ways to go in terms of, of, of the racial climate. But, you know, no doubt you could measure the change. I mean it was really palpable for me, and one of the main things being the reduction in the fear factor, because growing up, that was one of the sort of defining things that, you know, you were constantly aware that, you know, anybody white, policeman or otherwise, could sort of you know, give you a really bad time and the recourse limited as to what you were able to do. And at the same time, because you did have that sort of no man's land--this is sort of one of the other things I think has kind of gotten lost in the retelling of, of the South of my youth, which popularly has this sort of image of sort of the cowering black folks, you know, scared to move and this kind of thing because of the mean white folks, and there was a lot of that. But because there was little recourse if you were like wronged from the legal establishment, most of the men were armed, knew--had rifles and shotguns, and they were hunters, as my father was, but they were also guns for protection, you know. And you know, growing up during this era when there was a lot of racial violence, you know, I mean I, I was witness to black men, you know, arming themselves and, and patrolling their communities, because that's what they had to do. You know, that's still kind of a, an untold story I think of that time period. Story_ID: 169198 Speaker 1: I was saying off camera that the Center for the Black World is here with [HM] Vincent Harding and, and others. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I was, I was about to just add to that, that, you know, as I look back over sort of like what Atlanta [Georgia] has become, it was sort of--that was the beginning of it during that period, Maynard Jackson's election. But I, I think, you know, that AU [AUC, Atlanta University Complex Center, Atlanta, Georgia] Center, if I could pinpoint what is it about Atlanta that's different. Why is it that there is this kind of national affection among black people for Atlanta. You know what I mean? I mean as, as far as being just a citadel of progressive black thought and economic acumen, all this stuff, emanates out of Atlanta. And, and I think that the history of those black colleges, that, that sort of complex of independent black higher education, which fostered an independent black middle class, you know--we were on Auburn Avenue here today doing this interview to sort of like one of the great business streets during the era of segregation, but I think that the cornerstone of sort of like the black Atlanta, sort of that, that "Black Mecca" thing that people outside of Atlanta look at and go, man, that looks like the place to be, you know, which is why that's, this migration has been steady ever since sort of Maynard's election. It's been a year, but I think it's sort of rippling across the South. But Atlanta still seems to have that kind of special place in black America, and I think it emanates from the Atlanta University Complex Center. You know, [W.E.B.] Du Bois was there, and you mentioned Vincent Harding, and like the black sort of intellectual minds, a lot of them came out of there. And it kind of fostered this kind of independent thought that I think is unique. And I think people coming from other parts of the count--comp--country--pick up on it; they like it. They may not even know why. They may not e--even go to the AU Center, but there this something there in the air that black people--really I think it's around the world. I think you find this with, with, with African people from all over. They just kind of have this affection for Atlanta, and that's why I think it is so. You know, it's, it's hard to, to pin down. You just kind of feel it, you know, and other people just kind of come, and they kind of look around, and, and they sort of marvel at whatever it is that they're seeing and feeling, you know, about Atlanta. Speaker 1: I think you're right a hundred percent. I mean that's the way people do feel about it. I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean it's, it's, it's, it's a very special place. And, and you know, it's, it's sort of like a place where people, black people feel like there are possibilities. I think that's one kind of factor that's sort of always fueled it. And when you look back at the sixties [1960s], there was not a lot of real ferment here, although [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and, and all of his lieutenants were based here, you know, right here on this street. You know, most of--this is sort of like the weigh station, the, the station where they came back to, but they went out across the South to really launch the demonstrations. But Atlanta became sort of known as a cradle of, of black thought because of that black activism. Story_ID: 169199 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Maynard Jackson's campaign, and, and what were your--what, what, what are your observations of what that, that, that was like, 'cause that had to be exciting--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it really was because, you know, I, I came here in the, in the spring of '73 [1973], and that's when the campaign was in full flower. And the current mayor now, Shirley Franklin, I remember meeting her, her, her then husband, David Franklin, who was, was Maynard's campaign manager. I remember meeting Shirley in a, in a, in a campaign headquarters downtown. It was a converted, it was a converted car dealership. It was sort of the nerve center of the Jackson campaign. And Shirley had this orange and red, you know, vote Maynard t-shirt, you know. And there was just sort of this ferment of activity and excitement, that if this happened, you know, if a, if a, if an African American could become the mayor of the South's, you know, jewel city, you know, what a major sort of breakthrough this would be. And so that became one of the first stories that I reported when I came down here for Newsweek, you know, and you know, it, it, it was, it was a great sort of introduction to, you know, the world of Atlanta politics and a, and an appreciation for the kind of heavy hitters that had come through here, you know, and how, how the movement politics was evolving into electoral politics. [HM] John Lewis, who's now a congressman for the fifth District, was the head of the Voter Education Project, which was a, a private organization that had as its goal registering all of these millions of black voters around the South. And I remember interviewing John in his office downtown, sort of a little cramped office, and I remember this poster he had on the wall. It was this, it was sort of a black and white poster. It had these hands of a black man and sort of in a, in a, in a fist. And, and the, the caption said the hands that picked cotton can now elect the president, or words to that effect. And it was a very powerful symbol of sort of the evolution of the disenfranchised population, you know. And so, you know, just covering that Maynard campaign was, was, was, was a great assignment. I can remember the, the night when the returns came in, and, and, and, and it was clear that Maynard was, was gonna win, you know, and the sort of excitement that was in the air. You know, the World Press was here, and it was, it was, it was a great kick to me writing about that for, for a major publication like Newsweek magazine, you know. So I knew that this was gonna be a great place to be a reporter, especially for me, you know. And I really took to this, to the covering the region with, with great relish. And then, of course, two years later, [President] Jimmy Carter, who is governor, starts to make noises about running for president, and so that became a big, a big story. Story_ID: 169200 Speaker 1: Well, before that even, Hank Aaron breaks Babe Ruth's record, right-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, that was, that was the, the second sort of big assignment that I got. I was, I had been a sports editor and a, and a, and, and of course a baseball fan. And this was like huge news. I mean it was, it was huge news in the, in the athletic world, but in the, in the, in the general world too of American sort of social dynamics, you know, because, because of the significance of a, of a black player chasing that, that (unclear) home run record of, of Babe Ruth to signal the career home run record. You know, it was, it was thought to be a, a milestone that no modern player would ever reach, you know, and Hank just kind of snuck up on them. And, and so when I came here, it was like oh, he's gonna hit it either this year or next year, so let's, you know, see if you can get close to Hank. We wanna do a, do a cover on him. And so, you know, I got to, to hang out with, with Hank and you know, ultimately became good friends with him, with Dusty Baker [John "Dusty" Baker, Jr.]. You know, he and I were close to the same age. He was a rookie with the, with the [Atlanta] Braves and, and Ralph Garr, who had been up there a couple of years. So we all-- Speaker 1: Ralph Garr with that-- Speaker 2: --we sort of-- Speaker 1: --huge afro. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, yeah, the amazing, amazing switch hitter-- Speaker 1: How he could get his hat on over-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah, yeah, those hat, hat-- Speaker 1: He was a great hitter. He played for the [Chicago] White Sox--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, he was a greater hitter and a great base runner. And so I got to--you know, Hank was, Hank was a, he was a very private person, and it, it took a while for him to warm up. He didn't really like all of the media attention, frankly. Speaker 1: Yeah, he seemed to be of the, of the black superstars of the sixties [1960s], that, that emerged in the mid-'60s [1960s], Willie Mays-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Frank Robinson-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Hank Aaron seemed to be the shy one of the group, you know. Speaker 2: He was, you know, he, he was. And you know, he was a words of few words, but, but you know, I was just was sort of persistent then. And it was a great assignment because we didn't really have a deadline in terms of when the cover was gonna run. I was just sort of reporting it and accumulating material. And we thought at some point that summer he was gonna get close enough, and we were gonna do the cover. And so, you know, I got to travel with him and I hung out. I interviewed, you know, just a number of times, getting him to talk about baseball, you know, 'cause it's a very private guy. And this was also a very tense time because Hank got an inordinate amount of hate mail. You know, there was a lot of controversy about a black man daring to best the, you know, the great Babe Ruth's record. You know, it was like, it was such a, such a milestone in baseball that, you know, it really became this heated kind of thing. He, he, he'd get, you know, booed in some places. And at, at one point towards the, towards the end of, of the '73 [1973] season, as he got closer, you know, somehow in the midst of all this, Hank was still like puttin' down, you know. And you know, just for aside, a, about amazing Hank's productivity is, you know, you see these guys hitting like sixty home runs and you know, fifty-five home runs. Hank never hit more than I like I think forty-five, you know. But every year, you know, for twenty-two years, the guy was anywhere from like between thirty and forty home runs, you know. And one of the things that was ironic about that is he didn't really think of himself as a home run hitter, you know. He thought of himself, and he wants to be remembered more as an all-around player, which he really was, you know. He'd steal forty bases. You know, he'd hit for average, you know. He, he won a couple of gold gloves. But, you know, that consistency and his power came from his wrists. I remember one of the great sort of revelations in interviewing Hank and talking about how did he did do it; you know, what did, where did your power come from? 'Cause when you look at him, especially when you look at these sort of pumped up guys today, I don't think Hank weighed more than a hundred, maybe eighty-five [185] or 90 [190] at, at his top weight, you know, but he had these, these huge wrists. And he explained to me how he got his power. I said how do you, how do you--what is the secret to a Hank Aaron home run? And he said, "I turn my wrists over." I said you turn your wrists over? And he, you know, he hits and all of his power was in that snap, you know, when he, when he, you know. And, and so, he told me that he developed that powerful sort of wrist snap, because when he first started out playing as a boy in Mobile, Alabama, he'd bat wrong way; he, he held the bat the wrong way, cross-handed, you know, which is the right--the left hand over the right, which you're not supposed to do if you know about baseball. People tell you you'll break your wrist. So, for the first couple of years or at least the first year of Hank's play as sort of sandlot, he would bat cross-handed, hittin' the ball like that. And so by the time we got it right, he had these mammoth wrists, and, and they were fast, and that's where his power came from, you know. And, and he talked also for the first time in, in some of those interviews about his family, 'cause he was very private, you know. And he talked about, you know, second thoughts he had about naming his, his son Hank Aaron, Jr., and maybe that was a bad idea because of the pressure and stuff. And you know, during that period one of his, his daughters, who was a journalism student, she had to have police protection because of a threat leveled at the Aaron family during, during this chase, you know. But we did do that cover. That was my first Newsweek cover, and the cover line was 'Chasing the Babe.' And it had a picture of, the cover image was a, was a picture of Hank, Hank's home run swing and inset was a, was a picture of, of Babe Ruth sort of like looking down on it. It was a great image-- Story_ID: 169201 Speaker 1: It's interesting that Ty Cobb [Tyrus Raymond "Ty" Cobb], who I believe is from Georgia-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --disliked Babe Ruth because he suspected him of being black. Speaker 2: Of being black, right. Yeah, Ty Cobb was like a notorious racist, and everybody-- Speaker 1: Notorious. Speaker 2: --sort of knew that about him, you know a great player, but, you know, he made no bones about it. But yeah, yeah, that is, that is iron, you know, that--and there was a lot of, lot of talk about that too, that, you know, (laughter) Babe Ruth, you know, had, had, was an interracial guy really passing as, as, as, as white, you know, which happened a lot during the, the era of the forties [1940s] and the fifties [1950s], you know. Speaker 1: That's right. And that's another thing too I guess in some ways is that Hank Aaron was a, a, a true Southern black man who-- Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: --as opposed to as I grew up on Alaga syrup (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --proclaim-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --and he, he was a, he played in the Negro Leagues. Speaker 2: He played in the Negro Leagues. Yeah, he was, he was one of the few Major Leagues players during that time, and Willie Mays was another one who actually, you know, knew what that Negro League world was about before he came up, you know, after Jackie Robinson. And you he always considered Jackie his, his great hero, you know. And Hank was, you know, towards the end of his career he got very outspoken about, you know, Major League Baseball and racial disparities and, and you know, all the, all the kind of things that, that bother him. He, he really had, had a lot more on his mind than baseball, you know. And that was one of the things I think that separated him from Willie Mays, although, you know, they were both from, from Birmingham. But Hank was always a little more stoic and a little more serious about the world than, than Mays. And I, and I think Hank may have felt that, you know, the media sort of didn't like that about him. He was a little bit, you know, too outspoken and then standoffish about certain things, you know. It was, that was tough then. You know, there's a lot of black sportswriters and sportscasters today. But, you know, in the seventies [1970s], you know, you really could count them on one hand and especially the ones that were working for like mainstream publications, you know. So, it was a world where, where the black athletes rarely saw like a black journalist, you know, certain at that the level of, of a Newsweek or a major publication writing about them, you know. And then there was some friction that I, that I picked up on between people that covered the sports all the time, you know, and some of the black players, especially Hank, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 169202 Speaker 1: So we're like 1974 now. So was there another big story here in--around that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, there was a story, and I think it was '77 [1977] the Alabama Attorney General Bill Baxley [William Joseph Baxley, II], who was, who was in, in law school at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] in September of 1963 when a bomb exploded in the 16th Street Baptist Church killing four little girls. And he told me years later when I was writing about his reopening of, of, of that case, that, that day he got physically sick at the, at the violence and the inhumanity of it. And he wrote the names down of the four little girls on the back of a business card, and he said some day he was going to do something about that. And you know, ten years or so later, when he's now the youngest attorney general in, elected attorney general in the, in the history of the state, one of the first things that he does is he reopens the 16th Street Baptist Church murder [1963] investigation. And-- Speaker 1: This is in Birmingham [Alabama], right? Speaker 2: In Birmingham. Speaker 1: Alabama, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remembered that case very well because I was, I was in high school when it happened, and I had, I had family that was in Birmingham at the time. And it was a very sort of shocking kind of thing. So, you know, to be back now as a, as a national reporter and, and to write about that in 1977 when, when Baxley put together a case that con--convicted the first of a series of Ku Klux Klansmen-- Speaker 1: Was Bob Chambliss and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, "Dynamite" Bob Chambliss, right. Yeah, he was sort of the, the ring leader of a, of, of a (unclear) there in Birmingham, and then Baxley subsequently tried. There were other people that they knew were involved, but it took almost twenty years later, up until really I guess about 2003 or '04 [2004] for the last of those cases to actually come to fruition. And, and the irony there was the, the prosecutor in the, in the last of those cases that involved--one of them was a named Bobby Frank Cherry, who was a Chambliss associate. That case was prosecuted by Doug Jones, who was a, a young, white guy, young college student at Cumberland Law School in Birmingham, when Baxley was arguing the "Dynamite Bob" case in '77 [1977]. And Doug Jones, who later became the U.S. Attorney over there, pursued the case, wasn't able to get a conviction. But after he left office as a U.S. Attorney, he was appointed a special prosecutor for the state of Alabama, and he prosecuted the last of those cases, you know. And so, but covering that '77 [1977] case was sort of a really important kind of, kind of moment for me as a reporter. Story_ID: 169203 Speaker 1: I don't wanna skip over anything, but you, you were around here when the Atlanta [Georgia] Child Murders were going on. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I cover that too. Yeah, that, that, that took--wow, that was, that started in the summer of '79 [1979], and it started really just as, just as a, a missing person's case. Some, some mothers had realized that, that, that there was a half dozen of them that had children that were just missing; they had been missing for some time. And towards the end of that summer, because there was such a hue and cry, the Atlanta Police Department created this task force to look into these murders (unclear) what were these missing kids. They, they later found the remains of, of some of these kids that had been missing for, you know, eight, nine months. But, but then the, the, the real sort of terror of the Atlanta Child Murders started after that, as we go into, to 1980 and really towards the, the end of 1980 right until the spring of '81 [1981] I guess, when there was almost a body a week, a black child, mostly male. Some young adults would, would, would be reported missing and would be found dead within a couple of days later. And it, and it, and it was, it was really like living in a, in a bad dream. My, my own children were, you know, elementary age kids at that time in the eighties [1980s], and you know, it was, it was just a very challenging time. It was, it was, it was an eerie, unreal place to be, the, the sort of clockwork like regularity of it, you know. Speaker 1: Atlanta, from my observation of being in the South in the early eighties [1980s] in Memphis [Tennessee], Atlanta or towns that, you know, people in real nice neighborhoods, even in the poor neighborhoods, let the kids go out and play, and they run up and down the block and they-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --they just play. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And everybody looks out for everybody. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that's what made this really-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that, that's what really confounded everybody and really frightened everybody. And so it kind of gradually built, and then suddenly by the, by the end of 1980, you know, it was, it was really clear that something terrible was, was happening here, and that the killer or killers were obviously engaged in a kind of cat and mouse game with, with, with the authorities. The first wave of bodies that were not decomposed, but were actually a child or a young person, would disappear and would be found relatively quickly. The first half dozen or so were found clearly sort of displayed in, you know, really kind of public places. And then later, after it was reported that forensic investigators were finding dog hairs and fibers on some of the bodies, you know, then the bodies started to end up in various rivers around metro Atlanta without clothes, most of them. And so you really had this really scary serial killer apparently, or killers, and nobody knew, nobody knew who it was. There was all kinds of speculation that it was a police officer or somebody. People couldn't understand why it was continuing to happen since by the, you know, the beginning of 1981. Everybody knew, all parents knew and all children knew, you know, if you didn't know somebody, you know, be wary of strangers. And you know, you had a lot of false calls on people, somebody ride into the neighborhood and parent might notice them and not know who they were and call the police, and there'd be a dragnet, and you know, there'd be a false alarm. But that was the kind of pins and needle existence that people lived on. Speaker 1: Yeah, it focused a lot of negative ener--attention on it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for the first time in a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah, for, first, first time it really, it really seized the, the nation around the fall of, of, of, of 1980 I think. Speaker 1: It was a regular Nightline topic of discussion-- Speaker 2: Yeah, regular Nightline copy. You know-- Speaker 1: --along with Iranian hostages and-- Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly. You know George Bush, George Herbert Walker Bush was the president then or the vice president. Ronald Reagan was president. You know, they got the FBI involved, and, and I remember Vice President Bush came down, you know, to lend the weight of the federal government. There was a real sense of, you know, some kind of racial upheaval because although there was no proof that, you know, who the killer was, white or black, you know, because it appeared to be just kids being targeted, that there was a racial-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there were no white kids that you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --aspect to it. None that really fit what came to be called a pattern. And then the investigation itself became controversial towards the end of, of the case. And you know, there's still a lot of controversy about it. They-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we're gonna pause here, but when we come back I wanna ask you about [HM] Lee P. Brown and, and Wayne Williams and the conclusion of this and what you think-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --about it. Okay. Story_ID: 169204 Speaker 1: Yes, with the background and choppers behind us and stuff, we're talking about police, the police investigation of the Atlanta child murders. And now what was your impression of the police approach to it? And at that time you had a black Police Chief [HM] Lee P. Brown, who was very well respected and who, who's trying to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, actually you had, you had, at that time Lee Brown was actually the commissioner of public safety, and the police chief was also a black man, the other second criminologist, law enforcement person, a man named George Napper. He was the police chief, and Lee Brown was the, was the commissioner of public safety. You, you had a black mayor; you had a black--half black city county, Atlanta cit--city council; you had black county elected official. So you had, it was a black-run city, and yet this was happening. These, these children were being snatched up, disappearing and, and turning up dead, you know, asphyxiated, for the most part strangled in some kind of way, and the, and the bodies thrown out so that they could easily be spotted. I mean it was almost as if the killer was, was enjoying both, you know, the actual deed, and, and the, and the, the notoriety, and the, the terror that he was creating, you know. Story_ID: 169205 Speaker 1: Now before we get to Lee Brown [HM Lee P. Brown], I thought I'd ask you about, I forgot about [HM] Dick Gregory. Now he, he came out with a theory that, really, I think it almost kind of hurt his career, in a way, 'cause it was so-- Speaker 2: You mean the-- Speaker 1: Interferon-- Speaker 2: The interferon the CDC [Center for Disease Control and Prevention] was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, is there any, any--as a reporter, was there any way that that could be-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no there was, there was nothing that ever turned up credible about any kind of conspiracy, any sort of government kind of conspiracy, 'cause people were, you know, it was, it was such a wide latitude of possibilities that, you know, all kinds of, of theories were being floated about. I remember at, at one, at one point during that, during that summer and fall of, of '81 [1981] when, when we moved from a missing person, suspected foul play kind of a thing to the actual belief that persons, that persons are abducting and killing children, young people for, for sport. You know, the, the bounty hunters came in with their dogs, the, the seers, the, the, the, the mind readers, the psychics. You know, you had all kinds of sort of private investigators coming in. At one point, the taskforce, which is a multijurisdictional police taskforce, because the bodies by, by the fall of '80 [1980], of 1980 were, were being found all over metro Atlanta [Georgia], Douglas County [Georgia], and DeKalb County [Georgia], and neighboring counties, as well as in Fulton County, and as well as in parts of Atlanta city property--proper. So, you know, you had these various police agencies all working with this taskforce. The FBI came in after [Vice] President Bush-President [Ronald] Reagan was prevailed upon to, to bring federal help. Sammy Davis, Jr. and Frank Sinatra came in and held a fundraising concert at the Atlanta Civic Center, first time I'd ever seen Sammy or Frank live. And they raised a bunch of money, you know. And so this tragedy had really captured the world and the, and the nation. And I was writing something about it almost every other week. And I went out on searches, you know. Community groups would go out on, on searches looking for clues, anything. There was just nothing. One of those volunteer searches actually did found--find--the remains of one of the, one of the victims. Story_ID: 169206 Speaker 1: --(Unclear) but the searches were going on, and people were sort of, they wanted to do something, you know, people, the community at large. And the police were doing everything that they could people thought, but nothing was happening. And so people were just kind of frustrated, and so these community searches--and they turn out to be bi-racial. And in a way, I think they, they, they, they, they may have helped diffuse some of the tension, because you saw people as a community sort of working in concert to try to-- Speaker 2: You, you also said-- Speaker 1: --deal with this-- Speaker 2: --during the break that, that there was this--you know, I know we heard it on Nightline that there was a suspicion that the, that some members of the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] were doing this, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there was-- Speaker 2: --and we're talking about-- Speaker 1: --that was-- Speaker 2: --how-- Speaker 1: --report. Speaker 2: --it, it, it may not have been very healthy for somebody that looked like, somebody looked like they were a Klan member or you know, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and red, red, redneckish-type person driving through the black community was a risky kind of a-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that by the, by the time everybody was convinced that somebody was, was snatching up black kids, in particular black kids that, you know, the, the, the, the sort of racial element of it began to diminish, at least in my mind, and I think in the minds of a lot of investigators, simply because these neighborhoods, for the most part, were segregated where they were finding, where they were, where these kids lived. And so, you know, a white face would, would, would of, would have stood out. And by then, certainly kids were aware that they were in peril by hanging out after hours and being alone. You know, the city [Atlanta, Georgia] had passed a curfew by that time. But, but these, these kidnappings and, and disappearances were still occurring. And they sort of moved as the information about possible forensic evidence came out and after the word just seem to have permeated--I remember all of the schools, elementary schools were visited, almost every one of them within the Atlanta school system were visited by police officers warning them to take heed. And so you, so you had this sense of fear, parents walking their kids to and from school, picking them up. You had this sense that these kids knew that they were at risk, and the precautions started to increase. Story_ID: 169207 Speaker 1: And then what happened was the victims began to be slightly older young black men in their early twenties, but impaired in some kind of way. One young man was, was, was slightly retarded, another guy, one of the guys that eventually was, was named as a victim in, in the, in the indictment that actually came out of this case was, was, supposed to be a chronic alcoholic. So that--the supposition was that although they were older than people in the first pattern, their, their infirmities made them vulnerable in, in the way of, of a, of a, of a younger child. And so, these people came on the missing and murdered list as, as well, and there was great controversy over--you know, some kids, some kids who actually were missing who had been found dead but didn't appear to fit what had become a kind of pattern weren't initially placed on the, the list that the taskforce was investigating, and then later they were placed on after more evidence came about. So, the list itself became controversial. There was a mother's group called STOP [Committee to Stop the Children's Murders], which really was the catalyst towards bringing the, the case to a head and really getting the police and the public involved. And, and, and you know, they would hold, hold press conferences, and, and it was just a big, a nightmare that seemed never ending. Story_ID: 169208 Speaker 1: And the break really came in the spring of '81 [1981]. May 22nd I believe was the date, 1981. The beginning of January--well, through that, that Christmas of 1980 and into the beginning of 1981, bodies are turning up like once, first it was once--one every two weeks, then it was almost one a week. Sometimes it would be two in a week, and, and sometimes they'd overlap. A kid would, a kid would be missing, and no trace. Another kid would turn up missing, and then the previous kid who had been missing, his body would be found. And so you just had this kind of reeling of, of, of a whole community, and this was, this, this drumbeat, bodies being found in the river. You know, you talk about the hovering helicopters, and I would be assigned. You know, you'd, you'd, you'd have the radio on; you know, I'd be heading home at the end of a day; and you know, there'd be a bulletin that, you know, the police or crime scene seems to be developing in a--behind an office park in DeKalb County [Georgia] where, where somebody has spotted the body, what appears to be a boy, you know; and you go there, and you later find out that it is one of the kids that had been on the list. And so it was, it was absolutely unnerving, you know, to cover, just to be in the community with everybody looking over their shoulders. And meanwhile, these bodies are popping up in the river. At some point, after the first couple of bodies start to appear in the river, the taskforce, at this time lead by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]--and that's another whole sort of story, the sort of, the tensions between the FBI and the local cops, you know, all that sort of turf battles--but in any case, they, they divided up the responsibilities, and they started to stake out this bridge. There were these bridges, three or four bridges around metro Atlanta [Georgia] that the taskforce had determined a body might likely be tossed over the side, since this had become part of the pattern by the spring of, of '81 [1981]. And so, it turned out that the taskforce was staking out a bridge on the James Jackson Parkway [Atlanta, Georgia] on this night. They had two police recruits underneath, and then they had some chase cars on either end of the bridge. And so early in the morning the stakeout team under the bridge reports a loud splash in the water. And the subsequent testimony at a, at a, at a Superior Court trial indicated that the, that the stakeout officers radioed up to the team on the bridge that, you know, do--is there a car on the bridge? We just heard a splash. And when the guys on the bridge look up, they see a car moving from what appears to have been a, a stopped position. And then the car crosses the James Jackson Parkway Bridge, and it goes into like a, a convenient store lot and it turns around and it heads back across the bridge. And there's a, a police car sitting at the, at the convenient store, and they move in, and they stop this car, this station wagon. And the occupant was, turned out to be a man named Wayne Williams, a young twenty-three year-old black man who was a freelance photographer and had been, you know, sort of a gadfly in the music business. And so they questioned him that night, and they want to know, do--what did he throw off the bridge. And he said you know, he, he denied throwing anything off the bridge. He denied stopping on the bridge, and he said that he was a talent scout, a music talent scout, and he was scouting a location. He had an interview with a perspective singer, and that's why he was out there. He was checking on her for this interview he had later today. So, they don't retain Wayne Williams at this time. Story_ID: 169209 Speaker 1: They later report sighting certain things in the car, but they don't confiscate anything, bag what they said at testimony later was that there was a bag on the backseat with what appeared to be women's clothing and you know, fleece-lined gloves, and some shoes. You know, this was all in the police report, but none of it came it came into the actual trial of Wayne Williams because they didn't confiscate anything. So [Wayne] Williams goes home, but later that day, they actually interviewed him down at FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations] headquarters but later that day. So by then, word has gone out that, that, you know, there's somebody being interviewed, possibly related to the child murders. But Wayne is not retained, but he later, that morning, has one of the most amazing press conferences at his house at which he passes out his resume. And, and because he's not a suspect, if you ever see the tape of this, you'll just see like the cameras, all the cameras are on the interviewers. And you hear this disembodied voice because the--because he wasn't suspect, they, they couldn't show his picture. He had called this press conference. He passed out his resume, and you know, he talked about what had happened, and you know, who he was, and that, then there became this sort of cat and mouse, this game between Wayne and the police. Because by then, the police weren't calling him a suspect, but clearly he was a suspect. And while they were trying to make a better case forensically or, or, or whatever they were doing investigatory wise, Wayne was a free man. But we were all out there in the press sort of camped in front of his house waiting for the next shoe to fall, because clearly they were either gonna arrest him, you know, and he couldn't leave because they would follow him, and you know, he led them on merry chase. At one point he went by [HM] Lee [P.] Brown's house, and, and then he went by Maynard Jackson's house, you know, just kind of playing cat and mouse with the, with the police. And ultimately, Wayne Williams was indicted. By then the taskforce lists of missing and murdered people had grown to I think twenty-eight. And Williams was indicted for two of the cases, really the last two victims who, who happened to be adults, Jimmy Ray Payne and Nathaniel Cater. These were two of the victims that were found in the, in the, in the Chattahoochee River. What happened--to go back to the splash on the 22nd where they stopped Wayne, a couple of days later, Cater's body washes up downstream from the bridge. And so the cops believe that this was what Wayne Williams had thrown over the bridge that night. That was a big part of their case, you know, circumstantial, but that was the case that they had. So they had the case of, of Cater and Jimmy Ray Payne. Payne I think was twenty-three [sic, twenty-one] years old, and Cater was twenty-seven. Story_ID: 169210 Speaker 1: So then you have the trial, and how the Atlanta Child Murders case gets into, brought into the court with the case of [Wayne] Williams being formally charged for just two murders, the murders of, of these two adults is, the prosecutors invoked what was really a, a little used doctrine, but is now pretty widely used, most recently used in the Michael Jackson case. You know, it's called the Prior Bad Acts Doctrine, where prosecutors can introduce evidence of previous crimes for which a defendant is not indicted in order to show pattern, bid of mind, and opportunity. It's like a pattern case. You know, the jury is not to infer that--the guilt or innocence on these cases, but you're, you're to use these prior bad acts to show that the two that he's indicted for are all part of this pattern. And so that's how they got testimony into the Wayne Williams trial on the, the children who were, who were killed. And they introduced I think about five or six cases of evidence. And what they, what they attempted to show was the pattern of these, of these victims. And then they attempted to show that through trace evidence, which was also very new then, but it's pretty-- Speaker 2: Right, the fiber evidence-- Speaker 1: --widely used now, fiber evidence, you know, trace evidence where you use it to show, to connect a, a victim with an alleged perpetrator's environment. And the prosecution contended that, you know, trace evidence of fibers, and dog hairs, and carpet rugs that were recovered from the victims' bodies, both in the pattern cases and in the two cases that Williams were, was indicted for. They all showed that these victims had been in Wayne Williams' environment, and they, and they attempted to show to the jury that Williams had contact. They brought in witnesses that testified, you know, that they had seen Williams with some of these victims at, at certain times. It was circumstantial evidence case, but, you know, they used that to tie it together. And then they used, I think, talking to the jurors afterwards, they used Williams' demeanor on the stand, you know, to, to try to sort of let his, let his, his appearance, his, his actions sort of hang himself. That was the intent. Speaker 2: Didn't--you were at the trial-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Did, I mean did he--are you convinced that he's the, the one? Speaker 1: Well, I think that they showed enough, they, they, they, they convinced the jury that Wayne Williams was involved. And I think they set up a scenario in which--because Wayne was not a physically imposing person; you know, he's about five foot seven, and you know, overweight, and, and didn't appear to be, you know, like a strong person. But you know, the state pointed out that, you know, these were either children or, you know, indications that (unclear) incapacitated, so it wouldn't have taken like a really, a muscle bound man to like asphyxiate these people. And then they--we later found out that the, that the, the, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations] psychologists, who were ad--advising the prosecutors about the kind of personality that they were dealing with, with a, with a, you know, an alleged serial killer, that it was a Jekyll and Hyde kind of thing, you know, that, and that certain buttons could be pushed to show the jury this sort of angry side. And Wayne actually took the stand in his own defense. And on the first day when he was, when he was on direct examination by his, his attorney, you know, he was a very, you know, meek, accommodating kind of guy. And then on cross-examination when the assistant D.A. [district attorney], a man named Jack Mallard, you know, which is like this sort of bulldog prosecutor, sort of pace in front of Wayne and just kind of, you know, pricked at him. And you know, he started to--I think the exchange had to do with, with--he said to Wayne, you know, "What did it feel like when you're squeezing the life out of these victims?" and you know, you know, the part of the testimony that they had listed--elicited--from black witnesses was that Wayne Williams had this anti, had this, had this deep hatred, this, this ill feeling towards young black street kids. And, and one of the women who, who, who was a prosecution witness testified that Wayne had this nickname for them, called them drop shots, which is a derogatory name. And, and she, she even said that she had a conversation with Wayne in which he, he appeared to indicate that if, you know, if all appeared lost, he'd actually give himself up. And so she had testified the day before, earlier in the trial. And so Mallard, as he's cross-examining Wayne, he's, he's, he's, he's actually, he's pushing him about this term "drop shot." And so all of a sudden Wayne just sort of blows up, and he says, you know, "You're a drop shot," and you know, the FBI--"You, nobody saw me do anything." It was, he was really just kind of this snarling kind of combative, you know, evil personality that, you know, everybody was sort of brought up short. Story_ID: 169211 Speaker 1: And I think in the minds of the jurors, they had seen this transformation that the state had been pushing to show. And I think that and the accumulation of the, of, of the fiber evidence was, was what sealed his, his conviction. But then I think afterwards, a couple of day after the trial, when, when [Wayne] Williams was, was convicted and sentenced to these double, double life sentences I believe it was, without possibility of, of, of parole, and I remember the, the district attorney, a man named Lewis Slaton. The late Lewis Slaton in his summation was comparing Wayne to, you know, some of the great murderers of, of history, you know, Jack the Ripper, and Attila the Hun, and Idi Amin, and Wayne Bertram Williams. He lumped Wayne with these people, and he said that, and I think this was, this was telling in terms of how I think the jurors heard her. He said you know, "Like clockwork, we had these murders, a body almost every eight days, and you know, until May 22nd, 1981, when Wayne Williams is stopped on the bridge, you know. And, and like clockwork and up to that point, there were no more bodies," you know, but they had the Atlanta Child Murders. And of course a lot of people, to this day, think, think Wayne is, is innocent, that he was railroaded. And in a recent interview that Wayne gave one of the radio stations here that had interviewed him. Louis Graham was the DeKalb County [Georgia] police chief but was then with the Fulton County Police Department, was a veteran homicide detective. And he has always maintained that he didn't think Wayne was involved in any of the cases, and he has since reopened six of the cases that occurred within his district in DeKalb County. But it was just interesting to me that when Wayne was, was being interviewed and, and, and was talking about the, the fact that he, he felt that it was--his, he was targeted for this case, that, you know, people were, the government, certain government forces during that period were, were out to silence black leaders and, and black activists, and that, you know--so the, the interviewer says, Well, who do you think was behind it?" And Wayne said he wasn't sure, but that he thought it may have been COINTELPRO [Counter Intelligence Program]. And if you're familiar with COINTELPRO, that was that-- Speaker 2: That's-- Speaker 1: --FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] secret, the investigative agency that, that, that was after black nationalists, really back in the, in the, in the '60s [1960s] and early-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the [Black] Panthers and-- Speaker 1: --and early, and early '70s [1970s] really. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But, you know, it's one of those cases where--what I was about to say in terms of the controversy, when they closed out the other twenty-two cases, and they said essentially that they had evidence to show that Wayne was, in fact, the perpetrator, in most of the cases there were still a handful of cases, and there had always been a handful of cases for which the police had other suspects, either family members or acquaintances, or somebody, but they could never actually make a case. They, they had determined that they weren't part of what they were calling the taskforce murders, but that these other twenty-two were. And so I think Wayne eventually was, was saddled with two convictions and twenty-two other cases charged to him. And you know, there was a sense of it being truncated among some of the families who didn't feel like, you know, they knew enough about what had happened to their child, you know, the case never went to--you know, the, the, the state talked about it-- Speaker 2: So some of their cases were like-- Speaker 1: Yeah, those were the, the, the twenty-two-- Speaker 2: Glossed over it to make a case to-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they were--yeah, exactly, they, that they weren't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --given the full weight of, of trying to prove that he actually did it. And so I think that's why it-- Speaker 2: It keeps resurfacing. Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 169212 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the Newsweek special projects. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, I became the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau chief for Newsweek in, in 1979. And around that time, a couple of editors back in, in Newsweek New York created a special projects unit. And the idea was to take a single topic, subject and you know, throw the resources of Newsweek with, with some of its veteran reporters and really kind of do some really in-depth kind of reporting on, on people's lives, and sort of show, you, you know, kind of a, kind of a, a window into a slice of life. And the first project was a piece on Vietnam veterans. This is, this was five or six years after the fall of Saigon and the end of the Vietnam War in 1975. And that war had ended very bitterly, and, and America really wanted to forget that war and with it, most of the men who had fought it. And so, there was this kind of gulf between the end of that war and you know, what happened to the people that fought it. And we got the idea that, that, you know, that was really an important story, an important story to uncover that, there still hadn't been anything written about the Vietnam experience. And so what we decided to do was to focus in on a single combat unit, and to try to trace down as many of the soldiers that were alive that we could, and then interview them about their lives before the war, the war, and after the war. And, and in so doing, try to explore, you know, the impact of, of Vietnam on, on the country and sort of the lingering aspects of the war. And so the, the, the unit that we decided upon was a, was a, was a, a growing combat unit called Charlie Company. And we, what we got from the, from the [U.S.] Army, the only thing the Army would, could give us because of the privacy issues was the, the roster list of these men and their last known residence when they got out of the Army. They had all gotten out of the Army in, you know, the early seventies [1970s]. And so we took this list and we split it up, myself and four other reporters, and we sort of crisscrossed the country, tracking down these veterans of Charlie Company. And you know, it, it became really a great reporting enterprise because, as I said, it was one of the first really in-depth pieces of journalism about Vietnam veterans. And what we found was, when we got to these guys and when we started getting these great emotional recollections, we found that, you know, they had not, a lot of this they had not even discussed with their family, with their spouses, you know, sort of the, the, the, the silence surrounding the ed of that war was, was really profound. And, and, and we just sort of hit these guys when they were ready to open up. And they were helpful in, in, in turning us on to other people in the unit. And you know, we, we, we found about half of them, and we did a special of what, what became Newsweek's first special report called 'Charlie Company: What Vietnam Did to Us,' which was later turned into a book published by William Morrow by the same name. I was one of the co-authors on that. CBS Reports later did a, later sponsored a reunion of the Charlie Company survivors in, in Palm Beach, Florida and filmed a report for I think CBS Reports, which, which aired I guess in sometime in, in 1980 or, or, or '81 [1981]. And that became, for me, the Charlie Company project became for me my introduction to the special projects unit. And, and I did, although I did other reporting, I did, I did a lot of these long form journalism pieces, where we would go out and, and, and, and with a team of reporters and, and, and, and, and go full blow for, you know, months sometimes on a single subject. And then we'd come back and devote most of the magazine to it. It was sort of unheard with 'Charlie Company.' With 'Charlie Company,' it was such a success, it won the 1981 National Magazine Award for single topic issue, you know, which, which we were very proud of. You know, the National Awards is sort of the Pulitzer for, for magazines. And so we, we sort of got the inkling that we were on to something special there in terms of taking the kind of resources that we put into a single topic and like really sort of getting behind the news and giving the reader something really meaty-- Story_ID: 169213 Speaker 1: So what about 'Brothers' by Syl-- Speaker 2: 'Brothers' later became-- Speaker 1: --[HM] Sylvester Monroe's story-- Speaker 2: --when we did, we did, we did, we later some president campaign books, the making of the presidency, you know, which, which Teddy White [Theodore H. White] had part in with the, with the [John F.] Kennedy campaign. And we came along and did similar kind of things. We covered the--we had reporters covering the, the weekly campaign story. We were also on the plane, those of us who were working on the special projects team. And we were gathering, reporting, with the understanding that it would be embargoed until after the election. It was sort of a behind-the-scenes look at, at, at a campaign. So we did--I, I participated in a couple of those. And then we did 'Brothers,' which chronicled the lives of a group of black men who had come of age in the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois]. And one of them was a colleague, Sylvester Monroe, who had, was from Chicago, and had left Chicago as a, as a freshman in high school to go off to this program called A Better Chance, which sent him to prep school, and later to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and later to Newsweek. And-- Speaker 1: I mean to come to end up at Harvard and then Newsweek from Robert Taylor Homes, which is a time-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the largest housing project-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in the country, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --probably the worst managed in-- Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, yeah, just, just sort of like the poster child for what went wrong with housing projects during that, during that period. And so we, we sort of did the same kind of thing as we did with Charlie Company, in terms of splitting up the guys and then going out and, and interviewing them about, you know, their lives, you know, sort of looking at the lives, of, of black men and, and sort of chronicling, you know, from boys to men, and then the, the, the, the pitfalls that suck some of them down, and how others went another route and, and went on to gainful lives. You know, it was, it was, it was a fascinating reporting enterprises as well. And again, the magazine devoted most of the issue to that single topic, and that became sort of a thing for the special projects unit (unclear)--Char--like 'Charlie Company.' 'Brothers' later became a book called, called 'Brothers' and also published by William Morrow. In, in all we did-- Speaker 1: About what year was that? Speaker 2: --four books that came out of the special projects unit during that period in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Oh, it was in the '80s [1980s], in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --mid-80s--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, mid-80s [1980s] un--until-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --I guess the last one I worked on was probably 'The Making of the President' in 1988, in which I covered [HM] Jesse Jackson's second presidential campaign. Story_ID: 169214 Speaker 1: Now were you around when the famous "Hymietown" remark hit the-- Speaker 2: I was, I was not covering the campaign on a weekly basis. Vest Monroe [HM Sylvester Monroe] was covering it on a weekly basis. I was covering it for the, the special projects unit because that was one of the campaigns that we, that we, we--maybe that was the first one, 'The Making of the President' 1984. But I, I remember that, that incident very well 'cause it was a very controversial incident. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was [HM] Jesse Jackson remark was that, that, that whatever was said, was said in the, in, supposedly off the record. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And somebody--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it, it had not been published, but some reporters had, had heard it. And it later got printed in the, in the Washington Post. And then there was a, a controversy, controversy within journalism as to whether or not it was off the record and therefore off-limits comment. And then, and then the controversy over what, what Jackson meant by, by that phrase. You know, it was, it was considered a slur, an anti-Semitic statement, which, which he denied. But there was great consternation about it, and, and he later apologized. This was also during the period when, when, in '84 [1984], when [HM The Honorable Minister] Louis Farrakhan, the head of the Nation of Islam, who had not voted in a presidential campaign, had said he was gonna vote for the first time and had, and had endorsed Jesse. And so that became, you know, another controversial aspect of the Jackson campaign. But, but the Jackson campaign was one of the great news stories of that, of that period and one of the great sort of watershed moments in, in, in elected politics, especially in the Democratic Party. You know, I think the rever--reverberations from that are still being felt today, you know. Story_ID: 169215 Speaker 1: Now what else? Now I remember Newsweek in those days hit a number different--there was one--in terms of the African American community, there's one that, one cover story had to do, do with Afro-centric curriculum and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --classroom had a, had a Cleopatra I think on the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah, exactly right, yeah, yeah, the origin, the origins of man, and basically tracing it back to, to Africa is, is-- Speaker 1: Well, there was one, there was one about that too, but there's one was a black Adam and Eve on the cover-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right- Speaker 1: --about the genetics-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --African, the findings--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But the multicultural cover was, was very controversial, because there was a resistance at that time to the whole notion that, that there was even such a thing as multicultural and, and people questioning the value of it. Story_ID: 169216 Speaker 1: And so, yeah, I mean that was really one of the great things about being a Newsweek correspondent and, and bureau chief, was, you know, the world was sort of your oyster. We had all these different departments, and, and you know, whatever subject you could come up with to pitch your story on, you could have at it. And so, you know, there was never--everything was of interest to me then, you know. And I would do, you know, entertainment stories. Another sort of interesting time was covering the rise of Spike Lee as a major filmmaker, you know. Newsweek did quite a bit of stories, and I reported many of them on Spike's sort of evolution, you know, as a, as a, as a filmmaker to be reckoned with. I remember we did a, a cover on his movie 'Jungle Fever,' which is a movie about interracial romance. And we had Wesley Snipes, the actor, and, and Annabella Sciorra, the white female actor on the cover of, of Newsweek. You know, and, and it caused quite a bit of consternation out in the land. You know, this is, this is like, this is the '80s [1980s], but, that was still an image and a subject that you, you could get a lot of controversial debate about, you know, and, and Spike did that with, with his movies. And I remember one memorable weekend I guess he was doing the, when he was doing the 'Malcolm X'--no, it was during 'Jungle Fever.' He was working on 'Malcolm X.' And that's, that's when Spike was, was a great marketer. You know, that's one of the great first sort of guys to know how to promote his thing, you know. And I remember we were talking about 'Jungle Fever' on, on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], where he had a, he had a summer house. He was having a summer house built at that time. And he already had like his, his Malcolm X caps, you know, in preparation for the movie he made on the, on the, the life of Malcolm X a couple of years later. So-- Speaker 2: That's about 1993 I guess you're about? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, so, you know, that, that was, that was interesting. I covered the, the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] riots, you know, the-- Speaker 2: In '91 [1991]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I spent, spent a lot of time there after the aftermath, sort of trying to piece together-- Speaker 2: Let me go back, back to Spike Lee for a second, but do you remember the story about Spike Lee being kicked off the campus of Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]? He was shooting there I think at one point. Speaker 1: When he was shooting 'School Daze?' Speaker 2: Yeah, 'School Daze.' Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, at first he had permission I think the story goes. At first he had permission, and then when the powers that be got a look at the, the script or, or got a sense that it wasn't going, it was not going to be a totally uncontroversial movie about life on, on the campus, he had to move, he had to move off before the film was complete. But I understand now he's working on a sequel, and now he's getting carte blanche to shoot wherever he wants on the campus, so (laughter). Speaker 2: I think the movie just tended to--I mean people who could recognize the settings in Atlanta [Georgia], you know, I mean it didn't hurt-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the school or anything at all. Speaker 1: I think, I think, I think they probably realized that it, it did quite a, quite a bit towards raising its profile among people outside of the South, you know. And Spike, I was just talking to Monty Ross, one of his producers, a couple of weeks ago about how this metamorphosis of 'School Daze II' came about, because Spike, you know, he's a guy who doesn't like to do sequels, you know; he do one subject and that's it. But Monty said that Spike said that he'd go out on speaking engagements, and kids who were too young for the original 'School Daze,' kids in college now, freshmen would come up to him, and they'd beg him to do another version of it. And they would then start to recite like all the lines from the first movie (laughter). And so, he realized oh boy, you know, (laughter) maybe I'd better do this, you know. It struck a chord that is still out there and alive. Speaker 2: A lot of people I know think it was his best movie-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I mean in terms of, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of like just something so original. Speaker 2: It touched, every, everybody could relate to it-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I mean the, the scene-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --with the homies in it--I mean Atlanta, the, the brothers in, in the, in the chicken in the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, exactly, exactly, yeah. Speaker 2: I mean everybody knew about that. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know. Story_ID: 169217 Speaker 1: And Spike [Lee]--you know, people forget now because it's, I think he probably doesn't get as, get as much credit as he deserves for having really, not jumpstarted a career with a lot black filmmakers, but the whole sort of independent filmmaking industry itself. Because prior to Spike, you know, most movies that didn't get green lit by a studio didn't get made, and Spike sort of did his thing outside of the system, you know. And he, he demystified the process for people, 'cause you know, he did a book about how I did it, and he'd write this, put the script in there, and he'd, you know, it was sort of like a little primer on film making. And I think a lot of young filmmakers, white filmmakers were inspired by Spike's example, and you know, a lot of them are, are, are making their movies as a result. And then he had a great eye for talent. You know, Samuel L. Jackson, you know, you mentioned 'School Daze,' he was one of like the corner boys in that scene at the-- Speaker 2: With the bag and the-- Speaker 1: --at the chicken place (laughter). Right, with the bag on his head, you know, and in 'Jungle Fever,' Halle Berry played that, that junkie, you know, which when you look back at that movie, and you look at Halle Berry today, you'd be like, man, you know, how did Spike see that? But you know, so he, he really gets a lot of credit I think for not only giving a lot of (unclear)--Wesley Snipes did a lot of movies with Spike, Denzel [Washington], you know-- Speaker 2: Laurence Fishburne was in 'Jungle Fever'-- Speaker 1: You know, Laurence Fishburne, yeah. I mean, you know, the guy, the guy really was, has been a force in, in movie making in America. And you know, getting to know him and hang out with him, he's very opinionated and you know, was just, just a hoot, you know, a lot of fun. One of the best things about being a reporter is you get to meet all these interesting people, and you know, get to sort of learn a little bit about everything. Story_ID: 169218 Speaker 1: One of my more harrowing experiences occurred, I guess this was 1980. Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter] was president, and the, the sort of tensions between Cuba and the United States was sort of at their zenith. And there was a, an incident in which some Cubans from Miami [Florida] went over to Havana [Cuba] by boat, and they came back with some of their relatives. This is like in the, in the spring of 1980 I guess it was. And, and when they came back to America, they said that [Fidel] Castro had said that he was gonna let all the people who didn't wanna be in Cuba go, you know, and if anybody could get over there with a boat, he was gonna bring 'em to the shore and let 'em get up--let 'em get out. And so this created a, a firestorm in, in, in South Florida and really across the country, but especially in South Florida where a lot of Cubans, you know, had migrated since Castro took power in the '50s [1950s]. And so I, I got a call from our news editor, John Dotson, as this thing is sort of building, you know, about this. 'Cause we covered Miami at that time from--as part of the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau territory. And so I started making some calls and, and found out that there were, that there were people going from Key West, Florida, and so I made some arrangements. This is like, about mid-week, and, and so I called the news desk back and said it looks like I can get on a boat and you know, like Wednesday--'cause it's only, you know, ninety miles from, from Cuba from the Florida Coast. So you could be there, with good weather, a ninety-minute boat ride. And so I had this, this vision of going down and with this family of Cuban-Americans that had chartered this boat. And they were gonna pick up their relatives and you know, I was gonna go along, and I was gonna have this great on-scene story of, of this, you know, repatriation and, and, and, and, and reconciliation of, of this family. And so I go to Key West, and I, and I get on this boat, but I get down there and I realize that this thing is, is huge. I mean every fishing captain in South Florida has been chartered by Cuban families who are anxious to go over there and get their relatives, and so, you know, this is what becomes the Mariel boatlift. And so we leave Key West that Wednesday about dusk, and you know, as far as the eye can see, we, we're shoving off, and as far as the eye can see are these boats. You know, I can see that, I'm already beginning to think that this is not gonna be sort of the quick turnaround that I was hoping. But I'm, I'm into it now, and I'm thinking whatever it is, this is gonna be a hellacious story, you know. So we head out and, and really there are two families on this fishing boat. It's called the Danny III. And it really was not--it was a fishing boat so, you know, they were used to going out and offshore and taking a, a charter crew out there for, you know, a half a day and then coming. And so now they're gonna go to Cuba, and they're gonna take this family back, sort of really sailing into the unknown. So, overnight we're, we're there, and we sleep on the boat. I sleep on, on the bar; it's like a curved bar. It was the only sort of space there 'cause you had five or six people plus the crew, you know, men and women, family--two different had chartered the Danny III. So we--I get up the next morning and now it's, it's dawn, and I can really see out over the waters. And just as far as the eye can see, just these hundreds of boats all sort of converging on the mouth of this Port of Mariel, Cuba. And so it takes us all day to get inside, and then when we get inside I discovery that there are, you know, hundreds of more boats that have been there at least since earlier in the week, and you know, we're not gonna get out for a while. And the, and the Russian--the Cuban, Cuban gunboats are sort of circling the water. And they're giving out immigration papers, and you know, we're signing them, and then you're moved into the, to the port. And, and you tie off wherever you can because it's so crowded; it's, it's just like an amazing sort of jail on the water of all of these boats that were kind of captured there until Castro decides they wanna let, let, let us out. And so my, my couple of days stretched into about a week and a half on the, on the water with no sort of running water, and it was really kind of a, a bad situation. Story_ID: 169219 Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: There's sanitation issues. Speaker 1: Sanitation issue, food issues, you know, some people--you could go into the, into the town, and some people went in and, and got food, and you know, the boat sort of tied off, and you know, kind of cooked and shared food. And you know, the first couple of days it had sort of a little festive period to it. I mean you are in the water. It's out in the Caribbean, and then, you know, so it's not that bad. But then, after about the third day, you're realizing that this is not going to end. And some people were trying to get out and they couldn't. But the upshot of it was, what became the Mariel boatlift is that most people who, who went down hoping to get family members were just sort of loaded up. [Fidel] Castro, it was later determined just kind of opened the, opened the jails, and he basically used the Mariel boatlift to get rid of the undesirables in Cuba. And so he opened up the prisons and the mental institutions, and he brought them all down to the dock and he just loaded them up willy-nilly on, on these boats and, and sent them back to America. And that became, you know, the Marielitos, because, because these, these--this particular wave of immigrants, unlike the earlier waves, were, you know, less affluent, you know, less educated, more multiracial, a lot of blacks, black Afro-Latin Cubans in there. And so, they didn't get the reception of earlier immigrants, and, and for a long while here, after these boats came back, and our boat--later, we left after about eight or nine days. And, and, and the families that I went down with, we didn't take back any of the family members that they had gone for. We just sort of got loaded up with whomsoever they wanted to put on there and you know, came back to America. And then for a long time there afterward, the, the Marielitos became sort of like a running story in Miami, the residue of, of the Mariel boatlift. Yeah, that's in the '80s [1980s], yeah. Story_ID: 169220 Speaker 1: [President Jimmy] Carter had a better post-presidency than he did his years in the White House. Speaker 2: And I wanted to ask you about [HM] Andrew Young, and, and maybe we should kind of capsulize your thoughts about Andrew Young's career as a congressman, and then as a UN [United Nations] ambassador, and then as mayor of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, I didn't cover [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] or, or, or, or the movement, you know, as a reporter, but later, after I moved to Atlanta in the '70s [1970s], I, I did get a chance to interview people around him, you know, Andy [Andrew] Young, and, and, and Hosea Williams, and Ralph Abernathy, and Joe Lowery [HM Revered Dr. Joseph Lowery], and James Orange, and, and, and just some of the people that were there and, and so got a real good sense of, you know, the power and you know, the tenacity of these people. And Andy--you know, Hosea used to talk about, you know, the, the division of labor in the, in the, among Dr. King's men, you know, and how he would be the masked man. He'd go in and he'd shake everything up, and get all the white folks riled, and then Andy would come in, you know, soft-spoken and offering them a, an alternative. You know, either you deal with me, or you deal with Hosea. And so, it's interesting that when he later is, is, after he, he's elected as, as congressman and is appointed as a UN ambassador, you know, that this sort of diplomacy that he had really sort of developed in the movement, you know, he came to bring it to bear, you know, in the, in a global situation, you know. And he was--you know, we did a cover on Andy Young after--I, I remember when the word came down that Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter]--that he was gonna resign his seat from Congress and that Jimmy Carter was gonna name him the UN ambassador. And I remember having an interview with him for Newsweek, as he's, you know, getting ready to go to Washington [D.C.] and, and, and, and have this announcement in, in the basement of his, of his home in Southwest Atlanta and, and where he reflected on, you know, the historic aspect of what he was about to do and, and, and making the connection between his experience in the nonviolent Civil Rights Movement with, with the United Nations, and that whole effort towards piece and rec--reconciliation on an international scale, you know. So, yeah, he was, he was, he was determined to sort of have his own impact, and, and I think he did, you know. He, he, he was, he was not known for mincing words, you know. Some people said he was, you know, too candid, but that was just Andy. And I think that was just kind of the way he had learned to deal, you know, this sort of tell it like it is. And you know, sometimes it didn't go over in, in the world of diplomacy the way he might have expected-- Speaker 2: (BRIEF INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: We're talking--off-camera we were saying that I think that we kind of agree that the perception of Andrew Young nationally was a, more of a mild figure in the Civil Rights Movement. But he really appeared to be too hot for the Carter Administration when he-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think that was Andy's reputation during, during the movement, as I say. He was always the, the conciliatory-type guy, juxtapose against Hosea Williams, you know. And, and so, he was always the guy to go and negotiate with these sometimes rabid townsfolk in some of these little towns. And so, yeah, he appeared to be a safe bet. And, and, and of course, when he ran for Congress, that district is not nearly as, as majority black as it is now that, you know, that [HM] John Lewis is--I mean it was, it was, it was half, it was those, it was a kind of district where you needed all the black votes and a sizeable portion of white votes to win, And Andy was the guy in the old 5th District that could get enough white votes win. That's how he really won. He won in a clearly biracial election his first couple of terms. And so that was another reason why, you know, he had that sort of national reputation as a, you know, the guy that was a little more mild-mannered and nonthreatening, you know. Story_ID: 169221 Speaker 1: He had his moments when he got to the, to the job almost from the very beginning. You know, it was a very controversial meeting with, I think it was Yasser Arafat, the head of the, the PLO, the Palestine Liberation Organization, you know, which had been taboo. I think America had, had, had an ironclad rule of not meeting with, with PLO because of, you know, the violence that they associated with the, with the, with the PLO. But Andy had this secret meeting with Arafat, but it didn't last. The, the, the, the secrecy of it didn't last very long. And, and then when it came out, of course he was wildly--widely--criticized, and, and, and Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter], you know, took, took some hits for it. And you know, he, he had a very stormy tenure as the United Nations ambassador. Story_ID: 169222 Speaker 1: Yeah, that was interesting watching President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter try to smile during that period of time, his famous smile, but it was like a smile, uh, everything's not quite right. But I think that, that his, correct if I'm wrong, but I think Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] still, I mean he had the respect of Carter I think philosophically but not politically, I guess in a way. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I guess that's, that's true, you know. And I think Carter certainly was naive about the hothouse of politics that, that the beltway was, you know. I mean you remember he, he went in with this sort of image of, you know, citizen-president and (unclear) walk, he walked up Pennsylvania Avenue, skewing the limo, you know, and, and that kind of thing. But the, the system itself, you know, I, I remember all of these stories, us, you know, we--I was back and forth to Plains, Georgia, all the time during that period, both during the election and after the election, you know, 'cause his brother, Billy [William Alton "Billy" Carter], was, you know, was sort of a lightning rod for controversy, and, and he was under investigation at one point. And so, there was always this tension between, you know, sort of Southern sort of countrified folk coming to [Washington] D.C., and you know, the kind of impact and that kind of thing. 'Cause, you know, then the Iranian Hostage Crisis [1979-1981] really sort of defined the Carter administration, 'cause that just kind of took over everything there towards, towards the end, when--and then of course at--on the election, after he's defeated by [President] Ronald Reagan, the hostages are released, you know. But that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was--that, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --all been--you know, a lot of people believe, you know, in the October surprise and-- Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly, yeah-- Speaker 1: -and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, it was, it was-- Speaker 1: --that whole-- Speaker 2: --it was very controversial. But, you know, Carter clearly owed his, his election to, to black voters in large part and especially to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s father, Daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.], because Carter was sort of riding high until he did that Playboy interview, where he had the lust, the lust-- Speaker 1: Lust in his heart. Speaker 2: --lust in his heart. And then there was another controversial, racial statement that got attributed to him, and it looked like he was gonna lose his black support. And I remember this rally that they held downtown Atlanta [Georgia] in one of the parks there, in which Daddy King, Martin Luther King's father, sort of did his laying on of hands on Jimmy Carter at this, at this rally. And it, it really sort of turned the tide and, and, and, and made him acceptable to, to black voters across the country, you know. Yeah, that was a very, very watershed moment for Carter. Story_ID: 169223 Speaker 1: What, what, what other stories did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of the, I guess the big sort of story in the '90s [1990s] was the [1996] Summer Olympics coming to Atlanta [Georgia], you know, and, and sort of watched the, the evolution of that, 'cause Maynard Jackson had to finish out his two terms. And Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] had become mayor, and, and, and then Maynard had come back in again in the nineties [1990s] and got involved in this, what appeared to be preposterous notion of the Summer Olympics actually coming to Atlanta. And then Atlanta put in a bid, and you know, Andy Young, again, was, was very instrumental. If, you, if you go back and look at what happened there. The, the African countries, you know, the, the bloc vote as to, you know, which, which nation would, would win, you know, Andy Young, because he had spent this time in Africa, you know, became really one of the foremost authorities on Africa and African business and culture. And so he had developed these contacts, and he worked them to the benefit of, of Atlanta when the actual vote came, and so Atlanta won it. And it really was, was a, was a, a transformative moment in terms of, of jumpstarting the kind of urban development that you see going on here today. I mean they, they tore down the old [Atlanta] Braves stadium where Hank Aaron hit the tying home run, or the record breaking home run, in 1974, tore that down and built an entire new Olympic-size stadium for track and field, which the Braves later took over. This was the Braves ballpark, you know. And they did a lot of other infrastructure development as a result of the Olympics. And you know, covering the Olympics, you know, sort of watching an Olympics or a place become converted into an Olympic site, was really quite extraordinary and, and, and, and something that I will always remember as sort of a high watermark of, of a different, something really different to write about. Story_ID: 169224 Speaker 1: Atlanta [Georgia] seems to really be jumping in the, in the mid-90s [1990s], I guess from nine--there, there is a series of things leading to the [1996 Summer] Olympics [Atlanta, Georgia]. I think the Olympics was a-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --cap of a lot of different-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, the Olympics was really sort of the cap, and it sort of generated other kinds of development in and around the, the, the core downtown, you know. The other thing that happened during that period of the '80s [1980s] where they created the, the rapid transit system, you know, MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know-- Speaker 1: Moving Africans Rapidly Through Atlanta. Speaker 2: --rapidly through Atlanta, yeah, that's, that's, that's what the locals call it. Yeah, there, there was a great shortsightedness I think now. Some of the suburban communities wished they had because it, MARTA is great for where it goes, you know, but it doesn't go--you know, unlike say the metro stations, metro system in [Washington] D.C., you know, where you can take it into, you know, suburban Virginia or Maryland or, you know, on down the, into Baltimore [Maryland]. This only (unclear) runs sort of north, south, sort of within, you know, Atlanta city property, you know, from--proper--from, from, you know, the Far North Side out to the airport and then from the center of town, east west, you know. But where it's really needed, and it was needed then, what people didn't, you know, they, you know, a lot of the suburban communities, because, you know, Atlanta had evolved like a lot of cities during that period of a, of a, you know, the donut, you know, predominantly black core and a, and a predominantly white outer core. And the outer core, in large measure, saw the rapid transit as a way to bring the great unwashed out there, who otherwise didn't have cars. You know, they had a vision of this great invasion of, you know, Negroes that come out and pillage and then come back into their hovels of the town. That was kind of like the image. So, as a result, they resisted MARTA going, you know, to the furthest flungs the metro area. And now, you know, a lot of people probably wish that they could, as you can in other parts of the, of the country, you know, take a, drive your car to a train station in your suburban community, and the take the metro back into downtown where, where you work, you know. But that was a big development during the '80s [1980s], not as big as it should have been to relieve the congestion and all of the, the cars on the highway. Story_ID: 169225 Speaker 1: But the [1996 Summer] Olympics [Atlanta, Georgia], I remember cover the, the Dream Team basketball game, some of the great track and field, and you know, writing about the, the buildup of--and would, would, would Atlanta be ready, you know? And it was like a ticking clock all the way to, to the actual opening ceremonies, you know, they actually, right down to the wire--and then, of course, the, the great tragedy there at the end of the first weekend when the bomb explodes. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's ironic. Eric Rudolph is just sentenced yesterday as we're talking about this. Speaker 1: Yeah, just sentenced yesterday-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for that bomb in which one woman was, was killed, and, and a number of people were, were injured. And, and everybody who had been in the park thinks about, you know, how they could have actually been there. 'Cause I had been in and around that main stage all, all week, and that was the night that I had covered the, the Russian-U.S. basketball game. And it was one of the nights where I decided to go home early. And my daughter, who was, who had been visiting from Virginia where she was in graduate school, and we had put her on a plane that afternoon. She had come down for the first week. And so I was, I covered the game, filed my story at the Georgia Dome where the game was playing. Instead of coming back down to the park, which I had been doing every night, I decided boy, I'd been really burning. I think I'll turn it in early. So, I headed back home, took the train home. And when I got into the house the phone was ringing, and it was my daughter back in Virginia. And she said, "I just saw on CNN [Cable News Network] where a bomb exploded in the park. I just wanted to make sure you were okay." And I said, "Oh, boy, I didn't hear anything about that. I better get back down there." And so, I turn back around--you know, got driven to the train and took a train back into downtown and then--this was a Friday, which was the worst time for a news magazine, because we had already done the cover for that week. We had the, we had the, I think we had the rowing team on. The U.S. had a, had a, had a gold medal winning rowing team I think during that period. And so, you know, the magazine by Friday night was pretty much gone to bed, you know. And now, on Saturday, which is our publishing day, we're tearing up the magazine. And you know, we gotta like re, recount what happened, how many pe--all of the sort of tick-tock of the incident, plus, you know, the question of the impact on the games. Will it, will it cause cancellation or postponement? All of this stuff is happening on a, on a Saturday, and that was like an, an around the clock sort of reporting thing for me. And you know, that happens every once in a while on deadline-- Story_ID: 169226 Speaker 1: The other deadline that I can recall in which we had to tear up the magazine, you know, one of those literally, like you see in the movies, the stop the presses kind of thing, and we actually had done that. One other time that I was involved in, and that was, I think that was '78 [1978] [sic, 1974], the, the murder of, of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s mother, Mama King [Alberta King]-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --on a, on a Sunday in Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], right up the street from where we are now. This guy, Marcus Wayne Chenault, had came, had gone into the church and you know, had a gun. And Mrs. King was in the amen corner at the, at the, at the piano. She was, she was a church pianist when this guy jumped up and shot her. And I was in--it was a Sunday morning then. I was heading to a[n] [Atlanta] Braves game and, and so happen to be right downtown when it happened. And so I segued over there and, and, and did some interviews and found out what happened. And I remember calling in our nation editor, Larry Martz, telling him, you know, what had happened. And he said "Oh, we gotta do a makeover." And so, he and I put together a, a story; you know, it's a short sort of ninety, ninety-line story. Over the phone that Sunday, you know, we stopped at a--we, and stopped the press to get it in, and we got most of it in to the press run for, for that week, you know--so, a couple of those sort of nightmares of, of, of weekly journalism when, you know, the week is done and then you have like less than a day to like totally remake the magazine. Story_ID: 169227 Speaker 1: Any other highlights of being the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau chief [of Newsweek]? Speaker 2: Well, you know I just, the other thing that I, sort of stories I'm thinking about is, that I haven't mentioned, one was, I was not bureau chief then, but it was the escape of James Earl Ray, the assassin of [Reveremd Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], from Brushy Mountain Prison up in [Petros] Tennessee. And it also happened, as these things seem, seem to happen, on, on like a Friday, you know, Ray breaks out on a Friday. And a team of us rush up to Brushy Mountain on that Friday afternoon, and we're there all night. And you know, they're, they're searching through this dense, rugged mountainside for Ray and, and two other inmates who had gone over the wall. And you know, they got the choppers and the dogs. And I remember myself and a photographer, Wally McNamee, you know, sort of going off in Wally's car kind of riding the roads ourselves, just 'cause we got tired of sitting there waiting for the daily briefings, and you know, nobody knew anything. And then about dawn on Sunday morning, they brought James Earl Ray down from the mountain. The dogs had, had run him down. And, and we were all standing there in the line. They bring in Ray, and he's looking all muddy, and somebody says, as Ray passes by, he says: "Is that James Earl Ray?" Then Ray says, "Well, it sure ain't his brother." Those were his only words as they ushered him back into the, into the prison, you know. Again, that was one of those stories where the magazine sort of holds for the final reporting that we can get in before we actually gotta go to press. Story_ID: 169228 Speaker 1: As we sit here on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] today, just, just a few years ago the King family [family of the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] entered into this dialogue with James Earl Ray-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --basically-- Speaker 2: They exonerated him-- Speaker 1: --excused, exonerated him for the-- Speaker 2: --or, yeah, that's, that's controversial too. But they were de, de, determined that, that there was a conspiracy bigger than Ray, which a lot of people have all, have always felt. But where they differed from other people was, was whether James Earl Ray was involved in the conspiracy. And they said publicly that, you know, that, that he wasn't, and the actually had a trial in Memphis [Tennessee], basically a mock trial where this evidence that had been accumulated was presented, and you know, it was like a civil trial. But yeah, the King family did, did absolve Ray of, of any, of any blame. Speaker 1: It seems an amazing story. I mean do, do you have any sense of whether, I mean as a reporter interviewing people and-- Speaker 2: Well, I mean my, my sense was that Ray was involved. You know, I think that was, that was the sense. Even, even King's men split on, you know, Ray's involvement. You know, they think that Ray was a, was a patsy for a larger kind of conspiracy, but you know, nobody was really satisfied the way it went down, that Ray could have, you know, escaped overseas so quickly. And you know, you know, people talk about the guards being removed at the crucial point when, when King was, was vulnerable. You know, I think the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] did determine that, you know, Ray had been stalking King. But then you had the whole controversy of, you know, the suspicion of the FBI's own culpability because of J. Edgar Hoover's antipathy towards King. I mean he hated him in a word, and so there was a lot of effort to discredit King, and then he's killed. And you know, people, to this day, wonder, you know, what kind of government involvement there may have been, you know. Story_ID: 169229 Speaker 1: A lot of Southern mysteries in this, this region, that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, and that a lot of the stories--I mentioned the, the Birmingham, the reopening of the Birmingham church bombing case [16th Street Baptist Church bombing, 1963] and, and then the conviction ultimately finally of, of, of, of all of the living people in that case anyway. But you know, there were so many of these cases-- Speaker 1: The [Byron] De La Beckwith case [1963] in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know-- Speaker 1: --Mississippi. Speaker 2: --that really sort of opened the floodgates in terms of a different kind of, of prosecutor today. The irony of those case, and you know, two of the most horrendous ones happened in my hometown. One has been resolved; the other one is still--no one has ever been arrested in it. But you know-- Speaker 1: In Natchez [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: What, what, what did-- Speaker 2: --a man named Wharlest Jackson. Wharlest Jackson--the two cases from Natchez are Wharlest Jackson, who was killed in '67 [1967]. He was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] leader, and he worked at the local tire plant. And prior to his death, he had taken a job, he had taken a promotion to what was called a "white man's job," paid like pittance in terms of increased salary, but the status of it made him a marked man. And as he was leaving work one day, a bomb exploded under his truck, and he was killed. This was in '67 [1967]. And then the, the, the other case occurred in 1966, and this was the murder of a, of a handyman, a sixty-seven year-old handyman named Ben Chester White. He was brutally killed by a group of Ku Klux Klansmen [KKK]. And supposedly, their goal was to create a, a, a, a horrendous kind of incident that would draw [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] to the area where he could be assassinated. That case was resolved a couple of years ago. But there, you know, that was another thing about being in the South and, and, and, and having the opportunity to investigate and write about some of those cases that occurred when I was a kid and were still unsolved, you know, as I, you know, became an adult and, and was in the media and in a position to write about them. I wrote about many of, of those cases, including the, the church bombing, and including the Ben Chester White Case. But the thing about that era that I think is sort of unknown is those were the best-known atrocities, you know, the ones that rose to the level of national interest or knowledge. But there were, you know, many more that, you know, people never heard about, that we, we knew about growing up in, in the region, that never have seen the light of day. They were just sort of I guess the collateral damage of the freedom struggle during that period...