 Story_ID: 244814 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Coy Melnick. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes. My name is Leah, L-E-A-H, Ward, W-A-R-D, Sears, S-E-A-R-S, right now, yes. [HistoryMaker] Leah Ward Sears. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 13th, 1955. Speaker 1: Okay. Now there's--well, people are often confused by your name-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --all the time. So can you explain--now your husband is Sears Ward? His name is-- Speaker 2: Right, my husband's name is Haskell Sears Ward. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And let me explain the name game, okay the name saga. I was born in 1955 in Heidelberg, Germany and my parents [Thomas Sears and Onnye Roundtree Sears] named me Leah Jeanette Sears, J-E-A-N-E-T-T-E, okay. I went through the first twenty years of my life as Leah Jeanette Sears. In 1976, I married a young man named Love Collins, III. It was the height of the feminist movement. I wanted to keep my name and all that. What do you do about the name? We both decided to hyphenate our name, so we changed our name. He was Love Sears-Collins and I became Leah Sears-Collins, S-E-A-R-S hyphen C-O-L-L-I-N-S. And I remained that name for most of my professional career. It's important to know that because you'll find a slew of cases, Leah Sears-Collins. We divorced on September 23rd, 1995 and I assumed my maiden name Leah Jeanette Sears, okay? I married a guy, Haskell George Ward from Griffin, Georgia in 1999. Wanting to do something for him on the name front, but knowing I couldn't change my name and run again as under another name, 'cause I run every six years statewide and I'd already run twice under two separate names, Sears-Collins and Sears. I--we decided just to monkey with our middle names. I decided I would become Leah Ward Sears, and then two days later he said, "To be fair, I'll be Haskell Sears Ward," okay. So that's where we are right now. Speaker 1: Okay, it's quite a story. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a justice, presiding justice of the Georgia Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is October 14th, 13th, 15th? 15th? October 15th. Speaker 1: I think 15th, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, 2004. Forgive me, I've had a busy week. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are located in the courtroom of the Supreme Court of Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 244815 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask and they only require a short answer (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, that's fine. Speaker 1: And the first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Fried chicken and ribs. Okay, but fried chicken is--if I had to be stranded on a desert island, it would have to be with a bucket of fried chicken, okay, and I know it's not good for you. Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yeah, probably bright green. But I like bright colors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But bright green would be my favorite. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: This time of the year, which is the fall when the leaves change and become very vibrant and it's neither winter or summer. This is a beautiful time of the year in Georgia particularly. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I really like to go down to the Georgia coast along the Golden Isles [of Georgia], Savannah [Georgia]. I call it the slave coast, where the part of the coast of Georgia that looks just like the coast of Africa where the slaves came over. But unlike that, I like the cloisters and the lodge. I like the nice resorts down there. But I love the beach. I mean I can sit out there and just go all day just watching the Atlantic Ocean come in and go--and the history of that I can see my people coming. It's just an amazing-- Speaker 1: Like the Jekyll Island [Georgia] and St. Simons [Island, Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Yeah Jekyll Island and St. Simons-- Speaker 1: Sea Island [Georgia], yeah. Speaker 2: --and Sea Island and all the outlying--Daufuskie [Island, South Carolina] and I can lose--I don't know it's like a spiritual attraction to that part of the state. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really. It changes with the times. I try to stay contemporary because I have a twenty-one and a sixteen-year-old, but not really you know. Story_ID: 244816 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Thomas Sears] side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's full name is Onnye, O-N-N-Y-E, Jean, J-E-A-N, Roundtree, R-O-U-N-D-T-R-E-E, Sears. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 17th, 1930 in Sand Springs, Oklahoma, so a little town right outside Tulsa [Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: Sand Springs, Okla--okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: She could probably with good recall go back to her grandfather, so what, that would be my--I knew my grandmother and she would know her grandfather so she--probably her great-grandpa, my great-great-grandfather. But I'd have to look at documents to tell you who they were. I know my grandmother's name was Elva [Adams] Roundtree, E-L-V-A Roundtree. I do not know who--and she did not know for sure who her father was. That's always been a big mystery that I think they know, but I'm not really sure. But they know who her grandfather was and he was a Buffalo Soldier, believe it or not. They even had his discharge documents and he--they changed--his wife changed their name to Adams because she wanted to get rid of her slave name. So she started with the first male, first person in the Bible, Adams, so they changed--her mother's name was Adams, but it might have been something else. Speaker 1: Okay, well that's quite-- Speaker 2: Just trying to tell you everything I can recall. Speaker 1: Yeah. Are there any stories associated with the Buffalo Soldiers about the, or about the early settlement of Oklahoma? I know at one time it was a magnet for black people from around the country? Speaker 2: Well because of, yeah she would know more about that than I do. I can't recall any. My--I do know like my grandmother had nine boys and girls, nine kids on--and there were different fathers and that kind of thing. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. So were they all, most of the family in Sand Springs or-- Speaker 2: Almost all of the family is in Sand--well now they've ventured out but at that time they were all in Sand, all born in Sand Springs. Speaker 1: Now was Sand Springs an all-black town, or was-- Speaker 2: No, but the part that they lived in was very much an all-black enclave. And San Springs was a very small enclave. Speaker 1: All right, but right outside of Tulsa? Speaker 2: Right outside of Tulsa. Speaker 1: Okay. Do people in your family have any memory of the Tulsa [race] riot of 1921? Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother does. And my mother knows about it. My parents were interesting. They never really talked much about the bad racial times, and just never shared a lot of it with us. Not even racism or what have you, almost like to protect us from it. How I got a strong, such a strong sense of race and politics and all, it must be hidden in my genes. I don't know, you know. I don't know how that gets passed down. I have--I don't know, you know. My, I don't know. I don't know if I should say this or not but we don't know who my grandfather was. I suspect he might have been white, and they--and I have heard that--should, can I say this? Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Okay. I've heard that he was the superintendent of the Tulsa Public Schools system and his last name might have been Boyd [ph.]. But nobody discusses that so don't discuss that with my mother. I'm just saying. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's not to reveal her it's just that if somebody ever finds that, I'd be interested to know because obviously that would make him be a very--my mother has an extremely high IQ from a family that--my mother took in laundry, grandmother took in laundry and did domestic work all of her life. So I've always found it curious she was such a bookworm kind of type. I'm just curious about that wing. Speaker 1: And these are things that make us really wonder. Speaker 2: Yeah, you wonder, how do you get this sense of--okay. And of course I'm like that too, so. Story_ID: 244817 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Onnye Roundtree Sears] talk about growing up? What do you know about how she grew up? Speaker 2: She grew up, she's very light skinned and she was the only--very, very, very light-skinned and she was the only very, very light-skinned with long, straight hair in her family. That was difficult for her, I know that. She was--it was the--when people would call people yellow and red and that kind of thing. I know that she was very bright and therefore kind of separated out for being rather bright. I know she was, she tested with a very high IQ and sort of, they found her at some point and sort of cultivated that. She was very beautiful. She was taught to play bridge by the principal of the all-black high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] who lived next door to them. This was when--during segregation so every--from all the economic groups all lived around and helped each other out. She was taught to play bridge, and what to wear, and how to do make up, and she fell in love with the son of the principal of the high school, George Tillman [ph.], that lived next door. And she went to--she was put through Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma] in, somewhere in Oklahoma. I understand that's a-- Speaker 1: Langston, Oklahoma. Speaker 2: Langston, right. She graduated from Langston and was just brought along, okay. And I'm just telling you glimmers of what I was told to just get it all. Speaker 1: Okay. So she came out of the family that really didn't have a lot of education. Speaker 2: Very poor, very poor. She wanted to move up. I think she might have--some of them went to college but I--not many. Maybe one or two, or maybe only her come to think of it. Maybe one or two of them might have graduated from college. But-- Speaker 1: Did she come from a large family? Speaker 2: Nine children and a single mother. And the mother did everything with the oldest sister, Aunt Ellie Mae [ph.], who was born when my grandmother [Elva Adams Roundtree] was fifteen, and always sort of stayed with my grandmother to look after the other children. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did your mother do for a living? Speaker 2: She was a teacher. She taught all of her life and was a very good one. But she was a teacher when women that were bright taught school. Speaker 1: Okay. Sort of a ceiling on where you could go-- Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time, and that's what she did, and she didn't really do it to earn a living, because she married my father [Thomas Sears] very young, and he did very well for his time. And her money always as I understood it, was for her to, for discretionary look good clothes. And he always took care of the family, that's how it was done when I was growing up. Story_ID: 244818 Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name? Speaker 2: Yeah. My father's full name is Thomas Euric, E-U-R-I-C, Thomas Euric Sears. Speaker 1: Okay, Euric is kind of an odd name. Now how did--is there any story behind Euric? Speaker 2: No--I don't know. That's a good question to ask. My brother [William Thomas Sears] has that name too. I would like to know. It's not Eric, but it's Euric. It's maybe they didn't know how to do Eric. But I'm not sure what the reason for-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And you know with the name Sears, now I'm going to ask you this. It's probably a waste of time to talk about but you know it's so much speculation, which I've come to understand it's false about [Richard Warren] Sears being--no, not Sears but [Alvah Curtis] Roebuck being black. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Maybe I shouldn't even-- Speaker 2: No, no, but yeah people have said that. You know he was not. Speaker 1: Do they come to you--? Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: But do people approach you with that? Speaker 2: All the time. Speaker 1: They forget which one it was like I just did. Speaker 2: Yeah. Or when I married Haskell Ward [Haskell Sears Ward] it was Montgomery Ward and Sears--you know all, I get, I've gotten that. But I understand Sears is Germanic roots, but other than that I don't know. We're not related to the Sears retail people, even by virtue of being slaves, I don't think. My father's family is from the Tidewater area, Norfolk, Virginia. And they're--the Sears was from Chicago [Illinois] I believe. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I don't believe there's any connection. Speaker 1: What is your father's date of birth? Speaker 2: He was born April 6, 1927. Speaker 1: In Norfolk? Speaker 2: In Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? How far back--? Speaker 2: That's a little more fleshed out than my mother's side. His mother married--his mother's name was Eunice Mears okay, M-E-A-R-S, Eunice, E-U-N-I-C-E. And she married, what was my father's, my father's name? Gosh, cause we put it down--my grandfather's name was [William] Sears. Golly, I just, it's just--I'll think of it. Wait a minute, his last name was Sears. Speaker 1: So Mears married Sears? Speaker 2: Sears, so her last name was Eunice Mears Sears, that you know--she was given to my grandfather when my grandfather--when she was fifteen years old, from--at my--the story goes from my aunt on her deathbed, you take Eunice and marry her and raise up a great family. God, I would like to say my grandfather's name but I'm having a senior moment. But I'll--it's--we wrote it down in the package, okay. So, but--and they had fifteen children, okay, most of whom went to college, and they lived in the same house. They owned the store in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Sears store. Speaker 1: Actually, it actually was a Sears store? Speaker 2: But no--yeah there was a Sears. But it was a, what was called a confectionary where you see cans of this and my grandmother was the post-mistress so you could get stamps there, and you know trinkets and this and a little, two eggs and you know, some candy out of a jar. You, you--they're not much around anymore but they were when I was growing up. Speaker 1: I'm familiar with those in the South especially. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know someone who lived near the school usually would run it and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, you'd run in there and-- Speaker 1: --the kids would come and get their candy and sodas or whatever. Speaker 2: Right, exactly. That's right. That's what they owned. A slice of pie, okay that kind of thing. Story_ID: 244819 Speaker 1: Any stories about that [paternal] side of the family back in the days of slavery and, or Reconstruction or any of that? Speaker 2: No, not really. It's just that I think that that side of the family tended to be very spiritual and really tight in the Baptist church. My grandfather [William Sears] was a--what is the last degree Mason you could be, eleventh degree or--? Speaker 1: I think thirty-third degree. Speaker 2: Thirty-something degree. Speaker 1: Thirty-third degree. Speaker 2: Yeah, he hit the final Mason mark or he was a--and my grandmother [Eunice Mears Sears] was similarly situated and was called Eastern Star, the Order of the Eastern Star cause I know when she was buried she was in all white, in her Eastern Star outfit. And my grandfather had his Mason sword and all that, in fact my father [Thomas Sears] got that. So they were all--send all their kids to school, grandmother stayed at home and took care of them. She had children every two years until she couldn't have children anymore. I think it's seven boys and eight girls. Most of the girls went to Hampton University [Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia]. Almost all of them graduated, except for one, Foretta Thomas [ph.], who went to nursing school. All of them went to college. Most of the boys did very well as well. I mean their, they just were pressing it, education, and had a more stable two-parent household with mother at home cooking and cleaning and taking care of the children and grandfather bringing in the income. I think maybe being more middle-class, lower middle-class, dirt poor, but middle-class by black standards at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We--I don't have any slave stories or anything, that I can think of. They might. My father though is deceased. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now did they talk about race relations in Virginia? Speaker 2: Yeah, and you growing up, you knew, I mean you could see the--but the family tends to really be upbeat about it, you know particular the Sears family. You know that's how it is and we will--God bless us, we will persevere. I mean it's not a down, they got us working in--it's just you know with the God's will and good hard work we're going to persevere. And they did. They're not a downbeat people. I'm much more downbeat than that, you know. I mean persevere, hell. I'm going to fight you know, fought. You know I, and I'm not a radical. But you know it's, I'm a probably a little bit more--my, maybe I have a little Roundtree in me where, oh gosh, that kind of thing. They just seemed to bounce right through that, the sad part. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay? Speaker 1: Now did your father ever talk about growing up with you and stuff like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, he had a very strict father, you know. And a very strict mother and it's, you're a kid, you're required to do certain things. You've got a place here. You've got to pull your weight and you've got to get up and get out and do things. And in fact that's kind of how I was reared. It was very narrow, very strict. But you know he talks about his childhood with fondness, you know. Even the poverty part of it where I would say oh my god! Like my grandmother would make seven, let's say fifteen fish and you got a fish. And there was never an additional fish. And if you were hungry, too bad, you know. So you know it was like--and it would go around in order you got your fish. There were never any seconds. And he would always talk about that, ho-ho, ha-ha, you know happy times. You know what I mean? Like the rationing would be, he would--it would be a fond memory of getting up, having to get out and--because you had to get wood before you could get to--for the fireplace, for the fire, the stove, fire stove so that you could heat the house before you went to--that would, that evokes fond memories for him. It might, I might have considered it somewhat trying, you know when you have to be at school at eight o'clock. You know he always thought we were pampered, and petted. And, get them up! Get those kids out of bed. But just different generations, different rearing. Story_ID: 244820 Speaker 1: What did he [Sears' father, Thomas Sears] do for a living? Now he was in the [U.S.] military, right? Speaker 2: He was in the military for most of his life with me, when I was at home he was a colonel in the [U.S.] Army. And it was, the household was very rigid, very strict but loving. My parents supported me and pushed me and I wouldn't be here without that kind of support, and I'd like to say they were huge shoulders to stand on. They pushed me up-- Speaker 1: Where did he go to school? Speaker 2: He went to school, graduated from Booker T. Washington High School [Norfolk, Virginia], and I mean who didn't graduate from some Booker T. Washington High School? A Booker T. Washington High School in Norfolk, Virginia, and started school at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], I think it was Virginia State. Or Virginia State, it was the state school for blacks in Virginia. Speaker 1: Right there in Petersburg [Virginia]. Speaker 2: Petersburg. What's the name of that? Speaker 1: I think it's Virginia State. Speaker 2: Virginia State. He was then drafted into the Korean War, okay. It, like after his first year. And he did not go back to school until he left the military in his early forties, and he ended up like going back to--it must have been after his sophomore or into his junior year. Took a couple of years in Savannah State [College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] and then got an undergraduate degree at forty. Then he got on a roll, he went to Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia] and got a degree from Georgia State. And then he went to [Atlanta's] John Marshall [Law School, Atlanta, Georgia] and got a law degree. And then he went to ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] and got a divinity, degree in divinity. I mean just got on a roll in his forties. So by the time, when he died at sixty-two, November 19, 1989 in Savannah [Georgia], he was--actually had a church in Midway, Georgia and he had just been ordained a Presbyterian minister. And he had finally, after going through like a ten-year period of what do I do in my fifties, he was going to be a minister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's remarkable. So he became a colonel in the Army without the benefit of finishing college? Speaker 2: Exactly. He went to--they took the best and the brightest, and said, "Come over here. We need some blacks." And he, you know--or who, what, which one of you, which of you guys--this was the segregated military--want to fly a plane? And he said, "I do." They said, "Come on out," okay, and put him through OCS [Officer Candidate School] and then taught him how to fly. And you know he took off from there. Loved, he liked the army. He liked the life there. Story_ID: 244821 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's not that early, but I remember riding in the back seat of my parents' [Onnye Roundtree Sears and Thomas Sears] Corvette in Germany with my two brothers [Michael Sears and William Thomas Sears]. I have two brothers, one on either side, just sitting in the middle--I just recall my father in the driver seat, my mother in the passenger seat and I'm riding with them. Nothing to it, but I just recall that. Story_ID: 244822 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I don't have any sisters and I have two brothers. One's eighteen months older and one's eighteen months younger. Speaker 1: Okay. So well, tell me about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. And I know you've lived a lot of different places you know in the [U.S] Army. Speaker 2: Yeah, we were born in, at least my older brother William Thomas Sears and I were born in Heidelberg, Germany. My youngest brother, Michael Euric Sears was born in Monterey, California when we were moving around. But it was happy. You know the earliest childhood was happy and fairly carefree. I thought our home was tense because there were so many expectations of us. And I think freedom for children just wasn't there. So I thought it was as fairly tense household but it was a happy, secure household. You know I never--it was fairly secure. My--we lived in Army housing in the officers' quarters. That was at a time when there were very, it was rare to have black officers. So I was one of just a few blacks that had a fairly privileged lifestyle, because we lived in bigger houses, and in the better neighborhood. And I ran in a very, always from the beginning ran in a very diverse environment, and never really knew in my early, early years that there was a problem, a race problem. So I, you know was fairly carefree. My father [Thomas Sears] is very, a very, very, very dark man so we thought, I, you know, so an African man, and then my mother [Onnye Roundtree Sears] was very, very light. And for many years I thought my parents were a dark black man married to a white woman, because I didn't know that there were all these gradations of color. In fact I was often surprised when my mother had a slight and she would start saying, "That white person, they did, they always do this to us." And I was like, well, us, I was like always so--I was always kind of confused. This is early, early like three--so I do have earlier memories, impressions of you know I have a black father and a white mother and that's what I am. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I thought nothing of it. Story_ID: 244823 Speaker 1: Were you often the only black child in school? Speaker 2: Yes. As--I was always the only black child in all of the--except for maybe my brothers [William Thomas Sears and Michael Sears] who were there with me and maybe in some circumstances one or two. I've never attended--I attended one year an all-black school in the Washington, D.C. area called Beaver Heights Elementary School [Capitol Heights, Maryland], right outside Washington. I think it's in Maryland for the experience. My parents [Onnye Roundtree Sears and Thomas Sears] wanted to give me an experience of being in an all-black school and some relief actually, 'cause the whole time it was always one--and that was very difficult. That made my growing up very, very difficult. They wanted to pick the best schools that they could for me and they perceived that the best schools that there were, were the white schools where my mother was teaching. And I got a good education from one standpoint but it was a fight the whole time. You have to remember what it was like in the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s] where people would call you names and spit on you and wouldn't let--hold your hand if you were doing square dancing. No one would want to dance with you and it was horrible actually. It's almost like I've always been doing the same thing my whole life. You know, every school I've been in I was the only black or one of--you know every--when I went to the law firm [Alston, Miller & Gaines; Alston & Bird LLP, Atlanta, Georgia], when I graduated from--I was the only black of two in a big law firm. When I went to the court I was the only black or only woman. When I came up here [Atlanta, Georgia], it's always, it's like I had been always prepared to do the same work, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. I've heard that [U.S.] Army culture's very southern, I mean in terms of the, a lot of southern men aspire to be in the [U.S.] military and a lot of the officers are southern, have a southern background. Most of your military schools are in the South, except for West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] of course. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But it's very southern. Do you think that affects how you're treated in the military or does it make any difference you think? Speaker 2: You mean being southern or--? Speaker 1: Or being in--there are so many southern families I guess in the-- Speaker 2: Well remember now my father was from Norfolk, Virginia, black man from--and I, now that I look at it, he was a real southern guy too. So you know particularly when you contrast that with my mom who's from Oklahoma, even in the foods they used to fight about. You know my father wanted grits. You know, my mother had to learn to create grits. We never had greens because my mother didn't grow up eating--and my father missed greens. You know greens! So it is a very southern culture. It is very narrow. You are very, reared sort of in a box, and the culture is like that but it would've probably been like that for me anyway because you have to remember my father was a southern black man and a colonel. So it was going to be like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very dominating man. Story_ID: 244824 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl? What were you interested in and what did you do? Speaker 2: I, in looking back, I understand I always knew I was somebody. I always knew I was going to be big or was big. And I thought everybody thought that about themselves. You know--not--everybody. I always thought I was smart. I was always too opinionated, I understand. Even at the earliest. And I was too--before controlling became an important word, I was told I was vey bossy. And I was always looking out for the underdog and always did exactly what my parents [Onnye Roundtree Sears and Thomas Sears] told me to do. Always toed the line, except sometimes when I--I toed the line on things on the one hand and then there were things that I just flew way off. I mean I--this is it, no way, no how, I'm doing it in a very different way. So I suppose a revolutionary (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you give us an example? Speaker 2: But a very conforming-- Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of--? Speaker 2: Well yeah, like when they started bussing kids in Savannah [Georgia]. We lived in an all-white neighborhood, majority white before we had bussed into the neighborhood. And it was mostly Jewish. So what the folks there decided to do was to begin their experiment in bussing, they were going to bus the Jewish kids from this particular--which would mean bussing me too to the black school on the other--I was going to board a bus every day to be bussed to the other side of town to help integrate the black school there. You know that's how silly things had-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that didn't make much sense. Speaker 2: No it didn't, and I didn't like it, and I told my parents, I will do this but in--I'm going to graduate. I'm going to accelerate. I'm out of here. I'm going as far away as I can. I'm going, goodbye. And I don't think they really thought I was going to pull that off, but a year after that I had applied and gotten accepted to Cornell University in Ithaca, New York way, way far away. And the deal was, take me, and they were very upset about that. I think if they had gotten to choose for me, it would have been Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or a nice lady school. But instead I go way out to a school where they're taking over the--you know they're having demonstrations. It was great. I loved it. But that's not something they would have prescribed for me, but it was what I wanted to do. So it was lots of conforming with the shoots off to the side, you know. And the shoots off is--the conforming was good but the shoots off really you know propelled me in different directions. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: You know kind of made it, made me different. Speaker 1: You think you kind of would shoot off when things wouldn't make sense to you? Speaker 2: To me. And my father used to tell my mother, she's going to spend--I hope she doesn't spend all her life beating her head against the wall trying to change things that just aren't going to change. And no, I'm not going to spend all my life beating my head against--but I'm going to work all my life to change things that need to be changed if I, you know--I think my father would have--I don't know. He had visions that being a male colonel that just calm down. I mean he used to tell me that, calm down. Marry a strong man because you're a strong woman. So you need a strong man to dominate you. And, well no, he would tell me that, and because you're too much sometimes and just calm down. You need to learn to wile him. And I would sit there and say, you've got to be kidding me. I'm not going to do that. And, but that's how it was done. So you have to have a vision for things to come and I don't think he could see the woman's movement making a place for somebody like myself as opinionated as he is and as outspoken and powerful as he is, but female. Story_ID: 244825 Speaker 1: Now you told us something about school, but you attended several schools--where, now kind of give us a kind of chronology of where you've lived (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did. Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --you know as a military child? Speaker 2: Born in Heidelberg [Germany], I think, I don't know where I started school, that's a very good question. The first I remember going to school was in the third grade, so I must have gone to school at some army posts, either in Monterey, California or either in Germany, for some of the army post schools. That's a shame. I'm only forty-nine, I can't--but I'll get that. But I do remember the, you know vividly going to school in the third grade in New Carrollton, Maryland when we lived right outside Washington [D.C.]. It was Lanham Elementary School [Lanham, Maryland] in the third grade. Remember we were the only blacks there and my mother [Onnye Roundtree Sears] taught school there. From there we came south to Bartlett Middle School [The STEM Academy] in Savannah, Georgia and then Windsor Forest Middle [sic.], it was actually it was junior high school. Speaker 1: Now, did you skip Beaver Heights Elementary School [Capitol Heights, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Oh yes. I went to Beaver Heights Elementary School which was--in the third grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. So I would have been at Lanham Elementary School after that, maybe fourth and fifth grade, maybe fourth, yeah maybe fourth grade. I don't know where I went to fifth and sixth grade elementary. Oh, yes I do. I think it was in Lanham for fifth grade, maybe sixth grade. I do remember starting junior high school at Bartlett in Savannah, okay, and then going on to Windsor Forest--no not Windsor Forest, Wilder Junior High School [Savannah, Georgia] in Savannah. And then starting off at Savannah High School in Savannah and then finishing at [Alfred Ely] Beach High School [Savannah, Georgia] in Savannah. Speaker 1: Okay. So you graduated from Beach High School-- Speaker 2: In Savannah in 1972. Speaker 1: Okay, '72 [1972], okay. Now, well I imagine you were a good student in school? Speaker 2: I was always, very, very good. Always did what I was told and did my homework and did my assignments. Speaker 1: Okay, so that wasn't a challenge at all? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: But how was your social life in school? Did you--now you said you were both in all white schools. Speaker 2: Right. It was--I'm somewhat reserved anyway, but it was difficult. You know it was during the time--I was there in school during the time when the perceived--I had to fight against a notion that blacks were not up to par intellectually. And I remember some girls talking behind my--not behind my back, but you know talking and I overheard them, saying that they were surprised that I was as smart as I was. And surprised I was as attractive I was, because all blacks looked the same and not particularly attractive. And that--I, actually that's the first time this would have been okay, elementary school in Lanham, Maryland, which was before Beaver Heights. And that's the first time I knew I was attractive, 'cause I was thinking wow if they would say I was attractive, I must be--'cause they wouldn't give you anything. You know I mean girls can be so mean. I mean they won't give you--and so maybe I might be bright too, you know. I just had never put it all together. It was at a time when the presumption is, blacks weren't as competent, blacks weren't as smart, blacks weren't--there weren't any black principals, or you know, not in my world because I was in the integrating things. I'm an affirmative action baby. I went to college between '72 [1972] and '76 [1976] so then that means I'm integrating elementary schools as I'm coming along, did not go to segregated schools. Story_ID: 244826 Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in any special activities like music or dance or anything (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, I was a cheerleader and I was always the only black cheerleader. You know, it's interesting and it's still this way right now. The teams as I got older and got into more diverse schools in high school [Alfred Ely Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia], the teams would be all black but the cheerleaders would be all white, you know except for me bringing up the rear. You know never liked that. And I'm not afraid to say I didn't like that. I'm not upbeat about that. I always had this feeling that the perception of the high high girls were not black, the black girls but the white blondes. But the high high guys are the football player type, that type. And I just never liked that notion. I've got a son [Addison Sears-Collins] who's a scholar and he had a tough time going--he's twenty-one. He had a tough time because he wasn't a jock and that has not changed for young people. Story_ID: 244827 Speaker 1: Are there any particular teachers or mentors or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, my--I will never forget and now I'm getting--Ms. Stewart, Ethel Stewart [ph.], the year I was at Beaver Heights [Elementary School, Capitol Heights, Maryland] took me so close to her breast and brought me back. You know for years I had been this young little black kid at all these white schools and I pretty been stripped of a lot of self-esteem, and by the time I got to her, and I think that was in the fourth grade. She could see that, I think, and she took me around with her, and kind of started putting it back in. I love her. I think she's dead now but she even would take me after school. She'd tell my mother [Onnye Roundtree Sears] who taught across the hall, "Take the boys [William Thomas Sears and Michael Sears] home. I'll take her to get her hair done." Or "I'll take her with me and I'll bring her by at seven," and I would just go with her. And she made me feel so proud of who I--you know I sti- suddenly figured out, well I'm proud of who--I can be proud of who I am. I didn't know that. It really started to--and from then on, I could just sort of concentrate, just sort of concentrate on the work cause she gave me this infusion of, you're okay. But probably my mother could not give me, maybe she was so busy. But being a light skinned African American, she probably could not see my woman struggle with this hair and my figure, and you know, and I--it probably needed a darker skinned woman to help me through that. I don't know if it works like that now, but remember back then I was not--you know there was nobody to affirm all that. So all I knew is, every Saturday my mother complained bitterly about how nappy my hair was and "What are we gonna do with this?" you know, kind of thing, and so--and not to her--everyone did that. You know they slapped lye on your hair, and no one with--natural hair was unheard of, kind of thing. I mean even now as a, I don't call it a political statement but I refuse to wear hair that is not natural and it is because of the wounds from--I just, you know this is it and this is what you're going to get. And if you don't like it, that's your problem kind of type thing. I don't know if it's political, but it's my little statement that this is good enough. This is me. Speaker 1: Okay. I think a lot of people--a lot of black women who are writers or achievers seems to do this, do likewise. Speaker 2: Once you get up there and you can--and what I'm trying to say to other--in fact young black women lawyers now come up and say, "Thank you for wearing your hair, wearing braids. That meant if you can that means I can. I can come to court. Thank you for wearing pants for the first time." You know when I started wearing pantsuits, I had lawyers say, "I've never seen a judge in pants." Well God, you only see, if you think about it, only see cause there are no women here. You only see judges in pants. And I know what they were saying, but then it opened up the way for women to come in neat pressed pant suits. You know, you've got to step out so that you can bring along the people after you that need some space to move in their area too. If you just jump in the box then you don't, I don't think that's being such a good role model. Story_ID: 244828 Speaker 1: So you were a cheerleader in high school [Alfred Ely Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia]. Did you do anything else I mean in terms of-- Speaker 2: I, beta club. I was one of the nerdies, so I did the nerd activities, National Honor Society, beta club, debate, you know, those kinds of activities that--I was interesting, 'cause I was a nerd/cheerleader of which there was only one and that was me, okay. But-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that is sort of a thing that usually stereotypical cheerleaders are not the smartest people in you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. There are two sides to me. One is the fluffy, happy, party but not too hard side. You know I like clothes, and I like to decorate, and my daughter [Brennan Sears-Collins] has that side, okay? The other side is the very serious, very studious, very persevering, very intellectual side that my son [Addison Sears-Collins] has all of, it seems, you know. So I got two kids, one is party and then the other is, got to study. I mean you know that kind of thing. So both of those come together in me and depending on how I feel I can do them both. Story_ID: 244829 Speaker 1: You told us I guess how you chose a school, I mean, or why you chose to go to a school that's far away. But was there anything else about Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] that attracted you? Speaker 2: Yeah, the African Studies Research Center [Africana Studies and Research Center], we had one of the first and one of the best. I loved the gorges and the waterfalls that I looked at in the pictures of the brochure that they sent me. I had never been there before I got there. And freedom, it just looked like freedom, and it was. I mean this was way up in Ithaca, New York. No one could get to me, and it was so big and so rich with experiences. One night this person would be coming to campus, you know. You could--I could do film and photography and women's studies and Appalachian and religion and run across and learn how to grow the perfect apple in some horticulture--I mean Cornell was rich! I did, took a radio course to see how radios deconstruct--I mean it just, all this stuff. It was great you know. And I studied the-- Speaker 1: I think Ithaca was chosen as the number one town in America in the Utne Reader about five years actually. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was? I didn't think-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it was talking about the best place to live in the United States. Speaker 2: Really? The town was you know interesting--you know it was a small town but the university had everything. And they, the course the way they allowed you to matriculate around back then. I mean you could just learn anything, and I was just always, I mean it was, it opened up my world, concerts coming there. That's the first time I saw [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond other than during the--I sat and watched the convention, Julian Bond, Julian--but now I get to see him in a lecture, just coming. Oh it was just--and I went. I took advantage of everything. Gloria Steinem comes so you go there you know and sit and be mad. I mean I go to Julian Bond's, be mad there, just mad. These were the '70s [1970s]. It was great. It was really great. And it allowed me to get it all out so by the time I ventured to my beloved South 'cause I love it here, I was just open to what life had to offer. Story_ID: 244830 Speaker 1: You were I guess still in school when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed. You were a freshman in high school [Alfred Ely Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia], I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Oh no, I would have been, '68 [1968] I would have been still in middle school. I remember I was, when I heard he was killed we--I was auditioning or practicing for the play 'Little Women,' and there was only two blacks, two of us in that play, okay. And I was the narrator, and Pam [ph.], my dear friend who was my roommate at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], black, was the maid. And I remember a girl coming--we couldn't have been more than 13 or 14 saying, "Dr. King is dead. I'm glad they got rid of that troublemaker." You know, that was how I learned that Dr. King was killed. You know, this was all military and very conservative and that's how I heard about it. Speaker 1: How did you feel about that? Speaker 2: I don't know at the--I can't say that I can give you devastated or ambivalent. The job had--you running out? Speaker 1: Yeah, we can get your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. The job had--he had gotten us where we were going, and frankly I didn't know all that had been done yet, 'cause I was so young. So I didn't know what to think. Speaker 1: Did his death sort of spark an interest in what was going on in the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: No, not then. I think what sparked an interest in what was going on in the Civil Rights Movement was when I got to Cornell so young. I was sixteen and a half and I had to struggle to survive. And then I started seeing what people had done to get me there and I just started deconstructing everything and taking it all in. I could relax and figure things out. Even when he died I felt like I was in the midst of my own--I was very aware that this was a bad time. You'll recall that [Senator Robert F.] Kennedy had been--no, Kennedy was killed two or three months later in June of that year. Speaker 1: Bobby Kennedy. Speaker 2: Yeah, Bobby Kennedy. And I knew this was a terrible time. As a matter of fact I became of age during this time so I really thought this is how it all is. You know they're--the Vietnam [War] protesting and the Watts riots and the burning in the streets and this was my--my unfolding was during a turbulent time. I thought it was always like this, okay. Story_ID: 279423 Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] and the, what do they call it, the Africana studies department, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Africana Studies and Research Center. Speaker 1: Named I think by John Henrik Clarke. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Another key figure in black studies in the United States. But there you had James Turner, John Henrik Clarke. Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef Ben-Jochannan] was a visiting lecturer. Speaker 2: Right, he was. Speaker 1: And so these are some strong personalities (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I took his--absolutely. I took his course, everybody did. He--one of the highlights of his course was, I'll say this--he gave me an A++ on the paper that I wrote for him. I have it somewhere. One of the highlights of his course was boarding a bus and going to New York City [New York, New York] to see his collection of books on Egyptology and all that kind of--but really enlightened me about, I don't know what I was thinking, but you know I too had, didn't know Egypt was in Africa and all this. I don't know what I was thinking--you know he opened all of it. So finally I looked at a map, and oh wow, you know and started putting the pieces--Cornell was great like that. They would let you study, you could be a fool and believe foolish notions. And that's fine as long as you're spreading your wings. I really liked the liberal arts education that I got there. And I did embrace some rather foolhardy things, which is what you do when you're nineteen and twenty, you know. Then I-- Speaker 1: You want to tell us about something foolhardy? Speaker 2: I mean all kind--I don't know. Like some of the--well I mean for some of the studies on the black family that I bought initially that I discount now. Some of the women's studies notions. For example I did buy for a long time, women are the same as men, exactly the same. It's just simply how we're socialized. Speaker 1: The different bodies and that? Speaker 2: Different bodies but same being. So if you give your son a doll and some--he'll basically be a--well I did that. I, you know, in 1983, I had a son [Addison Sears-Collins] and I gave him a daughter--gave him a doll and gave him--and he loved this doll and pushed the doll carriage around. But that boy was not a girl. He was a guy. And there was nothing I could do or say to get him out of that, to smooch him up or deprogram him from maleness. And that blew--from then on I--that changed my whole idea of male, female relations. It's, a lot of it is biology. It's not just that you can throw us together. You can be the wife and I can be the husband, if we just label ourselves like that. It doesn't work. And I started to soften I think a little on the gender--I had really strict rules and roles. Women were supposed to go out and get jobs, and I guess the kids go live in a commune or something, you know they'll rear themselves. Well they don't. They don't. You have to do it. You know, you're the mom, and the mom, they want the mom too. And the mom's not the same as the dad, 'cause even now my husband [Haskell Sears Ward] has, is, has a daddy attitude about--and I--so I've learned a lot. And maybe what I now know isn't right but I've changed a lot, I'll just say that. Speaker 1: Being a parent, you find that instructive in terms of how you view the world? Speaker 2: Right. Right. It's not--you know some things are just in you. And as I've gotten older too, I have--there are some things that I feel like must be in my cells, the cells of my--and I don't know where they come from but they're there and so I just move along with that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 279424 Speaker 1: Now at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] again, now we've talked about the Africana studies department [Africana Studies and Research Center] on some--did you meet John Henrik Clarke too? Did you ever take a course from him? Speaker 2: No, no, no. I was not an African studies major so I would just drop in, took a few courses, and then of course they had, always had something going on campus. I lived in a co-op when I was there. It was an all-black female co-op called Wari House [Wari Cooperative], experiment and living amongst your own. Speaker 1: That's an African name. Speaker 2: Yeah, Wari House, don't know-- Speaker 1: W-A-R-I? Speaker 2: Yeah, W-A-R-I. Reason I wanted to live there is that had been burned by some fraternity boys two years before I got there, and some protests about being on camp--blacks being on campus. So it was a real hip place to be. Speaker 1: A statement. Speaker 2: It was a statement like, you burn us, we're going to live there anyway, kind of type thing. Actually it was, we didn't all get along so well, and you know we'd buy grains and granola and make, try to make healthy dinners. At that time, health food didn't taste good. Remember that, there were black beans, but you would eat it saying oh, I'm healthy, that kind--you know, and earth shoes and jeans and that kind of thing, loved it though, free. Speaker 1: Okay. So you got along pretty well with the other black women? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, I did. I did. I--my best friend lived next door and we're still lifelong friends. It was good. I was glad. Story_ID: 279425 Speaker 1: Now who are some of the other--now you took some women's studies courses [at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Did you take a lot of political science and that sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I took more psychology and family, like my major is human development and family studies. And I got a degree out of the human ecology school there because I was always more interested in people and how people move around in the world than political systems. I don't know why. I'm very interested in the family, particularly the black family, but the family in general and what the family means in the whole structure of society. And I'm very interested in people and groups, group study. Speaker 1: In those days I think people were discussing Daniel Patrick Moynihan. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right, his book ['The Negro Family: The Case for National Action,' Daniel Patrick Moynihan] was actually kind of a putdown 'Black-- Speaker 1: People saw, some people saw it as a putdown. Some people thought he was trying to do something to help. I mean it was like-- Speaker 2: He was trying to do something to help but I think some people saw it as a putdown. Speaker 1: Yeah, cause he described you know-- Speaker 2: A culture of poverty, the culture of poverty. That was it. And there are generations and generations and generations and they--people just can't get out. And that's probably true now that I'm old enough and bold enough to say that. But you know it was back then when people, you just didn't speak of those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Yeah, it made people angry to talk about it. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. It's like what [Bill] Cosby is doing now. You know, just please just let's not talk about the problems we have. Speaker 1: Do you think--well, black sociologists are starting to step out and we had a lot of people like [HistoryMaker] Joyce Ladner had her book out, 'The Death of White Sociology[: Essays on Race and Culture']. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. The guy who wrote 'The Black Family,' Beards or Beard [ph.], he ended up here at Clark [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Anyway, read all of his and had met him. And I still, you know if I did not do this work I'd still--still very interested in the family and I'm interested now more than ever with all the gay marriage stuff that's coming out in, in the, in marriage, not just family but marriage. And it's the viability of marriage and marriage institutions and what it does to families and that kind of thing. We had gotten to the point where you know in the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s], any family is okay as long as you're loved and embraced. I'm not so sure about that anymore, and I don't mean to say I know that that's not true. I'm beginning to question that, you know, because I think it's good to question everything you're so sure of. I don't know if we, maybe we went a little bit too far and if we--you know I know in the '50s [1950s] we were way too far. Anybody that didn't have a two parent income and looked like Ozzie and Harriet were out of it. But maybe we swung the pendulum to the point where we're got women, educated women choosing to have kids and celebrate it. I don't know if I like that so much. But it's a thing you can do, but I just don't know if that's so cool, you know, for our society where anything goes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know just anything you want to do. I mean you are free to do anything. I'm just wondering if that's so good. Speaker 1: There's probably a price to pay for everything (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --we choose. Speaker 2: That's true, too. Story_ID: 279426 Speaker 1: But okay, at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], what other--so you majored in family, in-- Speaker 2: In human development. Speaker 1: Human--yeah. Speaker 2: And family studies. But you know went a route, took a broad range of the liberal arts, and some not you know--I did a lot of writing courses and a lot of communication, so could debate, some debating, 'cause I knew I was going to become a public servant. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have an idea at that point that you were going to become a lawyer? Speaker 2: Yes. I'd known I would be a lawyer ever since I was eight years old and sent away for the Harvard Law School Bulletin, and it came back and there were no females and no blacks. That was what I was going to do then. Speaker 1: So when you were eight years old you sent away for the Harvard Law School Bulletin? Speaker 2: Yeah. The law school bulletin, and there was nobody like me. And that was what I was going to do. And I followed early in my life the Warren Court, very carefully. I don't know where it is that someone that's 10 or 11 would be, but I watched them. Wasn't around for Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], that was '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: No--yeah, that was '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954]. So a year--so I really wasn't--that was May '54 [1954], that's right. So I really wasn't, being born in June '55 [1955], up around to really understand what was going on. Speaker 1: Did you have an idea when you were in your formative years of people like [HistoryMaker] Oliver [W.] Hill or Spottswood [William] Robinson [III] or Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] and all those people? Speaker 2: No. I knew Thurgood Marshall though. But I didn't know the nuanced people. I know Thurgood Marshall okay and I knew Warren, Earl Warren. And I remember seeing the impeach Earl Warren signs. So I, and I knew the way things were working was the cases were coming through the system bad and Earl Warren and his court were making things right. And I just had a notion of that. I knew Thurgood would argue them and the right part of the court would make things right on race issues and gender issues and issues of criminal, civil rights, rights for defendants, that sort of thing. He was providing rights for people. And that's what I wanted. I wanted to be Thurgood Marshall so much so that when my daughter was born I named her Brennan [Sears-Collins], cause Thurgood, you know, for a girl, I thought that was-- Speaker 1: You named her after Brennan the--Justice [William J.] Brennan [Jr.]. Speaker 2: I toyed with, I went with Justice Brennan who I thought, he was good too. So in fact when I ran the last time someone asked me, "Did you name your daughter Brennan, 'cause if you did, we know what your philosophical bent is?" I said no. But yes, I did. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm really enjoying this. Yeah, now okay so-- Speaker 2: Okay, back to Cornell, yeah. Speaker 1: At Cornell yeah, who were the other teachers there that seemed to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know they, I don't know. They, none of them really--I wasn't a--Cornell was a really big school and mostly I have impressions of great classes of, and great seminars. But there were no professors that I really ponied up to. I can't really remember you know. I know Urie Bronfenbrenner with the big psycho stuff but I wasn't really close to any that walked me through. Just sort of jumping around to all this great smorgasbord of stuff, and it was what they taught me more than that I got close to them. I didn't. Speaker 1: So there wasn't any focal point at Cornell that you centered in on? Speaker 2: No. The main point was to eat from the buffet and to try it all. And that's what I needed and that's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay. And what were your plans after Cornell? Speaker 2: Go to law school. Okay, I was going to law school and I was going to an Ivy League law school. Then I met my first husband [Love Collins, III] and that changed that. Story_ID: 279427 Speaker 1: Okay. So you came out of Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] in '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: I came out in '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you met your first husband around that time? Speaker 2: Yes. Love Collins, III. He was attending West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York]. West Point is on down the road and then up a bit from Cornell. So it was fairly easy for us to date. West Point had a lot of rigid rules so he would just get in his car and come up and vice versa. My family was very military anyway. They loved this guy. My two brothers [William Thomas Sears and Michael Sears] are at Annapolis [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland]. It fits right in, and he did. So we got married July 6th, the day before the bicentennial, July 6th, 1976. Speaker 1: Was July 3rd, I guess. Speaker 2: July 3rd, thank you. July 3rd, 1976. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so well it seems like it's a perfect picture here. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So did you go on to law school? Speaker 2: Well he had graduated and was--had been deployed or transferred back to Georgia. He is from Georgia. He was born in Columbus [Georgia]. So we went down to Fort Benning in Columbus. He was deployed to Fort Benning. And I initially started at Duke Law School [Duke University] in Durham, North Carolina, but I missed my husband, so I quit Duke and went to live with him for a year and then started the next year at Emory Law School [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you finish at Emory or did you-- Speaker 2: I finished at Emory in 1980. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: He would, he commuted. He would come up every week. Speaker 1: Are there any stories from law school that you want to tell us about? Anything-- Speaker 2: Nothing particular. I mean, no. I mean I was thought of as smart and competent, but you know, nothing in particular. Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't, you didn't find it difficult at all or-- Speaker 2: After Cornell, no. You know I was, Cornell had well prepared me to go in and do a lot of work. I knew how to study, and I knew how to work hard, and I knew how to educate myself with the service resources that they provided and I did that. Story_ID: 279428 Speaker 1: At this time, by this time you're living here in Atlanta [Georgia], I guess right? Speaker 2: Right. We're living off Buford Highway in Atlanta and he [Love Collins, III] had gotten out of the [U.S. military] service and gone to work at the Federal Reserve Bank [of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I'm getting out of law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia] going to work at a law firm named Alston, Miller & Gaines which morphed two years later into Alston & Bird [LLP, Atlanta, Georgia] because of a merger. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what was that like? What was it--were you the only black associate? Speaker 2: Very--the only black woman out of three blacks total. There was, Jim Hughes [James B. Hughes, Jr.] was there. Jim now is a professor at Emory Law School [Emory University School of Law]. Charles Johnson is there. He's a practicing lawyer who was married at the time to Glenda Hatchett, you know-- Speaker 1: Judge Hatchett from television. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. She was just Glenda Johnson then. And then me, you know. So that was, there were the three of us there. And there were--had been no black women at large law firms in the Atlanta area--I was the first one. There were other black men all from Ivy [League], all from very well--you know Charles had--what did Charles--well Jim had graduated from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] undergrad and Yale Law [School, New Haven, Connecticut]. And Charles had these really great credentials too, Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] and you know just the hi ho and I, you know--and that's where all the black, all the firms had recruited. And then I came along with good credentials as well. But there, I--and then a year after me, a few more black women busted into the big firm market. You know Gail [S.] Tusan and just the few other, you know, for the big firms. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything memorable about that experience (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, that was real tough. I liked the law firm and still like them and they'd always been extremely supportive. But that was sort of like joining a country club. Very buttoned down kind of organization that while they were nice, I just didn't and couldn't fit in there and didn't--never really felt comfortable there. In fact, I went back a couple of weeks ago because they're--they were putting portraits--they built a new courtroom, and they are putting portraits of their most distinguished alumni in the courtroom, and my portrait is going to be included. And I wore a red suit and I went there, and it's all these guys coming back, distinguished alumni and it was--everybody had on blue, gray and black and I knew then, oh I remember that this place, this is very button down and very gray and you know very, it's just a country club. But they do fantastic work, and they're good people, and they take up good causes. And one of their causes was me. They've always been very supportive of me and I appreciate that. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Well, how long were you there? Speaker 2: Five years. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 279429 Speaker 1: Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] appointed me to the City Court of Atlanta [Municipal Court of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], which is the Atlanta traffic court, and I was ready to move [from Alston, Miller & Gaines; Alston & Bird LLP, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: And did you want to be a judge at that point? Speaker 1: I wasn't thinking about it. I was going to remember Thurgood Marshall and change all--but times had changed. And the focus of where to get things done was no longer in the federal courts with you know doing that kind--so you know you, so you have to move around. So when he said be a judge, I thought, well shoot, I'm twenty-seven. Guy's saying be a judge. I'll be a judge, shoot. I mean just, and what I was really thinking at the time was, I'll be a judge and everyone will think I'm a judge, and being a judge is big. Remember how twenty-seven-year olds think? And so I'm, yeah. And then I got on the bench and I liked the work. I mean I actually liked the flow and all that, and I liked being called judge and all that and all that. Now I had some, I had to back up after about a year or two, and I had grown up on the bench pretty much. And so I've had to tailor my--I've grown up and I've evolved as a jurist. You know, you start out as a young, loud fool, thinking you know everything and all that. And then someone takes you aside and says, "You sound like a young fool. Stop already," and so, oh, okay. So then you tailor it and you start working on yourself and you just, you hope you're getting better, more wiser, you know. Speaker 2: Are there any stories from traffic court? Speaker 1: Well yeah. Speaker 2: That's really a place that's-- Speaker 1: The folks just come in, yeah. I know one woman came in one day, couldn't believe when I walked in cause I was the only black female there at the time. And she went and wrote a long article on this beautiful, tall, thin mocha colored thing ascends the bench. Actually she was trying to be very complimentary, but man it was really kind of like, Mandingo comes on the bench. And it was a little offensive, but she was trying to be--and she spoke with such authority and all that. But it went a little bit too far. But I know what she was saying, welcome. She was saying welcome. I didn't know you would be there when I got to court. Speaker 2: She was proud of you. Speaker 1: She was proud. And she ran the article, she said, this woman whose grandmother had been a slave and whose mother [Onnye Roundtree Sears] had scrubbed floors. Well my mother never scrubbed floors. My mother was furious. But I know what she was trying to get at, and that's good. I was pregnant there the whole time, and they never knew that. Because with the robes and the way you come in, that's sort of interesting. Story_ID: 279430 Speaker 1: I became a better judge the longer I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What things do you think you improved on? For instance you know when you talk about a--you said you got better. And what were you doing as a judge? You know most of us go to court and we see a judge and we, all of us if things don't go our way, we all assume something's wrong with the judge. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But what does it mean to get better as a judge? Speaker 1: I think to shut up and listen more. You know, to just really listen more. And when you start to hear the same old story again, listen a little bit longer because it's not always--to be more compassionate when people need passion. I remember a woman came to court [Municipal Court of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] and I found her--I was short with her, and I said, "Twenty-five dollars." I still think about this. I still--this is--and she came up to me, judge, judge! She's an older, very attractive, tall white lady and she said, "I'm going through a divorce and I don't have twenty-five to give you. I'm going through a divorce, and I'm sick judge." And oh, I was like, oh god. And I made such short shrift, like everyone's got twenty-five dollars, so just go pay it. And I get upset even--I mean how was, did I not see that? You know, but suspended the sentence. I would have paid it myself, but I--you can't see everybody. You know, you want to have a window into what's going on with everybody. I appreciate that she made me see her and, but I want to see--being a good judge means being able to see people when you're looking at them. You know, to know what's really going on so you can do the right thing by them, not the masses. You know sometimes you--I've been easy on people because I was mad with the cop, because I know that's how cops are. But this, the cop was doing the right thing, and this person needed this, you know. So just, to know that not everything is so simple and not everybody is in the same stereotype. And to ease it up a little bit and listen to what people have to say. That's what the--everybody jumps to conclusions about everybody else and they can be so wrong. I've been called in this job a radical liberal. I'm not a--you know I have issues, but I make dinner for my husband [Haskell Sears Ward] and my children [Addison Sears-Collins and Brennan Sears-Collins] and I'm not burning up the place. So, I make my kids go to school and make their beds and not speed and, I don't know. Anyway, to not--being a good judge means--and not ruling because the lawyer that's presenting the case is someone you know. Story_ID: 243763 Speaker 1: What kind of training did you have, or preparation to become a judge? Speaker 2: I did a lot. I, when I first went to the bench at the traffic court [Municipal Court of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], I took courses at the National Judicial College in Reno, Nevada. They give training for trial judges. And when I came on the appellate bench, I went up to the University of Virginia [School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] where the national, I guess they have a master's degree in appellate judicial studies. And I spent three years there writing, I mean studying and then ultimately writing a thesis on a legal topic to get a master's degree, LL.M., in appellate judicial studies. So I've had lots of training. I like it. I like being in school. I, as I say, I like the smorgasbord of learning. It's always appealed to me, lifelong learning. Speaker 1: But what you told me during the break was kind of troubling, that judges don't have to go to school. Speaker 2: They do not have to study. I mean, so and many, many--probably the majority do not, you know. They get the judgeship and they're off. Speaker 1: They just start judging. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And they were a lawyer before, and all of a sudden now they're a judge. Speaker 2: Right. Now most, you have to have some kind of continuing legal education or judicial education, so that's twelve hours a year at seminars. But you know I'm talking about going to the classroom and writing papers and reading books and taking tests and that kind of thing, which I consider different than the seminar requirement. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Most everybody takes some kind of seminar, new judge orientation kind of thing. Story_ID: 243764 Speaker 1: We left you, twenty-seven years old in traffic court [Municipal Court of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know and you're trying to improve your, the way you handle this. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And to listen more and to be more sensitive to what's going on. You think--so it's not just the, understanding the law that's important in terms of being a judge, but it's actually understanding people? Speaker 2: It's, yeah understanding people and listening to people and treating people with respect. You know, a big part of being a judge isn't snapping people off and telling them to get right and jump--like the TV shows do. Real judges are just the opposite. They keep their mouth shut and they counsel compassionately, 'cause these are people's lives that you're dealing with and it's not a carnival atmosphere at all. Most people rarely have to go to court and when they do it's a big deal. So you don't just snap it off. These are big, big occasions in people's lives. And learning, knowing that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: Now you don't really like the television (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't like them, no. Speaker 1: --judge shows of which there are now about nine or ten now right? Speaker 2: Right. I just think they're, I call them television burlesque, you know carnivals where people--soap operas, Jerry Springer type shows where people just come and expose themselves and it--jurists are, allow them to do so. That's not what a court of law should look like and that's not what a court of law is. And it's a lot of minorities and poor people that I think exploit themselves, and are exploited for entertainment, and I don't like it. And I don't like that my--you wouldn't have a comedy doctor show where they're playing comedy on, and operating on someone. I mean I know you have comedies around doctor shows but not when they're really adjudicating, you know really doing the real thing. These shows I understand it, they're really adjudicating rights in many instances. Speaker 1: And I've yet to see rich, rich people in-- Speaker 2: No one would do that. I mean no one that had dignity would take themselves through that and their families, I don't think. Story_ID: 243765 Speaker 1: When you left traffic court [Municipal Court of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], I mean, where did you go? Speaker 2: I ran for the Fulton County Superior Court [Atlanta, Georgia] bench and won. You know, there were ten judges over at Fulton County Superior Court. There had never been a woman to serve as a judge on that court, so I was thirty-two years old and I ran in a contested statewide election against two opponents, one of whom was being pushed hard by the black community, Harris Bostic, and the other was being pushed by white Republicans, Ted Speaker [Theodore Speaker], and then I sort of jumped in there and won. Speaker 1: What--running for a judge, I know in many places, it's hard to rise above anonymity. People see just a name and they usually have no idea what that person stands for. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They just know they're a Democrat or a Republican usually when they-- Speaker 2: Well here we're non-partisan so you don't even know that. But I ran door to door, knocked on doors and went through malls and--I just used a lot of shoe leather and won. It was a great victory that a woman won by election in an open seat for Fulton County [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Were you the first woman to win? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --needless to say you're the first black woman. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But you're the first woman period. Speaker 2: First woman. Was thirty-two years old, so I was the youngest person to win and serve on that. So you could imagine when I showed up at the first judges' meeting, I'm thirty-two, black and female. Speaker 1: Okay, you probably-- Speaker 2: You could have heard a pin drop. Speaker 1: I would imagine you looked very young at thirty-two. Speaker 2: Oh, thank you. I didn't think so then but looking at the pictures I can see why they were, oh my god. Speaker 1: This is a teenager in a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear) --and there was a show on at the time, 'Doogie Howser [M.D.],' which was this young doctor. Speaker 1: Right, he was sixteen or something. Speaker 2: Sixteen and he had gone--they used to call me Doogie Howser, you know like a teenage judge, adjudicating people's--so I was actually thirty-two. Four years later--I loved that. I enjoyed the give and take. My first memory of going on the bench there, I was walking down to my chambers and seeing ten black defendants lined up against the wall in chains, in leg irons and I was woo, okay this is--here we are, you know. Like you know (imitates sound of metal clanking) walking and-- Speaker 1: So you-- Speaker 2: That was my first day. Speaker 1: These are big criminal cases that are coming to you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh yeah, I skipped state court. I went from the traffic court to the death penalty court, right? And that ticked a lot of people off. I didn't go through landlord tenant and work my way up to shoplifting, on up to armed robbery. I went from traffic to the highest felonies there were. Speaker 1: I'm saying the stakes are high, here. Speaker 2: Very. Very high, death penalty cases-- Story_ID: 243766 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you feel about the death penalty? Speaker 2: You know frankly in terms of procedure, trying a--well other than a death penalty case, trying a murder case is the same as trying any other criminal case, the same. It's just murder as opposed to--death is different. It's a different kind of case to try, and it takes a lot more steps and nobody had ever done that regardless of what court you sat in. It's just a different kind of case to have to try. There are more bells and whistles. How I felt about the death penalty? I wasn't sure, so I was able to get in--you know I was in the formative stage. Still am somewhat, you know. I'm still not sure how I feel about it ultimately. I mean, I have views, like some people really, some people are really evil and it's really bad. Sometimes I have a sense of, I hate that ours is the only society left where one of those civilized, so-called civilized societies that does execute. I don't know. I'm still ambivalent about it. You know my, I always say it is the law of the State of Georgia right now and I'm sworn to apply the law of the State of Georgia and I will apply that one. And judges don't apply their personal views, so as long as my personal view is not against it, so much that I can't do it, I do them all. I divorce people even though I hate to see people divorce. And I--there are lots of things like, I like how [John] Kerry said it the other night, I have my personal articles of faith. But when you're sitting on that bench, it's not your personal view that counts at all, it's the law. And I am the--the law is the master and I am, I do it's bid and I'm comfortable with that. Speaker 1: That's quite a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think most people don't really believe that that's how it is. But really that's how most of it really, most of us really function. Speaker 1: Okay. Well it's good to--we often suspect that some people do not function like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, like on this bench [Fulton County Superior Court, Atlanta, Georgia], I've known these guys for twelve years. Ninety--I'm not going to say a hundred percent, but I don't suspect that it's not like that. And I think most people are doing their job and that is their job a lot of the--most, by far 99 percent of the time like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know it's not outcome directed by somebody's personal view. Speaker 1: Now one of the other issues I think that we probably--you probably have something to say about is the number of African Americans in these--as the defendants in these murder cases, and other big crime cases. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's--we're going, seem to be going to jail at a higher rate than anybody else. How did you feel about that? Speaker 2: Very sad and depressed, and it's a phenomenon that begins before the courts get to be involved in the system. It's hard to get involved in crimes, I mean to be in the system at the superior court. By the time you get to that, for the most part, by the time you get to my court as a trial court judge they would have had many options. We just don't have the jail space to put everybody in jail. So you've had many chances and it just didn't work out. And it's a failure with the educational system. It's a failure of the families. It's a failure of the juvenile court system at the bottom end. It is a fact that in the educational system, in the family, at the early end judicial system, blacks are disproportionately picked up and treated differently and all that. I have no question about that whatsoever. By the time you get to my top court, I'm talking about the Superior Court, gosh, if you're guilty of murder it's life. There's no discretion. If you're guilty of robbing--there's prosecutorial discretion where the prosecutors can decide what to charge you with and I--there are a lot of people say that if you black you get less discretion, you don't have the--and that's probably true. If you're rich you don't get the wink-wink, you know. I don't doubt that either. And I hope in years to come that that changes. I'm not going to sit here and tell you that for the have nots and the haves, they're all treated the same. I can't do that now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know I'm committed to working to see that that changes. Story_ID: 243767 Speaker 1: This is the '80s [1980s], we--I think the--did the trial of Wayne Williams occur in the '80s [1980s]? Was that something-- Speaker 2: That was in the-- Speaker 1: The early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: Let me see, if I went to the bench [Fulton County Superior Court, Atlanta, Georgia] in--that would have been the early '80s [1980s] like '79 [1979], '80 [1980], maybe '81 [1981], '82 [1982]. I went--got on the bench in '88 [1988] so this is early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you became a superior court judge in '88 [1988]? Speaker 2: Yeah, '89 [1989], actually yeah. Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], okay. Speaker 2: I was, I won the election in '88 [1988] and was sworn in, in '89 [1989]. So this would be early '80s [1980s] when [Judge] Clarence Cooper tried that case. Speaker 1: Okay, 19--did you have any opinion about that at the time? Speaker 2: No. No, I think he tried a good case, and no, I didn't have a view. Speaker 1: There's still a lot of controversy about whether-- Speaker 2: They got the right guy, and I know that. I guess my mind's been so trained to--I try it in the courtroom. And if I wasn't there, I try and, you know I don't know. You know I, the O.J. Simpson trial for example, I went out there a couple of days to watch it while I was out there, but I wasn't there. You know, I didn't see all the bits of evidence the way the jury did. So I really don't know, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't doubt and I'm--I wouldn't be shocked or surprised knowing how things are. But I don't want to jump right in and say things were bad when they were really fine or that they're fine when they were really not so good. Story_ID: 243768 Speaker 1: Now what were--are there any memorable occasions you can discuss from superior court [Fulton County Superior Court, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. We had a--one case was a, I think my most memorable case was a woman, a thirteen-year old girl on life support. She was in a coma. The father wanted to keep her on life support and the mother wanted her to be removed from life support and there she would die. And they came to court to have me resolve that one. And that was difficult. I had a difficult adoption case where the child had been given up for adoption like on a Friday, but on Monday, the parents came and wanted the child back and the adoptions agency wouldn't let them have their child back. You know, they had surrendered the rights of the child. Just, yes all kinds of--there was a couple of death penalty cases, not notorious death penalty cases but that were big here. Speaker 1: For instance, how did you resolve the adoption case? I mean how was that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The adoption case I resolved it, the mother may have given up her rights but the father did not. The unwed father did not and therefore the father could take the baby back. And if the father could take the baby back--they were trying to be a couple anyway, so father could get the baby back. See, they forgot to have the father--I said, surrender timely, so that got the baby back for--and with the child on life support, I said that the sanctity of family was the most important thing, and if the parents could not agree to remove the child from life support, until they could agree, the child stayed on life support because that was a decision that could not be changed. You know what I mean? That's the--and I thought that would break up the--now these are instances where I'm actually just making up law, 'cause there was nothing. So in piecing together, life is paramount and the family is paramount. And this decision will all--they had three other children, and if I veto the mother or the father, whichever one wanted to remove, this child will die and they can't live together. They won't be able to live together and those children won't have a family so--and that was my major concern. I don't know how I pulled that together but that's what--so, and you know what happened in that case? I ruled on a Friday and Sunday morning she died of natural causes and they--that family was together ten years later. So I didn't have to--the father never had to say that the mother killed my child. You see what I'm saying? It was--so I thank God, thank God, thank God that she just died naturally. So they didn't have to suffer long, and the family stayed together. That just, that was just good, you know good. I was driving through the Midwest and someone called and said, "Guess what, the baby died." And I was, thank God. Speaker 1: That's quite a case. Speaker 2: Yeah it was. Speaker 1: Okay. So any other cases from superior court that you want to share? Speaker 2: Not really. Lots of fun, wonderful cases but no not really. Story_ID: 243769 Speaker 1: Well where did--how long were you on the [Fulton County] Superior Court [Atlanta, Georgia] for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was there for four years and then a vacancy came open. Zell Miller got, was appointed, was--got elected governor okay, and two vacancies came open on the appellate courts. There was a slot on the Court of Appeals [of the State of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia] and there was a slot on the Supreme Court [of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia], and I knew I was very young and I knew that Zell Miller was going to try to put a woman on the court. There had never been one. And [HistoryMaker] Tyrone Brooks, Representative Tyrone Brooks, had brought a lawsuit against the State [of Georgia] because of the low number of superior court judges in the state. So I was looking at being young, Brooks and woman. Oh, people were saying apply, you won't--you don't have a chance. Speaker 1: So you're black and a woman and you're-- Speaker 2: Black and-- Speaker 1: That put you in a unique position to fill two spots. Speaker 2: Yeah, but my thought was no state, no governor who was looking for a woman ever put a black woman in, they always picked a black guy and a white woman. And that's how they did it. So you'd have all these courts and there'd be one white--just like the U.S. Supreme Court was, would be Thurgood Marshall and Sandra Day [O'Connor] and the rest of the other guys. And that's how all the other states looked. Speaker 1: Zell Miller now doesn't, I mean nowadays, I know he's--he doesn't seem like a very liberal guy. So I--or-- Speaker 2: He was then. Speaker 1: He was then. Speaker 2: I don't know what to say. He was, then I went over there and interviewed. I don't know if it was a liberal, or he's independent, and he does what he wants to do. And he sat down, and we talked, and I wasn't the, you know I went in there not having been the anointed one, but by the time Monday rolled around I was beginning to--I don't know. It was just, I went out to lunch, and I came back, and I was getting ready to run again for Superior Court, and my secretary, Betty [ph.], was waiting for me at the door. She was angry. She said, "You stayed out for lunch too long. Get in there. Get in there. The governor's called you three times." And I said, oh. Oh okay, okay. Well, and I'm thinking, well he called to tell me that he enjoyed our interview but you're too young. Apply next time. Or the best that could come out of this is the Court of Appeals slot. Mind you, I had never been through this before so I didn't know the governor called you if he wanted to appoint you. I didn't know how it worked. Ring up, he rung me up and I was there, Betty was there. People were gathering in my office. "Governor, how are you?" In his north Georgia accent, "I'm fine. I'm fine. Judge, I was impressed by you," and I'm thinking, okay, well thank you. And he said, "And I want to tell you that I was so impressed," I'm thinking, oh wow. "I'm going to appoint you to the Supreme Court." And I was like, what? You know and I'm thinking in my head, you know I'm only thirty-six don't you? And I'm black, and I'm a woman, and what? So I'm talking--and I don't say any of this and I keep--"Thank you very much, governor. I appreciate your confidence in me." But this is all going on in my head. I didn't really want it. I was happy on the Superior Court. Now I've got to go do this and you're going to go do this too, 'cause you said you would do it and you're going to do it. And people had gathered in my office, and I had done the thumbs up. And they thought I had been appointed to the Court of Appeals and they're all cheering, yay, we did it! And then I turned to Betty and I said Betty, it's the Supreme Court. And Betty goes, wow! Even with the governor--and she says, "It's the Supreme Court y'all." It's the Supreme--where they have to go running out of the office just to--and I, you know I'm sort of stunned and they start calling family to get up there. She's been appointed. And then media started coming up, and I'm just walking around, oh my goodness. Oh my goodness. And I frankly, Larry [Crowe], was stunned for like two or three days. Like, what did I do? I sat in my office stunned, unable to do much but give interviews and all that. Finally one day Betty came into the office and said, "Okay Judge, we've got to go. You see these boxes, we're going to fill them up and we're going up the street and we're going to become the Supreme Court, okay?" I said okay. And she started pulling books, and we're leaving, we're going. And I got up and I said we're going. And we moved up-- Story_ID: 243770 Speaker 1: When I got up here [to the Supreme Court of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia], the average age of the guys were 65 or 63, all white except for Bob Benham [Justice Robert Benham] who was maybe 48 or 50, young, fairly young, black. Remember, I'm thirty-six, and they all are looking at me, like darn, you know. I'm going to upset the club. I mean, some have told me that. I mean, they would change in the robing room, put their--you know, that I would be--just the culture would change with a woman being there. But soon, very shortly afterward, they liked me and liked--you know I--maybe like a kid sister. Being young may have been an advantage but they liked me. I wasn't very strident or very loud or all that, and they would show me things. "Come here." I remember Charles [L.] Weltner, who was one of our congressmen. I could not call them by their first name, because they were basically my father's [Thomas Sears] age and Charles Weltner was making copies and he said "Psst, come here. I noticed you don't call us by our names." "Oh no." No, you know, 'cause you know you don't--we're southerners and you don't call someone your father's age Sam, or you know. And he said, "No, [HistoryMaker] Leah [Ward Sears], look we're your colleagues and so you have to call us by our names. So you stand right there and you say Charlie. I'm Charles so you call me Charlie." And I said, "Charlie. Charlie. Charlie, okay." And you know there were lots of things like that I just had to get used to. And I really did have great affection for all of them. You know, grew into a wonderful experience. I love the work. Love the work. Story_ID: 244839 Speaker 1: Tell us about the Supreme Court [of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right. The Supreme Court is the highest court in the State of Georgia. It has jurisdiction over executions, death penalties, collection contests, equity, divorce even as a matter of fact. It's an interesting court. There are seven members of our court. It's the--this particular court has served together longer as a group than any other court in the history of the state. There are two African Americans and two women on the court now. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: All right. We were talking about what the Supreme Court has jurisdiction over here in Georgia. Speaker 1: Yeah. Matters in equity, will contests, land lot disputes, that sort of thing. Capital cases, murder. That's about it, I think. We're in charge of the administrative arm of the bar, State Bar of Georgia. The Judicial Qualifications Commission of Georgia, the arm of the bar that is in charge of making sure that judges behave appropriately. And head of the bar, head of the laws, legal systems, judiciary system in Georgia. Speaker 2: Okay. Now what are some of the memorable--now you were appointed in, once again in 1990? Speaker 1: I was appointed in, February 16th, 1992 and sworn in, in March of that year. I can't remember the exact date. So I've been serving here for about fourteen years, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, about fourteen years. I will be, I'm the presiding justice of the Supreme Court right now, which is the second person from the chief which means, it's almost like being vice president. Speaker 2: It's twelve years exactly right now. Speaker 1: Twelve years, okay fine. Speaker 2: From '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: And I will be the chief justice next June of 2005. Speaker 2: Okay. Now how did that come about? Speaker 1: You rotate, and when I came into the court, the judges were much older than I am. So many of them rotated into chief, into being chief and then rotated out. Some of them were just retired before, got older and retired before becoming chief. So if you're thirty-six and you join a court that's in its sixties, and the mandatory retirement age is seventy-five, you--in twelve years you could move very quickly into the senior spot. Speaker 2: Did you think about that when you were appointed? Speaker 1: No. You know, it's just like at thirty-six, you don't think about your pension and all--I was just happy to be here, and happy to do the work that I do. It's only in the past few years that I have started thinking about my responsibilities as chief and what vision I would have as a chief justice of the Supreme Court 'cause it's really a leadership function. I mean you lead the bar in a certain direction. Speaker 2: Now, what is your vision for the leadership of this court? Speaker 1: I want to make, I want to see to it that we do better, that the legal system does better about giving, making sure that civil litigants have access to lawyers, not just criminal litigants. In my tenure on the bench I've just run into so many litigants who can't get a divorce or who have a land lot, you know, landlord/tenant problem, who can't resolve that because they don't have access to lawyers. Or even alternative dispute resolution. I mean we need to make sure that our violence against people, like women, domestic violence are better coordinated so that people are getting the services--I want to make sure that civil litigants have access to the justice system just like we're working now to ensure that indigents have access to the legal system. Story_ID: 244840 Speaker 1: What have been some of the memorable cases on the Supreme Court [of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: We--I think for me the overturning of Bowers v. Hardwick [1986]. What this court decided that the case that went up to the U.S. Supreme Court that, where the U.S. Supreme Court said sodomy laws are appropriate, that was a case that emanated out of Georgia in our court. We reversed our decision before the U.S. Supreme Court reversed their decision in Lawrence [v. Texas, 2003] and said that they were wrong. And I was really happy to have spearheaded that in an earlier decision. Speaker 1: Okay. This is a case where some gay people were-- Speaker 2: Were caught engaging in intimacy, and they were arrested for sodomy. And it went all the way up to the Supreme Court and the court said, "Yes, it's appropriate to have sodomy law even with consenting adults in the privacy of their own home." I mean you could be arrested and put in jail for that. And this court overturned our decision. Of course when the U.S. Supreme Court made the decision, it affected all fifty states. We changed our decision. The-- Speaker 1: Are those laws still on the books? Speaker 2: No, because the U.S. Supreme Court took their decision away after we took ours away. But it was good to be in the forefront of helping to remove all those laws from the books. Speaker 1: And I've often wondered about the laws against interracial marriage and so forth. Are they still on the books and such? Speaker 2: No. We, they went, that would have been unconstitutional anyway. But a few years back they went through and cleaned everything. You know, there were slave laws and buggy laws that no one would have enforced, but they were still around you know. So that's--they did a clean effort on that. But we had the Marcus Dixon case [Dixon v. Brown, 2003] here, which I don't know if you know anything about that. That was the young Rome [Georgia], young football player from Rome who was jailed for having sex with a young white woman [Kristie Brown], just recently. Speaker 1: Right, that was on television. Speaker 2: That was on television. Speaker 1: Right, it was national television. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was--take, lost his scholarship [to Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] and put in jail for ten years. And he was found not guilty of rape and all that, but rape and battery and all these things. But he was found guilty of child molestation, and he was seventeen and the girl was sixteen. So he was jailed for sixteen years because the law--what his offense did within the definition, she was a child and you see what I mean. She's-- Speaker 1: And at seventeen, he was not, a year away from-- Speaker 2: Well even if he had been fourteen, under the law, she was a child. You know it was just a blip, you know you see what I'm saying? Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: She was a child and he molested her. It--and this is getting away from the case 'cause I don't want--if he had been fourteen and she was fifteen, and he fondled her, that's child molestation. I don't know if that's what the legislature meant, you know. But that's what the law said. So you follow (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But if he was fourteen, he would have received a juvenile-- Speaker 2: Probably a juvenile-- Speaker 1: Juvenile sentence-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: --instead of a-- Speaker 2: But he was seventeen so he was no longer covered by the-- Speaker 1: So he was tried as an adult. Speaker 2: Exactly. But at fourteen, he could be tried and convicted of the offense, just, he would just be in a different forum, right. That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, so that decision was overturned? Speaker 2: That was overturned. What other--we've had some big decisions-- Story_ID: 244841 Speaker 1: The governor [Sonny Perdue], I mean I think this is--well I won't say that, but the governor sued the attorney general [HistoryMaker Thurbert Baker] to decide who had the right under Georgia law to bring litigation, the governor or the attorney general? That was a big case [Perdue v. Baker, 2003] about power sharing in the state. We [Supreme Court of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia] removed some judges from the bench. Those were big cases. But we've had some--we've had the Wayne Williams case up here several times. That's why I really couldn't and can't discuss. That's come up here. We've had the Alday killers up here. We've had, it's not H. Rap Brown anymore. It's-- Speaker 2: Yes, I--he has a Muslim name [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] now. Speaker 1: Yes, right. He-- Speaker 2: Former H. Rap Brown, right. Speaker 1: Well I mean, we, when there is a crime in Georgia, it's coming up here. I can watch, turn on the news right now, and see something terrible going on and I know not to go there. Like the [Tri-State] Crematory case, it's-- Speaker 2: You're right, that was a horrible case here. Speaker 1: It's here now. It's here now, you know. It's in my office right now. I know when they're coming, 'cause you can watch the news. It all, ends up here, all of it. So you name it, it gets here if it's criminal. If it's civil, most likely it will get up here too. So I walk very lightly trying not to have too much to say. The gay marriage case, gay marriage amendment [Georgia Definition of Marriage Amendment; Amendment 1] will be argued on Tuesday. I am preparing for that right now. In the, you know, so that's going to be an interesting case, and that's going to be a big case and it's not been decided yet but it's going to be packed. Speaker 2: Well you're getting ready to launch into--you're getting ready to assume this, I guess the highest position on the court in the State of Georgia. Speaker 1: Yes, right. Speaker 2: And you're still fairly young, you know, so-- Speaker 1: Well fairly. I still, I need glasses to see big time. But yes, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm looking forward to it. Story_ID: 244842 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I would like to see us work on some of our real core issues, and not run away from them. I'd like us to work on father absence. I think too many families are--fathers are really important people and they're really important to our daughters and our sons. And I think we need to work harder to see that more children are growing up in homes with their fathers. And that's not just for blacks. I mean I think we got a harder time with it, but I just think we ought to celebrate fathers more, and try to keep them in our homes. And I think we ought to try to keep our families together more. I think we ought to insist more on education for our kids, not just in lip service, but I mean make them study. Turn off the TV and get kind of a stricter code. I think we should celebrate less. I went to a church during my last campaign, and I was introduced and it--I don't need to be cheered but--and then this person who had just hit a home run, you know the [Atlanta] Braves game stood up and it was a standing ovation at this major, major, major church. And he gets a standing ovation for hitting a home run, and here I am, and I freed this person and fought the battle for this thing, and done the this thing, and I don't think anybody really knows the contributions that are being made by those of us who are working in the vineyards of--in our minds to make sure things really happen. You know we celebrate and glorify hip hop folks and look, I like a lot of that too. I--there are a lot--certain aspects of the hip hop culture I really like and some I don't. But material things and cars and sex and makeup and this and that, my daughter [Brennan Sears-Collins] right now is sixteen, laying on me, seventeen, to get an [Cadillac] Escalade. I can't afford an Escalade. I'm on a government salary. But to save our money a little bit more you know to be, for the things that really count maybe as opposed to going into high, high debt. It's, maybe I should be a social worker or something or--but that's what I'd really like to see us work on, on our core fund--the fundamental stuff and many of us are doing that. But the celebration is not about that. It's about so many things that I don't think count that much in the long, long scheme of things. Story_ID: 244843 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your second husband. Speaker 2: Oh, thank you. My second husband's name, I got remarried in 1999. His name is Haskell Sears Ward now, and he comes from Griffin, Georgia. He's fifteen years older than I am so he's sixty-five. And he certainly brings a different perspective to my job and my life. He's been really pivotal in this job, kind of calming me down even more. He was deputy mayor of New York City [New York, New York] so he's sort of been there, done that. And I look to him a lot for, how do you do that? How do you, you know--it's been a real help to me to be with somebody that has a little bit more wisdom about how to be out there in government service without being way out there. So, he's a nice guy. Thank you for asking about him. Speaker 1: All right. And now did your parents [Thomas Sears and Onnye Roundtree Sears], they got a chance to see you become-- Speaker 2: My father did not. My father died when I became--six months after becoming a [Fulton County] Superior Court [Atlanta, Georgia] judge. And the interest--he wept through the entire swearing in. I mean, he just couldn't handle it. I was kind of surprised too. I--but my mother has. She's been able to see it, and she sometimes says, "I'm sorry that your father missed all of this because it's been one hell of a ride." Just to mention real quick. I have two children, Addison Love Sears-Collins. He is a senior now at University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]. He's top 2 percent of his class in physics and living on the lawn now. And Brennan [Sears-Collins], my daughter, is seventeen, goes to Southwest Atlanta Christian Academy, in southwest Atlanta [Georgia]. And she's trying to get in Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] or some such. We'll see. Story_ID: 244844 Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, is there any one major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: I would like to have been married just once. You know I don't--and I would like to have known more than I knew when I knew it, but I couldn't. I'm sorry. I just hated that I've been married twice. And--but I love my children [Addison Sears-Collins and Brennan Sears-Collins] and I love the way my children look, and you know I'm happy that my first husband [Love Collins, III] was their--it's so complicated, blended families and all that. And I sometimes feel that's where I failed. That's the area I couldn't do and couldn't make that go and I regret that. It also--but it also humbled me a lot, and I got to see what so many other people have to go through. I was a single mother for a while as a Supreme Court [of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia] justice. So, and that's not a bad thing to do so it's probably part of who I am right now, that suffering and the struggle to do that. That's not so bad. I wish I--we were friends with a lawyer in town, my first husband and I that--who killed his wife, Fred Tokars. And I wish I knew more that people can be evil. People you know can be evil. And he's in jail now for life, and that changed my life. I had to learn so much so fast. You know, I didn't know that people that you know and love and trust can betray you and do all kinds of evil things. And here I was a judge learning that lesson, really big time. That's why I'm telling you these--the growth has been phenomenal, so I just wish I can know things. Like I wish when I, if I had known what I know about--that we would be getting a divorce, I would marry someone else, but I didn't know that. Life opens up in different--and there's something now I don't know. Maybe something I'm doing with a child that's not so hot but I don't know that. And I'll find out ten years later, darn, if only I had--you know doing the best I can right now. But I--and that's why I try very hard to do what I, the best I can now. I try very hard not to do stupid things like have Betty [ph.] do my laundry, and you know do stupid stuff, you know what I mean? Or drive me all around town with the light flashing or--cause you know there are so many (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Betty is your executive assistant? Speaker 2: My executive assistant. Yeah, there are so many things that happen to you that you can't control--like I want my father [Thomas Sears] to know where I am, but he can't. He died at sixty-two in '89 [1989], you know. So you're going to have to live with that. Why make, why do stupid stuff that you have to live with on top of that? Okay. So that's one thing I go around saying a lot by the way. Why do stupid stuff that you have to live with because there are going to be things you can't control that you have to live with? You will live and die with the consequences of the choices that you make and that is something I tell my children all the time. Story_ID: 244845 Speaker 1: Also, likewise when you look back at your career, what do you see at this point, and you're still developing this, but what do you see at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: So far, the legacy has been less of what I've written and more of what I've done. I have been able to survive three challenges too, three times, three election cycles where people tried to defeat me. All with the liberal activist, radical, you know what that kind of sounds like. The people that did not want to know who I really was. I've been able to survive that three times, and I will be chief [justice on Supreme Court of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia] in June if I survive. So I think my biggest legacy has been survival in a really dangerous--this last time the governor wanted to defeat me and the governor unleashed all of his people to defeat-- Speaker 1: That's Perdue, right? Speaker 2: Sonny Perdue, everything, and I survived. And it was an amazing thing. I thought I was all alone in the beginning of the campaign. By the time it was--by the middle of the campaign, ministers were walking off the bench to bring me up into the pulpit. I mean, it had become that kind of--you ain't going down and we're not go--and I knew this may be tough, but I'm not alone and that was a good lesson to know. I mean folks were putting up signs all over the place. You know, hey baby, we ain't gonna let you go down. We ain't gonna do it. And that was a good feeling. And when the head of 100 Black Men at the big party turned to me, and said whoever--"You're one of ours and if somebody attacks you, we're going to attack back. Is that right all of y'all?" And they said (makes sound). That felt good, you know. Speaker 1: I like that. Speaker 2: I know we're still in the game. Sometimes we, I feel we don't, you know, we forget. Story_ID: 244846 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Hmm, that's a good question. Oh golly. That I survived in a rough, harsh time, and brought some people with me, brought a lot of people with me. That I busted open some doors, and I did it with grace and dignity, that the people could be proud of me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's it. I think that's how it's probably--I thought it was going to be for some passionate decisions I wrote. It's not that at all. It's that I'm bringing people up, and they'll probably write the decisions. You don't really get to pick a lot. You know I--you, I think it's going to be that and it's something else so, okay...