 Story_ID: 486174 Speaker 1: Okay, this morning we are going to be talking with Judge Vaino Spencer [HistoryMaker Vaino Spencer], and may we start by my asking for your full name including your maiden name and middle name, maiden name and married name. If you could, give us all of those names and spell them. Speaker 2: Surely. My given name is Vaino, spelled V as in Victor, A-I-N-O. My last name, my married name is Spencer. My maiden name is Hassan, H-A-S-S-A-N. My title is justice of the court of appeal. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I'm the presiding justice of the Court of Appeal for the Second District in California [California Court of Appeal for the Second District]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: We have six districts. Speaker 1: Okay, and the, your middle name. Speaker 2: I do not have a middle name. Speaker 1: No, no middle name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I use my maiden name as my middle. Speaker 1: As your middle. All right, and we might as well do it here. There's an interesting story about your first name Vaino, and can you tell me where you get that, the origin of that name, where you get it from and the meaning? Speaker 2: Yes, well my father [Abdul Hassan] advised me that he named me after his mother [Vaino Hassan]. That was her given name, and the origin of the name apparently according to my dad was from the Sanskrit language, and he told me the meaning was sweetness and light of purity and sweetness, and I will never forget that the only occasion prior to this that I ever told anyone that occurred when I was in high school [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California], and I was editor of our high school newspaper, the Polytechnic Optimist, and one of the co-editors, Johnny Estingo [ph.] asked me one afternoon what was the meaning of the name, and I made the mistake of telling them, and thereafter whenever they wanted to tease me they would say, "Oh, here comes old purity and sweetness." Speaker 1: (Laughter) Let's move on. I want to ask you a couple of things. First of all, if you would, today's date, if you could give us that? Speaker 2: November 22nd, 2006. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at this time? Speaker 2: We're in my chambers in the Ronald Reagan State Building in Los Angeles [California] at 3rd [Street] and Spring [Street]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and my chambers consist not only of my inner chambers, but also of my assistant's office and the offices of two of my research attorneys. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this is part of a division. We're division number one and we have this division, three other justices, associate justices who we work together in panels of three, and each of us has a staff of five. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this building was completed in 1990, and I had both the privilege and the burden of being the chair of our court manage- court building committee rather. I worked with the president of the Los Angeles authority who was responsible for creating this building from the architectural phase to the completion, and that's one Jerry Epstein [Jerry B. Epstein] and he's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that building, was the building originally named the Ronald Reagan Building? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he, then President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was here for the-- Speaker 1: Dedication. Speaker 2: --dedication ceremony. Story_ID: 486175 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you five questions that I'm told will relax you, although you seem very relaxed to me. I'm going to ask you these questions, and they're very simple questions. The first one is, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I believe it's celadon green. Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't have any particular favorite. I'm, I love good food. I love gourmet food really. Speaker 1: All right, all right. How about your favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Speaker 1: All right. And your favorite time of the year or season? Speaker 2: I don't particularly have any, I yeah we get, we don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. That's typical of many people who are Los Angeles [California] based. Speaker 2: I was gonna say living here in Los Angeles we have something on almost every season 'cause you know the seasons-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --do, don't vary like they do in the East or the Midwest. Speaker 1: Right. And finally your favorite saying? Do you have a favorite saying? Speaker 2: Not, no one particular. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 486176 Speaker 1: Let's move on to, if I could talk a little bit about your, your parents. Let's start with your mother, and if you would give me her full name? Speaker 2: Ada Nona [Ada Taylor Hassan]. Speaker 1: A, A-D-A. Speaker 2: A-D-A, Nona, N-O-N-A, and her maiden name was Taylor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: T-A-Y-L-O-R. Speaker 1: Nona was her middle name? Speaker 2: No, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and maiden name was Taylor. And do you know her date of birth or place or birth? Speaker 2: Yes, her, she was born September 28, that would have been 1893 in Utah, State of Utah, St. Louis, I mean not St. Louis, Salt Lake City [Utah]. Speaker 1: Salt Lake City, okay. And your dad? Speaker 2: My father's first name was Abdul, A-B-D-U-L. The last name Hassan, H-A-S-S-A-N [Abdul Hassan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To the best of my knowledge he too did not have a middle name. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he was born in what was then Colombo [Sri Lanka], the City of Colombo in the Ceylon [Sri Lanka]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that's an island off of India and he-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --he was very active in Indian affairs, and worked to support Mahatma Gandhi in the struggle to gain the freedom from the British, which they managed to do in 1947. Speaker 1: Right, and so you come from a long line of civil rights fighters. Speaker 2: That's right, he was wonderful. Speaker 1: Do you remember what his date of birth was? Speaker 2: No I don't. Speaker 1: That's fine. Speaker 2: I know it was in June, but I don't know, but my mother always assumed that he was just a few years older than she was. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's fine, that's fine. Let's go back for a moment because--to get your date of birth. Speaker 2: I was born in July 22nd, 1920. Speaker 1: And the place of birth? Speaker 2: Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: Okay and I know you do, your grandparents were not here when you were born-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --so you don't have a lot of information on either your maternal or paternal grandparents (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's true, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay, we'll move on from there. Let's go to your siblings, and you had two siblings. Speaker 2: That's correct. I had, I have a brother, Alfred Hassan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He is now ninety-five years old. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: He was born here, and he was a track star in school, in both high school [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California] and college [Compton Junior College; El Camino College Compton Center, Compton, California], and he trained as a civil engineer, and has been retired for a number of years. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He lives in a relatively small city called Perris, P-E-R-R-I-S, California. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you happen to remember what his birth date was? I know it was 1910. Speaker 2: November. I don't remember the exact date (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) November, that's fine. Speaker 2: --but I know it's in November. Speaker 1: That's fine, and you also had a sister. Speaker 2: I had a sister who was seven years older than I, two years younger than my brother of course, and she, her first name was Cecelia [Cecelia Hassan], and she died quite young. Speaker 1: Right. Cecelia again, no middle name? Speaker 2: No middle name. Speaker 1: No middle name right, Cecelia Hassan, and she did marry before-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: She did not-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --okay, all right. Story_ID: 486177 Speaker 1: Now I want to go to some of your earliest memories after you were born and with you growing up with your siblings [Alfred Hassan and Cecelia Hassan] and your parents [Ada Taylor Hassan and Abdul Hassan]. How far back can you remember while highlighting some of the key things that may have happened, say in your elementary school period or prior to school? Speaker 2: I remember in elementary school, I attended Wadsworth Elementary [Wadsworth Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], and I was obviously even then interested in politics. I ran for student body president (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh you did, in elementary school student body president, okay. Speaker 2: Student body president yeah, and I had a group of wonderful teachers. It was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Any one particular one stand out? Speaker 2: I don't remember their names, but I remember them as being just absolutely devoted to the children, and I had great classmates. It was a very integrated school. We had, however, relatively few blacks or Negroes as we were then called, and we had a few Chinese and I don't recall any Hispanics, Mexicans, Latinos. And there was a relatively small group of Jewish children. One of my best friends was Jewish. In fact, two of them, Martin Rapaport [ph.] and Sarah Leavitt [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we-- Speaker 1: It sounds like a friendship you developed and maintained over the years? Speaker 2: Yes and the atmosphere was so different than it is now for children. The neighbors were, again, the neighborhood that I lived in was also very integrated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My immediate neighbors, next door and across the street, were German, and everyone--there was one Japanese family and one Chinese family, and the others were, I think there were three black families in the block. Speaker 1: What section of Los Angeles [California] was this? Speaker 2: This was, you know where Wrigley Field [Los Angeles, California], Wrigley Field which was subsequently named after Gilbert Lindsay [Gilbert W. Lindsay]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --then the name was changed, and that area, which was then 41st Street. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They changed the names and it's now 42nd Place-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but and that is, was at Avalon [Boulevard] and 41st Street, and Avalon is two blocks from Central Avenue, and Central Avenue at that time was the main thoroughfare that later became a sort of a jazz center, entertainment center for the black community-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --as over the years the area changed from being predominantly white to being predominantly black, and it was a thriving area. Speaker 1: And during the period of elementary school for you the percentage of African Americans in this, in the city was much lower than it is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh very small-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --relatively small. Speaker 1: Right, okay-- Story_ID: 486178 Speaker 1: Some of your earliest memories with your siblings [Alfred Hassan and Cecelia Hassan]--are there any highlights there or with your family? Any highlights, any memorable things that happened with you and your family or you and your siblings? Speaker 2: Yes, well, I was very fond of my sister. My sister was retarded. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she went to special schools, and even though she was older I always assumed the responsibility for her. And I did not like my brother at all. He was, he considered himself to be the disciplinarian, and of course whenever he would catch me alone at home he would, he would attempt to impose discipline, and I couldn't wait for my father [Abdul Hassan] to get home so I could complain about it. And so eventually he got the message, but to this day I really don't care much about him. Speaker 1: I'm sure (unclear)--. How about interaction between your mother [Ada Taylor Hassan] and father and you. What was it like? Was your mother a housewife or? Speaker 2: Yes, she was a homemaker. Speaker 1: Homemaker. Speaker 2: And she was wonderful. Now, she assisted my father, however, this was in 1947 when I returned to school for the purpose of proceeding to study law, my father and I established a real estate business, and that was in 1940, and after I left the business to go back to school, my mother then took my place in the business-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she and my father enjoyed going to work together. Speaker 1: Okay. Prior to that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Prior to that she-- Speaker 1: --your father in real estate? Speaker 2: No, prior to that my father had been in the manufacturing of very elegant ladies lingerie-- Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: --and he catered to a very wealthy clientele, and then after the Depression [Great Depression], or during the Depression I should say, he lost his business-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then he started working in the motion picture industry. He was quite a scholar. He had been raised in the Buddhist temple in Ceylon [Sri Lanka] after his parents died, and he studied constantly, and when he came to this country he graduated from both Polytechnic High School [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California] where I subsequently went, also from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he was very popular in the movie industry whenever they were doing pictures with a locale in India or the Middle East or Afghanistan, for example. He was the technical advisor. Speaker 1: For that okay so he-- Speaker 2: And that's--he left that, however, to come with me to establish the office at 46th [Street] and Main Street in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, go ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they worked there until he became ill in about 1954, and he died in 1958. Story_ID: 486179 Speaker 1: Let's go back a little ways, and there was an interesting part. Your father [Abdul Hassan] was a Buddhist, am I correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And your mother [Ada Taylor Hassan]? Speaker 2: My mother was a Protestant. Speaker 1: Okay, and yet they coexisted very well (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, oh, and respected each other. They respected each other's religion, and I know that my father would be dumbfounded to know what's going on now with reference to the terrible tension between the Muslims and the Protestants. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Or I should say between Muslims and Christians. Speaker 1: The children though, were they Protestant or did they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Christians, all of us. Speaker 1: They all followed the mother. Speaker 2: All followed mother, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay and the-- Speaker 2: We, however, would go with my father to the Buddhist temple, as my mother frequently did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Where as children we would go on special occasions. Speaker 1: So, it was a very tolerant family of two religions? Speaker 2: Oh very much so, and my father was the most remarkable person. He and so wise and so respectful of all people. Speaker 1: Good, good. Can you give us some examples of that tolerance that your father had for all people, any that you might remember? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember any particular instance. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was just an aura about him and comments that he would make, and whenever he would hear of any distressing example of intolerance, for example, he would always speak out-- Speaker 1: Publically. Speaker 2: --publically against it, and he would write letters (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's where you later got that same-- Speaker 2: --he would write letters to the editor. He was just--my mother also was very in her way, not as militant as my father, but very outspoken. She was active in the suffragette movement to get women to vote, and a very strong person, even though she was only 4'10" and she for years she only weighed about eighty-five pounds, but she was a dynamo. Speaker 1: Right. Any particular instance that you may remember about your mother being very outspoken and very politically active? Speaker 2: She wasn't politically active until I became so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but she was active in causes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that she espoused. She was very active in the Prohibition movement. She did not approve of alcohol at all for years. Later she began to enjoy champagne (laughter), but she had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this, this was following Prohibition right? Speaker 2: Much later, much later-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --yeah when--I guess she was then about in her sixties before she ever had a drink. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But, she was, she gradually became more tolerant of people even though she disapproved of drinking. She got to the point where she did not condemn other people for doing so, and she also was more inclined to--she had very strong views about religion, and she did not really res- I wouldn't say she didn't respect, but she didn't approve of various other religions. Now she was very tolerant of my father and Buddhists, and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --she also was tolerant of his friends who were Muslims. There were a lot of Muslims that came to our home regularly. My parents entertained a lot, and these people would come, and food had to be prepared separately. And the interesting thing was that she for example had a bias against Catholics and I wanted as a child, I wanted to be a Catholic. My circle of little friends were Catholic, and I would sneak out and go with them to Mass-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then after school too, they were studying catechism getting ready for their First Communion, and then I wanted to take my First Communion and my mother wouldn't permit it. So I-- Speaker 1: And how about your Jewish friends, how did your mother tolerate-- Speaker 2: She liked, but she liked them individually-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but she never commented about their religion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I know she was very anti-Catholic and then later again she developed, you know, and she regretted her earlier prejudices. And she became a very tolerant, very, very, you know, loving person (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's a strength in itself. Any other examples of your mother's concern about other religions as you were growing up? Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't recall anything else. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 486180 Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of the friends in the neighborhood and families in the neighborhood [in Los Angeles, California]. They, all of those different ethnicities and religions got along well in your neighborhood, or were there problems? Speaker 2: No, there was never any friction, and I know that my mother [Ada Taylor Hassan] would stand at the fence and visit with the German families, the mothers and the grandmothers of immediate neighbors on both sides, and occasionally they would come to our house for dinner and we would go to their homes for dinner. And same thing with the people across the street and down the street and around the corner. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And Norman Houston [Norman O. Houston] lived in the block, a block away from us-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --between McKinley [Avenue] and Central [Avenue], and I had a friend Betty Bradley [ph.] who lived on the corner of McKinley and 41st [Street] and Totse Nkinge [ph.] remained a good friend of mine through, though life really until her death. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a schoolmate and she lived in the same black. Speaker 1: So there were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was half Japanese and half Negro. Speaker 1: Right, right and so you were not the only African Americans there in the block, Norman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no and, no, there were, in addition to Totse's mother who was African American, the, there were two other families in our block-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and one of the families was--her daughter, Dorothy [ph.], was a friend of mine-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then, oh I guess it was about probably half a block away there was another family. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so all of these various religions and ethnicities and everything lived together, and it was never an issue. Speaker 2: No, no one, you know, to my knowledge no one even gave it a second thought. Speaker 1: Okay, now you're in elementary school now and your brother [Alfred Hassan], I guess, has gone on to middle school and so forth-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you run, you're gonna run for class president. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. There must have been some concerns on your mind or some things you wanted to change? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I don't remember really. It was just, I was just an activist, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: ---and I don't know what prompted me to think that I wanted to be president of the student body. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I remember it vividly and I remember making a speech in the auditorium, accepting the office-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and it's funny that I have such a clear picture of that (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh good, good. The--you went on from there, Wadsworth [Wadsworth Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], to middle school. Speaker 2: Yes, Edison Junior High [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Edison Junior High. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. I wasn't sure when they went from junior high to middle school then. Speaker 2: I know at that time they called it junior high. Speaker 1: Okay, and we're going to hold it for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, it is what they would call middle school today. Speaker 1: Today. Story_ID: 486181 Speaker 1: You are just entering junior high school, Edison Junior High [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --marching in ready to take over. Tell us about that? How much do you remember about Edison? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: What life was like? Speaker 2: I was the only black student-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --there for two years, and then in my third and last year a black boy entered, and he was quite an athlete, and he was very popular, and when I graduated he was left, he was then the only one. The (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay do you remember his name? Speaker 2: --at that time we had restrictive covenants and there were no black families living in the vicinity or in that school district, so the only way that I got there for example was because I was going to enroll at McKinley High School [ph.], which was in the district that I lived in, and they did a number of tests and I apparently scored so high on my IQ test that Dr. Murphy [ph.], she had a Ph.D. in education and she-- Speaker 1: She was a principal? Speaker 2: Well she was the principal of Edison High School-- Speaker 1: Of Edison. Speaker 2: --and the principal of McKinley communicated with her, and then they talked with my mother [Ada Taylor Hassan] and father [Abdul Hassan] and convinced them that I should enroll at Edison, and they thought it would be a more competitive atmosphere for me and I did, and again the teachers, the students, everybody was just fine. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, and I again ran for elective office there. I ran for secretary of the student body and was elected. Speaker 1: Okay and was that your first year, second year? Speaker 2: That was my third year. Speaker 1: Third year there, okay. Any memorable teachers there at Edison that you can-- Speaker 2: No, not by name-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --but again they were all very good. Speaker 1: And what, oh you were gonna give us the name of that athlete that entered Edison your third year. Speaker 2: I didn't, I don't remember his name. Speaker 1: Oh no, not a problem. Speaker 2: No, we never became friends,-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --but we, we were pleasant with each other, you know, but I-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I don't, we never got to be close. Speaker 1: Okay, and so you-- Speaker 2: He was younger. He was at least two years younger than I because I was in my third year when he came. Speaker 1: Okay, those age differences are very, very important (laughter). Speaker 2: At that time (laughter). Speaker 1: The, the, so you ran for secretary, class secretary in your third year there-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you won? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Any--and I'm asking these questions if they're none--but no memorable incidence happened at Edison? Speaker 2: No, no. We, I had a little group of friends and we enjoyed each other and we visited each other's homes and-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and I remember that one of my probably closest friends, she was from a Mormon family and I recall, I didn't really know anything about Mormonism at that time, but I recall her taking me home with her to have refreshments and to meet her parents, and so later when I learned that Mormons were restrictive with reference to the admission of blacks to certain positions in their church-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I was surprised because her parents were just absolutely wonderfully warm and delightful people. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: It just goes to show that it's--individuals are individuals. Speaker 1: And in all of these religion groups there are contradictions. There are contradictions and that's one of their contradictions (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: The, you did very well scholastically-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at, at Edison. Speaker 2: Yeah I was straight A. Speaker 1: Oh, okay and that's doing very well (laughter). Story_ID: 486182 Speaker 1: You went on from there to high school. Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --at John H. Francis Polytechnic High School [Los Angeles, California]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --which was what we would still today to consider just south of downtown Los Angeles [California], which is at Grand [Avenue] and Washington [Boulevard]. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: It has subsequently moved to the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California], but for many years-- Speaker 1: Oh it has. Speaker 2: --yeah. For many years that's where the high school was situated. Speaker 1: Okay, and there in your first year what was that first year like because as you moved up these various schools the competition became greater I would imagine. Would I be correct in assuming? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay and, but scholastically you continued to do well? Speaker 2: I did-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yes I did. I graduated valedictorian of my class-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and I remember giving the graduation valedictorian speech; never will forget it. My parents [Ada Taylor Hassan and Abdul Hassan] were about the third or fourth row, and midway during the speech I had an absolute blackout (laughter) unfortunately. Speaker 1: You could not remember what you wanted to say. Speaker 2: I couldn't remember the balance of the speech and so fortunately the instructor was off stage in the wings, and she gave me a cue and then I was able to salvage (laughter) the balance. Speaker 1: I don't want to get too far-- Speaker 2: That was the most embarrassing moment (laughter). Speaker 1: I don't want to get too far into that because I wanna take us back a little ways, but before we leave that spot, what was the theme of your valedictorian speech (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Democracy summons youth. I'll never forget it (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, all right, all right. Do you remember any important highlights of that speech? Speaker 2: Well, it was a very optimistic speech. The theory being that the young people were gonna save the world. Speaker 1: All right, that sounds great. Story_ID: 486183 Speaker 1: I don't want to leave your brother [Alfred Hassan], your older brother out because he's going through junior high and high school, then how is he doing scholastically? Speaker 2: He did very well also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah he was, as I said he spent a lot of time, he was a track star, and he spent a lot of time in that area, but he was very, a diligent student. He-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now did he go to Edison [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California] also? Speaker 2: No, no-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --he went to, I can't think of the name of that school. I can picture where it is, but I don't remember the name, and then for high school he went to Jefferson High [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and Jefferson High at that time was very much like my elementary school [Wadsworth Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] and my middle school or junior high school in that it was very integrated. The black students were a very small minority of the students again. The makeup was very much like my elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was just in the same area, just a few blocks apart. Speaker 1: He was a track star. Any other highlights you can remember about him in there? Speaker 2: No, no I don't, and when he went to Compton Junior College [El Camino College Compton Center, Compton, California]. I remember he was at, participating at some track meet at the Coliseum [Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, Los Angeles, California] and I recall that was just before the Olympics [1932 Summer Olympics, Los Angeles, California]. I believe it was 1932 Olympics, and I recall my parents [Ada Taylor Hassan and Abdul Hassan] taking me, and I was, would have been about eleven years old at the time-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to watch him run, and he won the half mile. Speaker 1: Well he ran in the Olympics? Speaker 2: No, this was not, this was, this was not, I don't believe so. I believe-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that this was another meet, but it was at the Coliseum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now it's possible it could have been the Olympics, but I just don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. The Olympics-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --in '32 [1932] did take place at the Coliseum. Speaker 2: At the Coliseum, then it could have been. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: 'Cause I remember the Coliseum was packed. It was, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Maybe he was running one of the pretrial-- Speaker 2: Could have been. Speaker 1: --meets or something. Story_ID: 486184 Speaker 1: I didn't want to go too far because I wanted to come back to something I found very interesting, and you felt you had a teacher mistreated in high school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us that story. Speaker 2: Well, my favorite teacher at Polytechnic [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California] was Frances Hov, and she was-- Speaker 1: How do we spell that last name? Speaker 2: H-O-V. Speaker 1: H-O-V. Speaker 2: Frances Hov, and she was, her family was from Denmark-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she was absolutely the most delightful person. She loved her students, and in our class as I recall I believe that I was the only black student, and then we had Johnny Estingo [ph.] who was Mexican American, and we had one Japanese, and I remember Marjorie Ellergy [ph.] and the others I don't remember by name, but there were about ten of us on the newspaper staff. She was the journalism teacher-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she was also the advisor to the students who were responsible for editing and putting out the newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had a weekly newspaper called the Los An- the Polytechnic Optimist and-- Speaker 1: Okay, you were the editor of that. Speaker 2: --and I became the editor-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and we won a number of prizes, and she had a sort of a running feud with the editor, rather the teacher of the print--I think they call it the print shop. They did the printing of the newspaper, and he, the person in charge there he taught. The class was all boys. He taught them printing and how to run the press and so forth, how to set the type. Of course it was totally different in those days than it is now (laughter), but-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --he had a telephone in his office, and then on the first floor there was a pay phone booth, and we were on the third floor and Ms. Hov did not have a telephone, so she had a number of students, former students, who then worked for the daily newspapers. We had the both the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times] and the Los Angeles Examiner morning newspapers, then we had the Evening Herald [Los Angeles Evening Herald], the afternoon paper, and the students would call her, wanting to call her to give her tips on information that she, they thought would be pertinent for her newspaper, and she didn't have any way of receiving these calls. So, but so periodically she would go down to the first floor, and she'd have to walk down to telephone them to see what was going on before our deadline, and so I didn't understand why it was that they had a telephone in the print shop and we didn't have a telephone. So, without saying anything to her about it, I telephoned the principal and made an appointment to see him, went over and talked with him about the inequity and he agreed with me and I thought everything was fine. And then the next day in class she wanted to know who was it that went to the principal and complained about her not having a phone, and apparently he assumed that she had put me up to it, and he apparently didn't like that, although he didn't give me any indication of that. So, I had to stand up in class and confess that I was the culprit. But, happily within a day or so we got a telephone, so (laughter). Speaker 1: All right because you were an activist, exactly. Speaker 2: That old saw about the squeaky wheel gets the grease (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Always gets the grease, absolutely. Story_ID: 486185 Speaker 1: But, she was so delightful, and the night of the deadline we, the paper [Polytechnic Optimist] came out on Thursday morning, so our deadline was that Wednesday, and we would work late and then she would take us home. It would be then after dark, and she lived within walking distance of the school [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California] and we, I never will forget that every time I drive down Washington [Washington Boulevard], which I did this morning, I think of that. We would walk about ten or twelve blocks down Washington Boulevard to her street, which was Toberman [Street], and then half the way down Toberman to this darling cottage that she had, and I will never, never forget my first impression of that lovely cottage. She had books, bookshelves in every room from floor to ceiling, and including the kitchen and the bathroom. Speaker 2: She was an active reader? Speaker 1: She was just wonderful. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So, when many years later when I--I kept in touch with her over all the years until her death, and when I became a judge in 1961 she was one of my guests at a dinner party. As was Johnny Estingo [ph.] and the remaining members of our editorial class. Speaker 2: So they all came to this dinner. Speaker 1: Right, all that were still living. There were two who had died, but they came. Speaker 2: Okay that's a wonderful story, wonderful story. This whole, would it be fair to say that you may have patterned yourself somewhat--I know a part of it was your mother [Ada Taylor Hassan] and a part of it was your dad [Abdul Hassan], but how much of it was Ms. Hov [Frances Hov] and your admiration for her, pattern your life or help pattern it? Speaker 1: I can't think of any direct effect except that well maybe I was always impressed with her kindness, her, the way she cared about her students and she was--her temperament was so lovely. Gracious, she was very gracious, and all of that probably rubbed off on me. Story_ID: 486186 Speaker 1: But I also of course had the benefit of having extremely gracious parents [Ada Taylor Hassan and Abdul Hassan], see. Speaker 2: And that's why I sort of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah. Speaker 2: --would not give her all of the credit because I know-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: --a great deal of you are your dad and your mom. Speaker 1: I was very lucky really. I went through most of my young years without having any, any bad experiences, with the exception of being aware that many parts of Los Angeles [California] were restricted. Speaker 2: By that you mean? Speaker 1: You know, there were residential restrictions, even though in the area in which we lived as I indicated was very integrated with a few minorities, but there was a boundary. For example, no minorities, racial minorities lived west, on the Eastside [Los Angeles, California], west of Avalon [Boulevard]. And it wasn't until 1940 when I opened, with my father, opened an office on Main Street where we were the first to be able to, and we rented this office. And I never will forget talking with the broker, and he was initially very reluctant, very reluctant to rent to us, but he met my parents and in particular my father and he became very, he was favorably impressed with my father. I think that was the only reason that we were able to rent that. And then after we sort of integrated the area, then the owners then rented--they owned a number of properties in that block and then they rented to other black families. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were-- Speaker 1: And then we had the same experience on the Westside [Los Angeles, California]. I don't know if anyone told you this before, but there was really a small patch of area around Jefferson [Boulevard] and Vermont [Avenue], between Jefferson and Vermont and Vermont and Western [Avenue] where blacks had lived for many years, but no one west of Western-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and then again it was a question of trying to move into these areas and I will never forget I was canvassing in that area, which was north of Jefferson around Normandie [Avenue], between Normandie and Western, and property owners would slam their door in your face, you know, and swear. One woman told me, she said, "You will never, this area, this particular track," she named the track, she said, "there will never be a Negro family in this area." Speaker 2: And we had not gotten to Crenshaw [Boulevard] right? Speaker 1: At that time. Speaker 2: At that time. Speaker 1: Yeah at that that we were not, we were south of Jefferson between Vermont and Western, and then in the, after the restrictive covenants were declared to be invalid-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --with the Shelley v. Kraemer [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948] case, then blacks started moving all over the Westside. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, that's interesting, very interesting history because I did not, I knew there was restrictive covenants, but I did not know it was that far downtown-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and that's very, very good history. Story_ID: 486187 Speaker 1: Let's go back now, and you are in high school, at Polytech [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California], and you're doing newspaper work. Was that your ambition at that time, to be a newspaper person? Speaker 2: I thought so. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I did-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as a matter of fact during summer vacation I think this was in my last year, either the second or the third year because so many of Ms. Hov's [Frances Hov] former students had gotten jobs at the Los Angeles Times and the Examiner [Los Angeles Examiner], Johnny Estingo [ph.] and myself and one of the other white members of our old group, the three of us went down to the Los Angeles Times to apply (laughter) for a summer job and-- Speaker 1: And now what year, we are in 1930? Speaker 2: That was the--I graduated in '38 [1938], so that would have been probably in '36 [1936] or '37 [1937] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Speaker 2: --I think probably '37 [1937]. Speaker 1: And pretty much in-- Speaker 2: In fact it would have been '37 [1937]. I graduated in June of '38 [1938]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I-- Speaker 1: And we're in the Depression [Great Depression] still. Speaker 2: --had total confidence, you know, that we were all outstanding and there was no reason, you know, no reason to be concerned that they weren't gonna give us a job. And we were shocked when they didn't (laughter). Speaker 1: They didn't give any of you a job (laughter). Speaker 2: Not any of us (laughter). No, so. Speaker 1: They--and you were just applying for a summer job? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah 'cause we were still in school. Speaker 1: What kind of-- Speaker 2: And they used to. They used to routinely give the editors, the top editors, summer jobs-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --so that's the reason we had every reason to expect it you know. Speaker 1: Now at that time-- Speaker 2: We were just the wrong color. This poor white person who was with us (laughter). Speaker 1: Got the brush (laughter). Speaker 2: She got it also (laughter). Speaker 1: The, but there were papers such as the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] and the black newspapers. Speaker 2: But we had only one at that time. It was the California Eagle. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Sentinel, the Sentinel wasn't founded I don't think until the early '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm a little ahead of the time. Speaker 2: No now come to think about it, we had a what they call a throw-away, called the Neighborhood News, and we had the Sentinel, I mean sorry the Eagle, California Eagle-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which was the, sold by subscription or over the newsstand. Speaker 1: All right, and so now here you are, the door has been slammed in your face. What was your action? What were you going to and you just were going to take that or were you going-- Speaker 2: But that's what I did. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: We didn't do anything about it. Yeah, we were very disappointed, and we, I'm not certain at that time if we felt that the reason that we were not accepted was because of the color-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or racial or ethnic discrimination, but we couldn't understand it. Speaker 1: Right, right, but you didn't think of it as a racial thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't think, no we didn't at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 486188 Speaker 1: So then now you go back to school [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California], but you're still the editor [of the Polytechnic Optimist]-- Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and you still have ambitions of graduating and going into the newspaper business. Speaker 1: Well, I had intended going to SC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] to continue, and at that--and I had looked forward to studying journalism there, and then during that summer, summer of 1938, I took a job working for a real estate broker-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Sidney Dones [Sidney P. Dones], who was a very, very popular real estate broker, and he also was quite a visionary. He had founded an area, which is called Val Verde [California], a number of acres in northern, well it's not northern California, but it's north of here, and it became a resort for blacks. He was a very persuasive person, and he met the owner of that property and convinced her to sell it to him. And he then subdivided it and sold it in parcels for homes and people built homes, and he got the, one of the supervisors who was, that was his area and they put up a county funded clubhouse and swimming pool and recreational facilities and so forth. Speaker 2: Now was Mr. Dones African American or black? Speaker 1: Yes he's African American yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 1: --and he was a very interesting person and extremely progressive, really ahead of his time. Speaker 2: And as you said a visionary, and a visionary. Speaker 1: He was definitely-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and as I said I started working for him, and I was just fascinated with the business. And he became ill. He had a heart attack, and he asked me to stay. I had been working for him for about two months, and he asked me to please stay and help run the business while he was recuperating. And he was out ill for about six months, so I, although I'd already registered at SC I didn't go. And by the end of the time that he came back, I was so deeply involved in the business, and I had changed my mind I didn't want to be a journalist. I wanted to be a real estate broker-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so that, I took a totally different direction and then I didn't go back to school until 1946. Speaker 2: Oh, almost eight years later. Story_ID: 486189 Speaker 1: You are now working, you decided not to go to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] in 1938 and to work in real estate, and you were caught up in that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and tell us about some of the highlights of your real estate career? You graduated from high school [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: I don't remember anything of particular. I do know that I enjoyed it. I--Sidney Dones [Sidney P. Dones] had a wonderful clientele, and as a result of his being ill I then moved to the forefront and I got a license. I was not twenty-one, so I could not get a broker's license, but I qualified for a salesperson's license and I was able to not only list property and sell it, but also, I met a number of the investors that he used to finance purchases. If you can believe it, at that time, he would advertise weekly in the Los Angeles Eagle [sic. California Eagle] and the Neighborhood News, and then when the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] was founded, also in the Sentinel. And he was selling property, nice houses, for as little as $150 down. Now this was 1938, the Depression [Great Depression] was still very much in effect, and he--I recall selling a four flat for $4,500, $400 down, and that was--I recall that house was, the building I think was on Wall Street near Santa Barbara [Santa Barbara Avenue; Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard]. And that's the way it went, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, in 1940, he had regained his health, and he was in full force again, and so I told him that I wanted to go into business for myself. And he was very supportive of my ambition, and that's when my father [Abdul Hassan] joined me and we opened our office, so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, let's go back a moment, and Mr. Dones had bought some property you said up north, how far up north, where, out in--past the Valley? Speaker 2: I would say it must be about a hundred--yeah. It was north of San Fernando Valley [California], between the Valley and Bakersfield [California]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: South of Bakersfield. Speaker 1: Okay, and he found people, blacks to buy up there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was the first resort or vacation, but many other people built cabins and small houses and used them as vacation houses on weekends-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and some people who were retired lived there permanently, and it's still a thriving community to this day. Speaker 1: Oh, what is the name of that community? If you can remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. A friend of mine retired there about ten years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, Okay. You don't remember the name of that community do you? Speaker 2: Val Verde [California], yeah. Speaker 1: Val Verde. Speaker 2: When he founded it, he named it Eureka [Eureka Villa]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then they subsequently changed the name to Val Verde, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, okay does that translate to green valley? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, you are now getting ready to--so let me ask you, when you initially went into the real estate field how did your parents feel about that, your mom [Ada Taylor Hassan] and dad? Speaker 2: They were very pleased. Speaker 1: They were pleased, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And as a matter of fact I said my dad joined me in opening the office. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: He got his broker's license, and by that time I'd just turned twenty-one, I got mine. Speaker 1: Okay and you opened the business together? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 486190 Speaker 1: And you sold real estate--any highlights during that period you were in business with your dad [Abdul Hassan] that you can recall (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we developed property in Fontana [California], and again, we had, we had problems. The--keeping in mind restrictive covenants were still in effect, and in Val Verde [California], rather in Fontana. Black families lived north of Highland [Avenue], and the name of the street was Highland, and then Sidney Dones [Sidney P. Dones] had a very nice ranch south of Highland rather than north, but he was the only one-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he didn't encounter any hostility from surrounding neighbors 'cause the ranches were some distance from each other. You weren't living right next door. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: But years later my dad and I, we sold a piece of property to a black family who had lived down the street from where we lived here in Los Angeles [California], on Wilton Place. We sold them a property north of the main drag, which was Highway 66 [U.S. Route 66]. You remember the old song Highway 66, we sold it, I'm sorry, south rather, south of that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and in that area just--although Dones was the only one living any place south of Highland. This was even further south, and very close to the main shopping center-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and lovely family, and to look at them you would think they were Caucasian. However, the racists burned them down, burned, set fire to the house and killed them. That was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was the reaction of the law enforcement authorities in the city? Speaker 2: They never prosecuted anyone, and a film was made of that, which was incidentally was never released to theaters. But it was shown in certain, in the black communities you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and liberal groups showed it-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but it was just an unbelievable tragedy. Speaker 1: And this was, what, '43 [1943]? Speaker 2: This was about '42 [1942] '43 [1943]. Speaker 1: Forty, okay. We're in the middle of a world war [World War II, WWII]. Speaker 2: We are--that's right exactly, yes. Yeah, because it wasn't until 1948 that Shelley v. Kraemer [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948] knocked off these restrictive covenants and then even after that, you know, we still had encountered a lot of hostility. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Even--I sold a piece of property in Highland Park [Los Angeles, California] where just recently you may remember reading in the newspaper about the fact that some Mexican young man killed a young black man. They want to drive out the few black families living there today. They want to drive them out, well I sold the property to a black maiden lady, lovely person. She worked as a domestic, and the Mexicans in the area terrified her, and I called the police department to complain about it and ask them to give her protection, and the officer with whom I spoke told me she didn't have any business moving there. That was the response. And I tell you I have such great admiration for the black lawyers here in Los Angeles because whenever anything like that came up, they were all very, very gung ho to address the problem and there were any number of meetings between the black lawyers. A number of us worked for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], in the Legal Redress Committee, and also there were some white liberal lawyers who worked with us. There were meetings with the chief of police, meetings with the chief of the fire department because we had just horrible discrimination in the fire department you know. Speaker 1: And again, we're still talking about we're in the middle of a world war, '42 [1942], '43 [1943] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, yes. No, no, this, no as far as the, the black lawyers meeting with the fire department-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --no that occurred in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay, so we got-- Speaker 2: Yeah because I didn't become a lawyer until '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: Oh right, right, okay, okay. But things were, were bad during the--'42 [1942], '43 [1943]? Speaker 2: Yeah the war, the war was going on and blacks were sacrificing their lives-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and they were still being subjected to rank discrimination here at home, and of course worse than that when many of the black soldiers returned after the war, and in the South particularly that they-- Speaker 1: Yeah they, and they would experience Europe or one condition and then come back to these same old conditions (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes absolutely, um-hm. Story_ID: 486191 Speaker 1: At the end of the war [World War II, WWII], '45 [1945], '46 [1946], you decided that you wanted to go to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], that career that you had abandoned back in the late '30s [1930s], what, was there any particular incident that made you decide you wanted to go back to school? Speaker 2: Yes I went to New Orleans [Louisiana] for Mardi Gras, I had a friend there who taught school, Agnes Adams, and I attended a number of parties at the homes of various black professional families, and I became conscious of the fact that in the South at least, and I gather that was true throughout the entire South, there was this tremendous emphasis placed on education. One of these people that, that I met while I was visiting there were all professionals, and now oddly enough in Los Angeles [California] we didn't have that emphasis. There were many very, very successful people here who were not college graduates, and that simply inspired me to go back to school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you applied to USC? Speaker 2: No I didn't. I did apply, but that was after the war-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it was in '46 [1946] and the, not only SC, but UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] were giving preference to the veterans, and if you weren't a veteran you weren't getting in. Speaker 1: Oh boy. Speaker 2: So, the only option open to me was City, Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California], so I went there and the expectation was that if I spent two years there by that time there would not be such an emphasis on the veterans and then I could transfer. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I went to City College and did very well there, and I graduated magna cum laude, and then I was going to go to SC and I found out that I could enroll directly in law school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --and by that time I was getting old, so I thought I'll just save two years and go directly to law school and I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let's go and visit some of your experiences at City College--that's where you went back, and by now, you thought that you might like to become a lawyer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: In fact, I knew, I decided that, when I was in New Orleans. I decided that I would go to law school. Speaker 1: All right okay because of the-- Speaker 2: Because-- Speaker 1: --low number of academically trained successful people here in the City of Los Angeles. Speaker 2: No, no it just so happened that a friend of mine who was a real estate broker, George Cannady [George Edward Cannady], he had gone to Hastings law school [University of California, Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco, California], not Hastings, but Howard-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and he frequently talked about the fact that he, one day he was just gonna stop working in real estate and concentrate on studying for the bar-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and take the bar because he had taken it earlier and he had not passed, but he had not studied. He hadn't devoted himself. It had been a number of years since he'd been out of law school-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and so I was aware of that, and that is what encouraged me to go to law school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, you're in law school [Southwestern University School of Law; Southwestern Law School, Los Angeles, California] and how are you doing scholastically in law school? Speaker 2: Doing fine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah I did, scholastically I did well in all of the schools I attended. Speaker 1: All right. And any highlights from the law school that particularly-- Speaker 2: Yes, the first semester there I kept hearing all of these dire predictions about the fact that, in fact the teachers, some of the teachers would tell you, tell the students, look to your right and look to your left, you know, at the end of your year or at the end of your time here there's only gonna be one of you left. Two of you are gonna flunk out. And I thought, well this is just incredible, why in the world would that sort of negative thought, you know, be imparted to these students? Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 486192 Speaker 1: I then also kept hearing that the passage rate for students--that only one-third of all those that take the bar are gonna pass, two-thirds will flunk. So, and the statistics, you know, supported that claim. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I couldn't understand it. What caused this peculiar situation? You know we all were admitted, we all have background and why is it that two-thirds would flunk? I didn't believe it was the student's fault let's put it that way (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --something was wrong. So, I first talked with the person, her first name was Francesca [ph.]. I don't recall her last name. But, she was in charge of the Los Angeles [California] office of the State Bar [State Bar of California]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I asked her, did she have any understanding as to why the statistics were so, so low as far as the passage rate, and she said the only thing she could think of is that the students aren't being prepared. And it occurred to me that what we needed to do as students was to form a student bar association, and we should make it a point to get to know the members of the board of bar governors so that we could have some communication with them and try to find out what is happening here. Why is this occurring? That didn't make sense to me. And if we are all getting the same quality of education and then also we had, we had two very prominent bar review courses, one was led by a professor of law at SC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] named Wicks [G. Richard Wicks], and another was led by a well-known lawyer by the name of Forrest Cool and his assistant was a Mr. Gilbert [ph.] who was very dynamic, and these courses were extremely popular and well attended and yet the bar results would still be pretty much the same. Once in a while, in fact I just noticed an article in today's paper where the last bar, a higher percentage of students passed for the first, higher than at any time in the last five years. But when I took the bar in '52 [1952], again two-thirds flunked, only a third of us made it. Story_ID: 486193 Speaker 1: We established this student bar association, and we had students, we had representatives from, I think we had three repre- three or four representatives from each of the major law schools, Southwestern [Southwestern University School of Law; Southwestern Law School, Los Angeles, California], Loyola [Loyola Law School, Los Angeles, California], SC [University of Southern California Law School; University of Southern California Gould School of Law, Los Angeles, California], and UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California]. UCLA had just opened their law school and Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], and University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California], and Hastings [University of California, Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco, California] and-- Speaker 2: Now this had nothing to do with race, we were talking about two-thirds of all of the students-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --regardless of race. Speaker 1: Absolutely yeah. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So, we met at SC and in their law school and we organized this student bar. In fact, I have a newspaper clipping dealing with it. And we elected officers, and I was elected as secretary, and we then communicated with the board of bar governors. This is a group that's elected by the lawyers of the state at an annual convention and they set all the rules for the admission to the State Bar [State Bar of California] to become a lawyer here. To practice law, you have to be a member of the State Bar, and you can only be a member by passing the examination. So, we communicated and let them know that we had organized and what our purpose was and we would like to meet with them. So, at the next annual meeting that's in connection with the annual meeting of the lawyers, we met with the board of bar governors, and we discussed our concern, and they in term were very receptive and we formed a very nice relationship with them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we also were very impressed with our then Chief Justice Phil Gibson. So, as an organization we held a dinner here at the Los Angeles Athletic Club [Los Angeles, California], and we honored Chief Justice Gibson with an award for his encouragement, and that was attended by some members of the board of bar governors. I remember one particularly, Herman Selvin was there, and there were others, and I don't know if it did any good or not, but at least it opened up lines of communication and-- Speaker 2: The following year. Speaker 1: It seemed to me that students were unnecessarily intimidated by the bar because of this aura of the fact that this is so, this bar is so tough, you know, that two-thirds of you are gonna flunk and you know it's sort of a brainwashing thing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and so I don't know you know if it did any good, but-- Speaker 2: Over the following years. Speaker 1: --I do know that and when I took the bar there were several members of my class, black members, who did pass as I did on the first time and that's it. Speaker 2: It seems that if they followed up with surveys and that score of the number passing did not raise, then that may not have done any good, so do we know whether that number of people who passed the bar is greater now than it was then? Speaker 1: It has varied, it has fluctuated. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There have been some years when it has been much better. Speaker 2: All right. All right. But again, there you were, active. Speaker 1: Trying to do something, trying to do something. Speaker 2: Trying to do something, not afraid. Speaker 1: It didn't bear immediate fruit, but I just felt something had to be done-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and I still don't understand it. I don't understand why so many students aren't able to pass. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Because some of these people who flunk are very bright people. I mean they've done very well in school you know-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) throughout their entire academic career. Story_ID: 486194 Speaker 1: And I know many boards of bar associations are still trying to figure it out in other parts of the country, states, and so forth-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because it's still there. Some have said it's a cultural difference. I don't necessarily buy that. Speaker 2: No, I don't think that's true, no. It might have been true at one time many years ago, but I see no basis for it now. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And you know our former governor, Jerry Brown, who was exceptionally bright and he graduated from Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], and I'm sure he had top grades there, and he flunked the bar the first time. So, I-- Speaker 1: And there's no cultural (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, so I don't know if it's that students become confident, so confident that they don't study hard for or concentrate their focus-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --on preparing for the bar by taking these bar review courses and take, and taking them seriously. For example, when I took the bar review course, and I took both of them, I took them a year before I was gonna take the bar, during the summer, before I went to the classes, I took both of them, so I got a feel of, you know what this is all about and then when I was preparing to take the bar I took the course again and I was very comfortable with it because I knew exactly what to expect-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and I did very well on my test papers in connection with it, but on that second occasion two of my classmates would--our sessions included night sessions during the week and also all day Saturday. Well on Saturday at noon, they would leave and go to the theater, and they flunked. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they flunked. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: So, I think it's a lack of attention and a lack of focus. Speaker 1: Focus on these. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That could be. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That could be. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you are now an attorney, not an attorney, but you are now in the law school [Southwestern University School of Law; Southwestern Law School, Los Angeles, California] and you're doing very well, and--any particular teachers who helped you or you feel we need to highlight in this-- Speaker 2: No, they were all good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were all just excellent, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. And you participated in the survey, and even though there was no appreciable difference in there, at least you did something, you tried and-- Speaker 2: We tried really. Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: And I don't think to this day there has ever been any real definitive explanation of this unless it is just that some simply don't focus on the bar review, but I'm sure that many students do focus on the bar review and still don't make it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: There's something very strange about it. Speaker 1: There's probably several answers, but no one answer, and they'll probably require more studying. But you finally graduate in what year (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I graduated in February of 1952. Story_ID: 486195 Speaker 1: You have now graduated from USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: No, from Southwestern Law School [Southwestern University School of Law; Southwestern Law School, Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Southwestern, right, Southwestern and the--you are now ready to take your bar and you take it and pass it with flying colors. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. What do you do next? What's your next move? Speaker 2: To open my office. Speaker 1: Okay, you open a private office. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. As a matter of fact, my husband and I owned a property on Western Avenue in the 2800 block in the middle of the block. Before, after taking the bar, I went to our trip to Europe and we were as a matter of fact three days out of New York [New York] when I got a cable gram from my parents [Ada Taylor Hassan and Abdul Hassan] telling me I had passed the bar, so (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh wonderful. I can see though I may have jumped ahead a little bit. There's an event that has happened that we did not discuss. You met someone during those years when you were in the real estate business, or did you meet your husband when you were in--or earlier? Speaker 2: I met him when I was in the real estate business, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and give us his name. Speaker 2: Lorenzo, Virgil was his middle name, Spencer [Lorenzo Spencer]. Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you two meet? Speaker 2: I don't really remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't recall. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I do know that he came into my office, and that may have been the first meeting. He came in to inquire about some property that my father and I were subdividing in Mint Canyon [Los Angeles County, California], which is in the Valley [Santa Clarita Valley, California], and then we thereafter met several times at various social functions. Speaker 1: Okay, well we've seen the pictures of you at that time and you were a very, very attractive lady (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you. Speaker 1: --and so did he ever tell you that it was love at first sight for him (laughter)? Speaker 2: No, he never told me that. Speaker 1: But you later met at several social functions. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I was dating someone else at the time that I first met him-- Speaker 1: And. Speaker 2: --and so was he, and then we later met at the home of the person with whom I subsequently went into law practice with, George Cannady [George Edward Cannady], at his home-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at a party. And for some reason, the chemistry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You noticed it. Speaker 2: --connected, connected, right. Speaker 1: The chemistry was there, it just happened that you noticed it. Speaker 2: Yeah right. Just happened on that particular time, even though we had seen each other for some time prior to that. Speaker 1: Now what was his profession? Speaker 2: He was a real estate broker and his office was down the street from mine. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: He was three blocks away. Speaker 1: Okay, now blacks could not get into real estate broker business organizations. Speaker 2: The realtors. Speaker 1: The realtors-- Speaker 2: Realtors. Speaker 1: --was the black organization right? Speaker 2: They established, they established-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --their own bar--just as the blacks at that time established their own bar association, the National Bar [National Bar Association] instead of the American Bar [American Bar Association], California Bar-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, Langston Bar [John M. Langston Bar Association] instead of the LA Bar [Los Angeles County Bar Association]. Well the brokers did the same thing-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and they--in Los Angeles they established two real estate boards and they eventually merged into the Consolidated Realty Board-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and both Lorenzo and I both belonged to that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as brokers. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had several occasions to come together and one day all of a sudden it hit both of you that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what year did you get married? Speaker 2: We were married in '49 [1949]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: October 15, 1949-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in San Francisco [California]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at the home of my husband's uncle. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the uncle's name, do you remember? Speaker 2: Yes, Roberts [ph.]. Story_ID: 486196 Speaker 1: So once you got married, did he [Spencer's husband, Lorenzo Spencer] join the real estate firm that you and your father [Abdul Hassan] had started? Speaker 2: No, at the time we married I was in law school [Southwestern University School of Law; Southwestern Law School, Los Angeles, California], yes, uh-huh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh okay. Speaker 2: I started law school in September of that same year in 1949-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and in that first semester a month later we decided to marry. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so he remained in the real estate business? Speaker 2: Yes, he remained in the real estate business until his death. Speaker 1: Okay, and then your mother [Ada Taylor Hassan] and your father had the old real estate-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --firm that you had been involved in. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And in the meantime you came out and started private practice. This-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This was not immediate with George Cannady [George Edward Cannady] becoming-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my immediate practice was with George Cannady. Speaker 1: Oh it was, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had intended to open a separate office, but my friend George Cannady owned a building half a block away and had established his practice about two or three years prior to that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I, he asked me to join him and I did, and we had a very happy relationship. Speaker 1: Right. What, what was the address or where was it? Speaker 2: That was 2902 Western Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay, 2902 Western okay. Now 2902 was around what, what was-- Speaker 2: The corner of 29th [Street] and Western which was between Adams [Boulevard] and Jefferson [Boulevard]. Speaker 1: Adams okay, okay, just a black from where Golden State [Golden State Mutual Life Insurance Company, Los Angeles, California] eventually built. Speaker 2: About, they were at Adams and that's about three blocks. Speaker 1: Three blocks okay. Speaker 2: About three blocks north. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And you--did you start to specialize in a particular practice? Speaker 2: Yes, in both real estate law and family law, and I also did a lot of personal injury work. Speaker 1: Okay. Any cases that particularly come back to mind that you might highlight as-- Speaker 2: I don't remember any. Speaker 1: Okay. And George Cannady he practiced, his disciplines were the same? Speaker 2: Yes, he practiced a general--he had a general practice including some criminal law. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. During this period, how long were the two of you partners? Speaker 2: Until my appointment to the bench, until I became a judge in 1961. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So, it was from '52 [1952] to '61 [1961], nine years. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were making a name for yourself during this period though as being a good attorney, fair, but a fighter, which many people--did you do any pro bono work in specific things? Speaker 2: Oh quite a bit. I think all black lawyers with few exceptions did pro bono work. Any civil rights cases, and we had a lot of them where, see notwithstanding the fact that California has had civil rights legislation to protect against discrimination in public places of accommodation-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --since before the turn of the century (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I did not realize that. Speaker 2: Yeah in the 1800s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And notwithstanding that as late as the '50s [1950s] lawyers primarily black lawyers, a few liberal white lawyers, were bringing actions routinely. We were suing restaurants, hotels-- Story_ID: 486197 Speaker 1: You went into practice just two years before the famous [U.S.] Supreme Court de- school desegregation case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --of 1954. Did you participate or, or help or have any role whatsoever out here in California in that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I didn't. No, and to the best of my knowledge the only black lawyer in California, or in Los Angeles [California] at least, who was actively involved in that was Loren Miller. Speaker 1: Okay right. Speaker 2: Yes, Loren was very much involved with Thurgood Marshall in that case. Speaker 1: Okay. Some of your civil rights cases, could we go through them--that may have been hot (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were, no they were just routine-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --discrimination cases. We had again typically someone would call and say that they had a reservation at a hotel or they had a reservation at a restaurant, and they were denied service or the reserve (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, because California-- Speaker 2: Yes, so if they had reserved a banquet room for an event, upon discovering that they were black they were, the reservation was cancelled. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had an action, I filed on behalf of the Consolidated Realty Board whom I represented at that time-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --against the Los Angeles Breakfast Club for that type of discrimination. And as a result of the lawsuit, they dropped the bar and thereafter we had no problem using the facility. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And that was usually the case-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but with reference to some of the restaurants and hotels, there had to be multiple suits. For example, I represented a friend of mine, Dr. Joseph Hayes. He sued the Brown Derby restaurant [Los Angeles, California] three times. And at that time the minimum, by statute, the minimum damages had to be $150, and routinely our judges, keeping in mind that at that time until 1953, we only had one black judge in the whole State of California. In '53 [1953], we had our second-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that was Thomas Griffith [Thomas L. Griffith, Jr.]. Prior to that, we had Edwin Jefferson and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then we finally got our third, and that was David Williams [David W. Williams] and that was in 1956, and our fourth was Bernard Jefferson, the brother of Edwin, and that was not until 1960. And then in 1961, I was appointed and I became the fifth judge, black judge in this state. Well, routinely the white judges, regardless of how egregious the discrimination was in public accommodations, they never gave any plaintiff more than the minimum of $150. Speaker 1: That, you mean any black plaintiff never got more than $150? Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and certainly none of the clients that I represented. And, but that did not deter black lawyers. That's the kind of pro bono work we did, you know. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: We didn't even receive any portion of the $150. They gave that to the client. But, it was-- Speaker 1: But you were dedicated to the, for the proposition (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Not only-- Story_ID: 486198 Speaker 1: We had a, an association of black lawyers called the Langston Bar Association [John M. Langston Bar Association]. At first it was for many years the Langston Law Club because it did not want to affiliate with the Los Angeles Bar [Los Angeles County Bar Association], and I'm not certain that it could have because until probably 1953 the Los Angeles Bar discriminated, and would not admit any black lawyer, and the American Bar [American Bar Association] would not admit any black lawyer and in connection with having organized the student bar association-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I met at one of the meetings with the board of governors, I met one of the members of the board of governors and that was Archibald Mull [Archibald M. Mull. Jr.], M-U-L-L-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --a Sacramento [California] lawyer, and when I passed the bar, even though I hadn't seen him in over a year, he somehow learned that I had passed the bar and he wrote a letter to me inviting me to join the L.A. Bar and the American Bar. So, I called him and told him that in case he wasn't aware, I couldn't imagine he wouldn't be aware, that they both had a history of discriminating against blacks. He said, "Please go ahead and put your application in." So, I did and the American Bar rejected my application. The L.A. Bar admitted me as a member-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I believe I became the first member. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Then I, and then about a month later he telephoned and asked me why had I not applied to the American Bar. I told him I had applied, and I had been rejected. So, he said, please reapply, that he was going to be on the committee, and that the result would be different. So, I did and I was then admitted. Speaker 2: Were you the first-- Speaker 1: I don't, to the best of my, as far as from California-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I know that it was only through his intercession that I was admitted. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I don't know about the rest of the country. Speaker 2: Right, right, but you think that you might have been the first-- Speaker 1: I might have been because they definitely had the policy and that was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the reason why they rejected the first, you know at first. Speaker 2: And there's a greater like, right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I didn't know of any other black member of our community, you know, who had--any lawyer who had been admitted. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Then after that, the Langston Law Club, some of the members did apply and were accepted, and then the club changed its name to the Langston Bar Association and affiliated with the American, I mean with the Los Angeles County Bar. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And had a position then on the board of trustees of the county bar. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And over the years, the county bar changed course completely and ultimately elected a very excellent black lawyer as president, and that was Sam Williams [Samuel L. Williams]. Speaker 2: Okay, who-- Speaker 1: And Sam Williams also became president of the California state bar [State Bar of California]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: And we believe that had he not died at such an early unfortunate age, he would have ultimately become president of the American Bar. He was so well, well respected among all lawyers. Speaker 2: Right, and over the past few years you've had nothing but African American national presidents (laughter). Speaker 1: That's right, exactly. Speaker 2: The--that's a very good history. And you were accepted by the Los Angeles Bar, was that 1950? Speaker 1: I think it was '53 [1953]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --cause I was admitted to practice in September of '52 [1952] and I believe that would have been either been in late '52 [1952] or early '53 [1953]. Speaker 2: Okay, and when you followed Mr. Mull's advice and reapplied for the Cal- for the American Bar Association, that's the national organization. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was that '53 [1953] or '54 [1954]? Speaker 1: That would have been '53 [1953]. Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953] also. Story_ID: 486199 Speaker 1: Let's go back because you mentioned something and I'd forgotten but I wanted to ask you about it. The student bar association. Now you as a law student you had applied for admission and was accepted there. Speaker 2: To the student bar? Speaker 1: To the student bar. Speaker 2: Well, I was one of the founders. Speaker 1: You were one of the founders of that. Speaker 2: And I became one of the first officers-- Speaker 1: Of that. Speaker 2: --of that student bar. Speaker 1: Okay. And the reason the student bar association was founded--this student bar was exclusively African American members? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, no it was, it was integrated. It was based upon representation from each of the law schools. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: You see. Speaker 1: Through the country? Speaker 2: No, throughout California. Speaker 1: Throughout the, throughout California got you okay. If that--(unclear)--. Now you were also the founder of another law group, association, the Black Women Lawyers [Black Women Lawyers Association of Los Angeles]. Tell us about how you came to want to solve that, what you felt was a need there and why? Speaker 2: Well I received a call from Congresswoman Yvonne Burke [HistoryMaker Yvonne Brathwaite Burke]. She told me that the night before the call she had attended a dinner hosted by a group of black women lawyers in Washington, D.C. and that they, and I don't know how much earlier, but they had formed this organization to promote black women in the legal profession-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and she was so impressed with the group that she wanted me to organize a like group here in Los Angeles [California]. So, I immediately felt it was a great idea and that was in the '70s [1970s], and I don't recall the exact year, but I do remember that we, some years ago we celebrated our twenty-fifth year anniversary. And I got in touch with two women--at that time I regularly attended a group of women lawyers, and of course at that time too we only had about five black lawyers when I first started going to these meetings. But, generally I was the only one at the beginning when I started attending these meetings. And then I noticed there were two other young black women who started attending also, and one was Shirley Henderson [Shirley A. Henderson] and the other was Sandra Carter. And Sandra Carter worked for a federal agency and Ms. Henderson was in private practice as I recall. And so after seeing them at three or four of these meetings, we became friendly, and I then when Yvonne talked with me about organizing the group, I talked with them about it, and there were at that time probably about twenty-five young women practicing law from our community, and they knew them, I didn't, and I discussed the idea. They thought it was a wonderful idea, they then started talking with their friends and so we held a dinner meeting and we chartered the organization. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it has been, it's been wonderful. It has grown by leaps and bounds. We have over a hundred members. Speaker 1: And twenty-five years ago. Speaker 2: More than twenty-five years ago. Speaker 1: More than-- Speaker 2: It's probably about, it was in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 486200 Speaker 1: Some of the accomplishments you had made up to just before your appointment in 1961 as a judge, you had begun a long list of accomplishments and actions that would make you name known throughout the state. Do you feel that--who was the governor there in 1961? Who appointed? Speaker 2: Governor Edmund G. Pat Brown. Speaker 1: Pat Brown, the father of Jerry Brown. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And when you were appointed, what was your immediate feeling in 1961? Speaker 2: I was very pleased. I had been active in Democratic Party politics since shortly after I was admitted to the bar [State Bar of California]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I also became very conscious of the fact that as a group we were not, even though we voted heavily Democratic, but we were not making our physical presence known in party circles, and I didn't feel that we had influence commensurate with our numbers and the support that we gave the party, and I felt that it was primarily our fault. And the other thing that bothered me was that white politicians would come into our community for years, primarily Republicans because for many years Republican loc- for local politics and for state politics they were getting the votes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They were getting, we were not always, you know, heavily Democratic voters-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and the unfortunate thing was that they were in effect buying influence through black ministers by giving heavy donations to various churches. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And of course some of that is still going on. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: This current administration has refined it and it's to me, it's one of the most disgusting things that I have encountered and I never thought I'd see this again. So, in the mid-'50s [1950s] I started talking with some of these ministers and pointing out to them how unfair this was to their parishioners because the legislation that was being enacted and the actions taken by some of these Republicans whom they were supporting were diametrically opposed to the needs of their parishioners and our community as a whole. So, I never will forget one of the labor activists in the labor movement, Hank [ph.], what is Hank's last name. I can't remember Hank's last name, but Hank said to me, he said, they know, "Don't you know you're messing with their pork chops (laughter)?" So-- Speaker 1: And you were. Speaker 2: And I was, but you know they came around. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They came, to their credit they came around and they became very active, and I became a strong supporter of Pat Brown. He was then the attorney general. He was a good friend of Leon Washington [Leon H. Washington, Jr.], publisher of the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] and also Carlton Goodlett [Carlton Benjamin Goodlett], publisher of the Sun-Reporter. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: In the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. And so I did my best to get the black ministers to support Pat Brown, and they did. And I also resented the fact that black Democrat, rather, not black, but Democratic, not activists, but people who held leadership positions in the Democratic Party had a rather demeaning attitude toward us in the sense that our votes were for sale if we were, they wanted us to be involved rather than having us make a contribution, you know, we would take from them, therefore they had no respect for us. And I felt that it was time for the leadership in the black community, the professionals, the business people, people who could afford it, to start supporting an organization that would be dedicated to electing blacks to office. At that time, we only had two black elected officers in state legislature, Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] and Byron Rumford [William Byron Rumford, Sr.]. And we had one black person [Monroe Jones] who was elected to the city council in a little small city named Seaside, California. That was it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we had, we had previously elected a black woman [Fay E. Allen] to the board of education [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education] in Los Angeles [California]. Story_ID: 486201 Speaker 1: Here we are, there's a change being, going on in Los Angeles [California] and you're an important part of that. You're working to get more Democrats into the process and at the same time to get more from those that we give our votes to. Go ahead, you were saying that Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] and Rumford [William Byron Rumford, Sr.] was, they were the only two blacks in the state legislature. Speaker 2: Yes, right, and I spoke with Gus, whom I knew well, about the fact that I wanted to organize a Democratic group, and I wanted to try to maximize our strength to involve other minorities, specifically Mexican Americans and Asians. And Gus thought it was a good idea, so I got together with a group of black lawyers and one Asian lawyer and two Mexican lawyers, and we organized the--a group called the Democratic Minority Conference, and we tried to reach out to the Mexican community and to the Asian community. We had limited success in getting any broad support from either. However, we got a lot of support from the black community. A number of black lawyers joined, business people joined, and we, one of the things I was most insistent on is that we do not take any money from the white politicians and also at that time every time a group was organized and if you had a mixture of whites, liberal whites, you were immediately branded as a Communist group. Speaker 1: I remember that. Speaker 2: And I had seen that over and over again. And I thought the only way we're gonna get this whole concept off the ground is to not affiliate, not have as our members liberal whites and some of the members had, their spouse was white, but we all agreed that if we didn't discriminate in this, in this area, we were gonna be red-baited out of existence and have no influence whatsoever. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, as repugnant as that was to us personally and of course it infuriated our liberal white friends and I can understand why, that's what we did. And we also dedicated ourselves to raising our own money. And I remember we had the opening banquet was only fifty dollars a person and that was in 1957. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if you can believe it (laughter) today's dollars, fifty dollars a person shocks some people. You know the idea (laughter), and we opened our headquarters, and I'll show a picture of the headquarters and-- Speaker 1: Wonderful we'd like to see that. Speaker 2: --and we had meetings every Saturday followed by dinner, and some of our dinners were catered, many of them were put on by members. My mother [Ada Taylor Hassan] was a great cook, and she, whenever she was going to be the hostess we had a sellout crowd, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Anyway, it was--it served two purposes. Not only did it give us an opportunity to meet our officeholders, because we invited different ones including whites to the meetings and let them speak, and they in turn gained respect for us because we didn't have our hand out and they recognized that we were a serious group-- Story_ID: 486202 Speaker 1: We then supported for the city council a man by the name of Eddie Atkinson, and he was the first serious black candidate to run for the city council. Speaker 2: Los Angeles City Council (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Los Angeles. And Jesse Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh], who was then the speaker [of the California State Assembly], supported a former assemblyman who was leaving office as an assemblyman, Don Allen [Don A. Allen]. And in the primary our candidate beat Jesse Unruh's candidate and-- Speaker 2: And at that time he was considered one of the strongest-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --people, most influential in the State of California. Speaker 1: Absolutely. So, that made headlines in the major newspapers. And it also angered him tremendously. He became my sworn enemy then and there. Unfortunately, a week or so before the election, it was then between our candidate, Eddie Atkinson, and the incumbent, who was a Republican, and we had a Republican mayor, Poulson [Norris Poulson]. And Poulson came out with a press, in a press conference accusing us of being a radical group [Democratic Minority Conference] and saying that, you know, we were gonna take over city hall, all the scare tactics, and Eddie Atkinson lost by roughly 3300 votes. So, we almost made it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But that was the encouraging thing and a few years later Tom Bradley ran for city council for that same seat-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in the tenth district, and Tom was elected. And prior to Tom's getting elected, Gilbert Lindsay [Gilbert W. Lindsay] was appointed by his mentor, Kenny Hahn, to take the seat that was vacated by Kenny Hahn's brother, that was Kenneth Hahn's brother. And so we then had two blacks in both District 9 [Los Angeles City Council District 9] and District 10 [Los Angeles City Council District 10]. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: That was our first success (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Both of them became legends. Speaker 1: That was our first success. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That, at about that time also we met a young black teacher by the name of Mervyn Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally] who came to our meetings, and was encouraged to run for office. He ran a few years later and got elected to the assembly, and that was the beginning. It was the beginning. Speaker 2: What is still a growing history, successful (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes it is. Speaker 2: --history. Let me go back because during that period, your career is growing. You are becoming well known in your community and now Pat Brown, is he the governor in 1961 or--? Speaker 1: Yes, he was governor. Speaker 2: He was-- Speaker 1: He was elected in 1958. Speaker 2: In '58 [1958]. Story_ID: 486203 Speaker 1: Pat Brown is the governor in 1961, and he elects, chooses you to be the fifth black judge ever in the history of the State of California. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: All right. Tell us how you felt and what your friends around you were expressing to you, and as you began to look that appointment, what you felt? Speaker 2: Well, to go back a bit, at that first meeting that I mentioned of the Democratic Minority Conference we had Pat Brown as our guest speaker, and he was so impressed with the participants in that meeting, and what our mission was and so forth, that at that meeting he spoke to my mother [Ada Taylor Hassan] and I didn't know this, mother never told me until years later, he told her that he was gonna, he said, "I'm gonna make your daughter a judge." And so he wanted to appoint me almost from the--he got elected in '58 [1958], and he wanted to appoint me to the, one of the first vacancies. However, his chief of staff, Fred Dutton, who later became very involved in the John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration, he told him that he couldn't because he would make an enemy of the then speaker, Jesse Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh], because of Jesse's antipathy toward me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so that, that went on for some time and Carlton Goodlett [Carlton Benjamin Goodlett] and Leon Washington [Leon H. Washington, Jr.] and Norman Houston [Norman O. Houston] and also Paul Ziffren who was the California representative, who was our national committeeman from California, and he had appointed me to a number of committees. They were all urging Pat Brown to appoint me anyway, and Pat said he just couldn't afford to. He couldn't because he depended on the speaker to get his program through-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and if he didn't get his program through he would go down as a failure with the governor. He was right; I understood this. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, finally Pat said to me, he said, "Vaino [HistoryMaker Vaino Spencer], why don't you have lunch with Jesse," he said, "he's a hard-headed old Dutchman, but I'm sure that once he gets to know you he will stop being antagonistic towards you." And I said, "I doubt it (laughter), but okay I will do it." So, I called Jesse and invited him to, to lunch, and my husband [Lorenzo Spencer] I met him at a restaurant adjacent to the Democratic headquarters over on Hollywood Boulevard [Los Angeles, California] and at that time Pat had appointed the fourth black to our courts, and that was Bernard Jefferson and that was in--this all occurred in 1960. So, Jesse said, he said, "There's no question about the fact that we need to bury the hatchet because otherwise," he said, "the governor isn't going to give your group anything," and he said, "he isn't gonna give my group anything." He said, "And he'll be reaching out to someone who has never done anything for the party." So, we did bury the hatchet and-- Speaker 1: Okay, at that luncheon. Speaker 2: --and that's right, and then the following year at the next vacancy Pat appointed me. Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, that's how that came about. And then after that my mother said, "Well I knew it all the time (laughter)." Story_ID: 486204 Speaker 1: That seat that he appointed you to was right here in the City of Los Angeles [California] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, on the municipal court in Los Angeles. Speaker 1: On the municipal court okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --all right. And-- Speaker 2: Interestingly enough too, I did not have the support of a lot of the black lawyers. The majority of the black lawyers did not support me. Speaker 1: They wanted someone else? Speaker 2: They wanted a black male. And I arranged a meeting with the governor's appointment secretary in Sacramento [California], rather in San Francisco [California], in conjunction with the meeting of the State Bar [State Bar of California] and at the Fairmont Hotel [Fairmont San Francisco, San Francisco, California], and I arranged to have the appointment secretary, a then judge, come to my suite to meet these representatives from the Langston Bar Association [John M. Langston Bar Association], and they hadn't told me that they had decided to recommend two other people (laughter) and so they said to him that their recommendations were for these two people and they named them, and said, "However, now if you just want to appoint Vaino [HistoryMaker Vaino Spencer] it's all right (laughter)." Speaker 1: Okay, so they gave him permission (laughter), but they had two other males. Speaker 2: They had two other males, right, yeah. One of them had flunked the bar thirteen times, yeah. And some of them worked actively against me. They went to some of the white judges who were strong supporters of mine and tried to convince them that they should not support me. Speaker 1: So, they worked hard against you? Speaker 2: They did, yeah. It was disgraceful really. Speaker 1: Okay, but now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But male chauvinism was very much alive and well in our community at that time. Speaker 1: I can remember, I can remember that. Story_ID: 486205 Speaker 1: But you became a judge, actually of all of the other black judges, all of them males, you became the first black woman judge, and how was it those first few months or few years? Speaker 2: It was fine. Speaker 1: You loved it. Speaker 2: It was fine. I loved the work-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I felt I was making a difference. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I know that it was typical for the newer judges to be assigned to traffic court or to the arraignment court where people come in and plead guilty or not guilty, and then you set it for trial in another court, and so I had those two assignments and I made a lot of friends among lawyers who felt that I was being courageous for years, and I don't know if this is, it may even be true today, but it was felt that in traffic court that even though you came in and plead not guilty that if the officer had cited you, the officer would not have cited you if you were not guilty-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --so there was sort of a presumption of guilt instead of innocence (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You came in guilty, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. And like 85 percent of all cases in traffic court resulted in convictions. So, in my court it was closer to 50 percent-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that infuriated our chief of police. His name was Parker [William H. Parker], who was a notorious bigot really. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, you may remember how he acted during the Watts riots, you know, just a terrible man. So-- Speaker 1: He's noted for being a bigot-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that's his greatest legacy that he's left. Speaker 2: Yes. So, he had his inspectors, they're now called commanders, but that was the highest position under being a deputy chief, and they, he had at least two of them would monitor my courtroom in the traffic court, you know and they, there was a sergeant who was assigned to our court regularly. He was a court officer from the police department, so he was privately very upset with this because he thought that I was being fair and in any event I learned that from a person I knew who was on the editorial board of the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times] who told me that the chief had urged them to editorialize against me and thereby try to defeat me at the next election. Well, it just so happened that one of the defendants that was a reporter, in fact a columnist for the L.A. Times and he had been cited for running a traffic light in the Los Feliz area [Los Angeles, California], and it turned out I found him not guilty. It turned out, I asked for an independent inspection of that intersection because according to the columnist, there wasn't a light at that intersection (laughter), and the officer swore there was. So, the report I got back from an officer of the court who went out to check it out was that the defendant was right. There was no traffic light at the intersection, so I of course found him not guilty. So, he wrote a glowing editorial, the [U.S.] Constitution is alive and well in Judge Spencer's [HistoryMaker Vaino Spencer] court. Speaker 1: Wonderful. Speaker 2: So, needless to say that infuriated Chief Parker (laughter). But, I had a great time there and through my years on the municipal court I served in, on every court-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and I was treated very well generally. The deputies of the prosecutors, however, routinely would try to disqualify me. They have the right, both on each side the defense and the prosecutor, has the right to file an affidavit disqualifying a judge without reason, you can file one without reason-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and they would try it, and I would always go to their superior, who was the elected officer to that court, rather to that office, the city attorney or the district attorney, and tell them that I wished they'd look at the record because if they looked at the record impartially, they would see there was no basis for this and if they persisted I was going to complain publicly about it. And so they did look at the record, and they always backed down, so I was never disqualified. Speaker 1: Wonderful. Speaker 2: Now some of our judges were disqualified because they didn't resist it. Speaker 1: They didn't fight. Speaker 2: They didn't, they didn't. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, they just quietly moved, you know, to another court or else they just simply didn't have that particular case. But, when they would, the district attorney or the city attorney would disqualify you, they would disqualify you from hearing all of the cases that came out of their offices. So, therefore, you could no longer sit in the criminal courts. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 486206 Speaker 1: Now during this period your reputation was growing as a fair judge, very impartial, but also one that would not be bullied, and this helped you, you believe, to move to the next step? Speaker 2: It helped me and it hurt me. It hu- it helped me with a certain segment, and it hurt me with others. Speaker 1: Okay let's go over how and where you felt it hurt you. Speaker 2: Well, I think it hurt me with reference to the conservative judges and the prosecutors who were prone to and did report negatively to me, about me rather, to the appointing authority-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and to the group that was charged with the responsibility of investigating the qualifications of a municipal court judge to see if that person was qualified to be elevated, and needless to say the prosecutors were dead set against me, and my supporters were not strong enough to overcome that objection for some time. Now eventually it switched. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eventually it switched and eventually some of the--for example, when Evelle Younger [Evelle J. Younger] became district attorney, he was a strong supporter of mine. I had tried cases in his court when I was a trial lawyer, and he was a sitting judge before he became district attorney that he had gained respect for me. So, ultimately I had sufficient support to get favorable recommendations from these groups that screened your record and made recommendations to the governor. Speaker 1: So you feel if you had not been such a strong judge and so committed to fairness that you might have moved up the ladder quicker? Speaker 2: Oh, I think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that without question. Story_ID: 486207 Speaker 1: You did eventually move up the ladder. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Tell us that story (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Jerry Brown appointed me and-- Speaker 1: By now Pat Brown was no longer the governor. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And his son-- Speaker 2: And we had, we went through the Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] years-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and during the Reagan years I had some support among some Republicans, but again because of the evaluation process I couldn't get through it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so therefore I did not get an appointment during his eight years in office. And then Jerry Brown came in and he wanted to elevate me to the trial court, okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, eventually I did get a good recommendation. In fact, I got the highest recommendation, which is exceptionally well qualified. Speaker 1: Wonderful. Speaker 2: So, Jerry Brown said to me, "Vaino [HistoryMaker Vaino Spencer], how can you go from being not qualified to being exceptionally well qualified in a matter of months (laughter)?" Speaker 1: And the answer is, in a Republican administration. The, you were a well-known Democratic activist. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Some of that played a role in not being elevated during the Reagan years too (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I think so yes. As a matter of fact, our state senator who represented the entire County of Los Angeles [Los Angeles County, California], Richard Richards, appointed me to, one of his two appointees, to the Democratic state central committee, and I had also been elected previously to the county, Democratic county central committee, and as far as the Republicans are concerned, you know, if you are a member of the county or the Democratic state central committee, you know you, you have to be a wild-eyed liberal. And particularly if you're a black woman you know you must really be crazy (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, a wilder-eyed liberal. Speaker 2: That's the story. Speaker 1: All right. But Jerry Brown did make that appointment. Speaker 2: Oh yes, he did. Speaker 1: You did move up the ladder. Speaker 2: He, and he not only appointed me to the Superior Court [Los Angeles County Superior Court] in 1976, but four years later he appointed me to the position I now hold-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as presiding justice-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of the Court of Appeal [California Court of Appeal for the Second District]. Speaker 1: To the Superior Court in 1976 and then in 1980 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty [1980], um-hm. Story_ID: 486208 Speaker 1: Now what are some of the highlights of your experience there at the Superior Court [Los Angeles County Superior Court]? Any memorable highlights that you care to recall for us? Speaker 2: I can't think of any particular-- Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: Oh I do, I do remember two-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and this goes back even to the municipal court days. I was very interested in having the bail schedule revised because I was appointed to a committee to deal with the bail situation, and as soon as I saw the report listing the amount, dollar amount of bail for different offenses, I noticed that the bail for a rape was 10 percent of that required for burglary. I couldn't believe it. Speaker 1: That doesn't make very much sense. Speaker 2: So, I asked the chair of that committee to put that on the agenda, and at the very first meeting we got that changed. Speaker 1: Oh okay, so everybody-- Speaker 2: And I-- Speaker 1: --had just overlooked it before. Speaker 2: Nobody paid any attention to it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And that was the mindset you know and there were other issues too both, on both courts dealing with women and in the, when I was on the Superior Court particularly in the domestic relations of what we now call the family law courts, there was a total lack of understanding on the part of many male judges, and also later when we got a number of woman judges on these courts, not all women judges were sympathetic to women's issues. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that led us, my friend Justice Joan Dempsey Klein and I who were on both the trial courts. In fact, she joined me on the municipal court in 1963-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we became instant soul mates-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and we worked together on the Superior Court, and she was appointed to this court two years before I was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in '78 [1978]. So in '79 [1979], she and I organized the National Association of Women Judges, and the purpose was to encourage the appointment of more women judges and also to make sure that the women appointed were sensitized so that they would speak up when they witnessed the inequalities that were being perpetrated there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Men judges at that time, the majority, now there were exceptions. I had two wonderful exceptions, who were close friends of mine, but many of the male judges had absolutely no understanding or empathy for the women litigants-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in family law matters. Speaker 1: And yet they were deciding their fate. Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 486209 Speaker 1: Now, we're at the Superior Court [Los Angeles County Superior Court] and you are facing some of the same problems. Being outspoken, fearless, and you're doing your job, and Jerry Brown has appointed you to the Superior Court. You remain at the Superior Court for four years. Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and also I faced a contention, rather an election in '78 [1978] and I got an opponent, and so I had a battle to retain my position in '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay. Against a male? Speaker 2: No, a woman commissioner [Virginia Chernack]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was encouraged to run against me by the administrator of the court because he had a very dictatorial attitude toward the judges. For example, whatever, whatever improvements we wanted for our chambers or for anything else dealing with court management, he had to approve it, and it was well-known that he had favorites who he, whose every request he granted and others who were in his disfavor, who challenged him at all in any way, you know couldn't get anything. So, two of my friends, the two I had mentioned before who were very fair minded judges said to me, "Vaino [HistoryMaker Vaino Spencer], you're a good friend of supervisor Kenneth Hahn," and Hahn as the supervisor, and the courts were under the control of the county supervisors, he can overrule the administrator and thereby give us the things that we need because many of the courts were being neglected physically, the physical plant was being neglected. So, I said fine, and so I called Kenny, who I had known for many years, and who, because he was a good friend of people like, well all of my friends and especially Leon Washington [Leon H. Washington, Jr.]. You know he and Leon were very close, and so I told him what the situation was and he said, "That's no problem, just write me a letter and we'll take care of it." So, I did, and among the things that I wanted done in my chambers, it was a chamber that had previously been used for a different purpose, not a chamber but the courtroom itself. The seats were too close to the well where litigants or witnesses going to the witness box, some would fall and one elderly man fell and hit his head. So, I wanted to have two rows of seats removed to make more space so that that wouldn't happen and we didn't need all of those seats because of the nature of the cases that are tried in that particular courthouse, courtroom rather. Story_ID: 486210 Speaker 1: Kenny Hahn [Kenneth Hahn] ordered it done, and the administrator was very put out about that. So, he encouraged this commissioner [Virginia Chernack], this woman, who had not been able to get appointed to the court [Los Angeles County Superior Court]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and she was very frustrated because of that, so he encouraged her to run and she did. She was a Democrat, but she ran as a Republican, and as a matter of fact she went to a Republican affair, and there were eight of us judges at that time who were being contested and one of the judges, Harry Peetris and his wife Mary [Mary Jo Peetris], were Republicans, and they were at this particular affair and apparently the gimmick was that all the guests were to wear some sort of elephant hat and some sort of-- Speaker 2: To identify themselves. Speaker 1: Yeah, some sort of elephant paper hat in the guise of an elephant head, and so my opponent was there and she had on this elephant hat and Judge Peetris' wife went over and knocked it off her head (laughter), and exposed her as a being a Democrat. And anyway it was just a, it was a rewarding experience in the sense that people who had been jurors in my court would telephone to say that they had gotten--they'd heard her attacks on me on the radio and they had gotten off the freeway and were calling from a pay phone to want to know where my headquarters was, where could they send a contribution, and Leo Branton's wife [Geraldine Pate Branton] and another judge, a lawyer then, Jack Tenner's wife [Hallie Tenner] were my co-treasurers and co-managers, they were everything. They were the treasurer, they were the manager, and I did not hire a consultant at that time, so they both told me that they were just inundated with the contributions. I wound up having so much money that the last month I stopped accepting contributions and requested that they be given to two of the other women who were being contested also-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that helped them not have a deficit, otherwise they were gonna have a deficit. So, it worked out fine, but it was an experience I wouldn't want my worst enemy to go through. Speaker 2: It sounds like it was a real experience. I notice that you received favorable comment from a number of prominent people here in Los Angeles [California], and the one by Joe Cerrell, a person I happen to know, says that she has served the law and the community with exemplary distinction, competence, knowledge of the law, and perhaps above all with strict impartiality and a deep felt compassion for the people who have appeared before her. Now that's quite a compliment. You couldn't get much better than that so obviously your reputation was growing in a very positive way-- Speaker 1: It was. Speaker 2: --and so those who were against you had quite a hill to climb and this competitor in 1978 that you had to run against simply seems to me had no chance, especially when you have donors trying to go off the freeway to make a donation. Speaker 1: I won by sixty thousand votes. Speaker 2: Wow and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --percentage wise, what did sixty thousand represent about? Speaker 1: Four percent. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 486211 Speaker 1: We get to 1980 and Jerry Brown decides that you've done a very good job at the, in the Superior Court [Los Angeles County Superior Court], and so therefore he appoints you to another post. Tell us what that post is? Speaker 2: That's the post that I now hold, which is the presiding justice of the court of appeal for the second appellate district [California Court of Appeal for the Second District] which covers four counties, Los Angeles [Los Angeles County, California], Ventura [Ventura County, California], San Luis Obispo [San Luis Obispo County, California], and Santa Barbara [Santa Barbara County, California] and we have thirty-two justices in this district. There are four in each of the eight divisions. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at this time we have in addition to myself one other black justice, Candace Cooper, who also served on the Superior Court and the municipal court. She was appointed by Jerry Brown to the municipal court, and by Duke, Governor Deukmejian [George Deukmejian] to the Superior Court, who was a Republican-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and then by Jerry Brown to the current position that she holds. At this time, we only had one other black on the appellate court in California and that's Vance Raye [Vance W. Raye], who is a Republican, who was appointed by Pete Wilson [sic.] for whom he worked as a member of Wilson's cabinet, and he serves in Sacramento [California], which is our third district. Speaker 1: Okay, all right the, you've served as presiding judge since 1980? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and so that's twenty-six years so far. Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact on the 20th [November 20, 2006], Monday, I celebrated my forty-fifth year as a judge. Speaker 1: As a judge. Speaker 2: Twenty-six of those as a justice here. Speaker 1: You must be doing something right (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, I hope so. I'm looking forward to retiring. Speaker 1: Let's--and when do you plan to retire? Speaker 2: I would like to retire next year-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --but it's depending upon who my successors will be-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and I very much want to see another, a black person appointed to this court. Speaker 1: All right, all right, and you're very much like Justice John Paul Stevens, you're going to stay until you get an adequate replacement. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Wonderful, wonderful. I admire your constitution. Story_ID: 486212 Speaker 1: Let's talk about those twenty-six years that you've had here, some of the highlights that you feel may be the highlights of your career. Speaker 2: Well, there's one case that I'm very proud of and that's the case of L.A., Mary M. [Mary M. v. City of Los Angeles, 1991]. This lady was a motorist, and she was stopped by a Los Angeles Police Department patrolman [Leigh Schroyer] and she was persuaded to let him follow her home where he raped her. And that was the first case of that type that I was aware of. We subsequently learned that there were several others that occurred in San Diego [California], which resulted in the conviction of the officer involved in that. But in my case, the woman sued in a civil court for damages. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: I don't remember the exact year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can get that for you, okay. As a matter of fact it's referred to in that article-- Speaker 1: All right, good. Speaker 2: --and that gives you the citation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The, historically whenever there has been a case of abuse, brutality by an officer, for example if the jury or judge finds in favor of the plaintiff, believes that the officer did indeed commit the act that he's accused of doing, that the damages are binding not only on the office, not only against the officer, but that the city, the employer, City of Los Angeles [California], is also liable. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in this case, the trial court found that the city was not liable. Somehow or another the trial court made a distinction between physical brutality where an officer beats someone and rapes someone. So, we got the case on appeal and I wrote the opinion. I wrote, rather I wrote a dissenting opinion because two of my colleagues, two of my male colleagues, took the position that the trial court was right and the supreme court [Supreme Court of California] adopted my dissenting opinion and thereafter it was always, it's a matter of established law now, conduct of that nature is just as reprehensible and of course in my opinion it's even more reprehensible than the garden variety police brutality. So, the city of course whenever confronted with this type of case in the future would negotiate a settlement-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --if the evidence was strong. Speaker 1: Let me just go over that just a little bit. So, the case came before the appellate court [California Court of Appeal for the Second District] here and there was a two to one ruling with your two colleagues ruling against the lady-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and you ruling for her-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that case then went on to the U.S. Supreme Court. Speaker 2: No, to the California supreme court. Speaker 1: Oh, to the California, okay, the California supreme court and-- Speaker 2: Right. And the city then did not appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court. It accepted the validity of the position taken by the California supreme court, and that has remained the law ever since. Speaker 1: Right, right, and looking over some of the commendations that you have received I notice one from a U.S. Supreme Court member [sic.], again someone that has been favorably cited, and that's Supreme Court Justice Stanley Mosk and when he says with her, referring to you, "With her quiet dignity, Justice Spencer [HistoryMaker Vaino Spencer] has been an admired member of the judiciary for the past three decades," and so obviously he was an admirer of yours also. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Not insinuating that that would influence his decision, but just calling attention to the number of admirers that you have because of your work here in the courts. Any other highlights? That's a very good one. Speaker 2: No, it, it has been a rewarding experience. Story_ID: 486213 Speaker 1: The Geronimo Pratt case, which was an extremely important case throughout the country. Can you just give us a brief background on that-- Speaker 2: Surely. Speaker 1: --prior to your getting it here at this level? Speaker 2: Yeah, in the early '80s [1980s] that case first came to our court [California Court of Appeal for the Second District] and it was an appeal from an opinion written by Judge Parker, Kay Parker [Kathleen Parker], for whom I had a great deal of respect, and Johnnie Cochran was the attorney for Mr. Pratt, and I was not a member of that panel. The panel consisted of two of our longtime justices and a third judge who was sitting with us by assignment. He was the trial judge. He was here only temporarily. And the majority ruled against Mr. Pratt, upholding the trial court's opinion that there was no justification for overruling the conviction. And Judge Dunn [George Dunn], who wrote the dissenting opinion, which I thought was brilliant, took a very strong position that there were multiple grounds for overruling Judge Parker's opinion and that without doubt Mr. Pratt had not received a fair trial. Speaker 1: Could you just go back into some of the basic facts of the original case for us, just for the people who can listen? Speaker 2: Right, Mr. Pratt was a member of the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] in Oakland [California], and he was accused of a terrible crime that was committed there. His defense was that he wasn't even in Oakland at the time, but he was in Los Angeles [California]. There was a great deal of evidence to support that defense that he was indeed in Los Angeles. There was also evidence to support the defendant's contention that he was the victim of a police frame up. That they were using evidence that they had received from two of his enemies. There was a feud going on for leadership of the Black Panthers, and they had received and they were using highly suspicious evidence to convict him and not everything that was in his favor was brought out at that time because it was not known to the defense. So, for that reason, he was convicted. The jury, and keeping in mind too that for years, and I'm not sure that that is not true to some extent even now, jurors are inclined to believe the prosecutor over the defense. The theory is that a person is innocent until proven guilty. That's the theory, but many jurors cannot conceive, and particularly white jurors cannot conceive the fact that officers would lie, or that alleged friends or associates would conspire to have a person convicted. They can't conceive of it. So, the burden really, even though technically it belongs on the prosecution's shoulders, in the minds of the average white juror, it's the burden of the defense to prove, to prove his innocence, see. Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --right. Story_ID: 486214 Speaker 1: The case, however, lingered, and Johnnie Cochran and others working on behalf of the defense, and they were working pro bono, they tried for years to unearth additional evidence to get the case reopened even after on appeal it had been, the conviction had been confirmed. And I'll give you a copy of the dissenting opinion that Judge Dunn [George Dunn] did, which I felt was brilliant. So, finally Johnnie Cochran and his team discovered additional evidence. For example, one of the witnesses against Pratt [Geronimo Pratt] had lied and that was known to the prosecutor, and the prosecutor had failed its duty to make that known to the defense. They concealed it from the defense, and it was on that basis that Cochran and his associates were able to get a judge. The case was moved out of Los Angeles County [California] to Orange County [California] because of the sensitivity and because of the involvement of the prior judge. So, this new judge in Orange County who had a reputation of being a very conservative judge, when confronted with this new evidence that the defense had not gotten a fair trial because the prosecutor had withheld this vitally important evidence, which could easily have made a difference. That was--so he granted, he set aside the conviction and granted a new trial. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so the matter then came to my court [California Court of Appeal for the Second District], and I received the case together with two of my colleagues and we upheld the trial court saying that without doubt Pratt had not gotten a fair trial. Well, the-- Speaker 2: Was it unanimous? Speaker 1: It was unanimous, right, and the Supreme Court [Supreme Court of California] affirmed that, and the prosecutor then took the position that it would not retry the case, and I'm glad because it was a terrible, terrible miscarriage of justice. Speaker 2: And a stain on California justice (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, and it was settled, I think, for about $4 million as I remember. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But that poor man spent all those years, over twenty-five years in prison for something that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Four million or--no amount of money. Speaker 1: But no amount of money-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --would compensate for that. Speaker 2: I would agree. You've looked at a lot of cases, some here in California, but I imagine you've seen some cases, just read about them in other states, and the number of times where you've seen prosecutors hide evidence that they fully are aware of and, or simply don't acknowledge that DNA results have formed a--taken us down another road-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --and, and so forth. Story_ID: 486215 Speaker 1: How do you account for prosecutors who feel it is their duty to convict more, that that is more important than meting out justice to the client, how, regardless of how much they dislike these people as an individual? Speaker 2: It's a middle state that it used to be pervasive both in prosecutors' offices and on the part of many judges, many judges, including years ago some black judges, you know, who just absolutely, in fact some prosecutors would rather try death penalty cases before some black judges than before some white judges. So, but things are changing, things are changing. But, it depends on the, it just depends on the mindset. For example, we have a former justice of our court of appeal, I mean our Supreme Court [Supreme Court of California] here, and I dislike criticizing another woman, particularly a black woman, but I can think of any number of white judges I would rather have if I were a defendant in a criminal case than I would this particular black woman because she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And more and more people, yeah. Speaker 2: --has, she just has that mindset, you know. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Clarence Thomas is another one. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know just some of his opinions are just so incredibly ludicrous. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: A total lack of any sensitivity for the human condition regardless of race. Speaker 1: Now, I may be asking you a question you can't answer, but I was trying to find out why black judges might want to be accepted more in their community, but compromise common sense and not my--the Clarence Thomas case in which he felt that a person being mentally incompetent should still stand trial and so forth (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's just, just incredible and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and his turning a blind eye to prison abuse. Speaker 1: Prison abuse is another one. Speaker 2: Just terrible opinion. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It boggles my mind you know how anybody, any, regardless of color, conditions, or anybody could possibly make that kind of decision. Speaker 1: And did we not see the same thing in the O.J. Simpson case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995], regardless of whether O.J. was guilty or innocent. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We're not talking about that as much as we're talking about the nation's black community knew this police officer [Mark Fuhrman] was not telling the truth, and the white community was just as sure that this officer was not lying. Story_ID: 486216 Speaker 1: Where we left off was in the judges in your profession who don't have the courage to make the right judgments and defer because of political considerations that they may be threatened by. And is there a way that we can, A, get more judges who will have the courage to make fair decisions, and get a court system that is more diversified and reflective of this, the people who live in this great country of ours? Speaker 2: Yes, I believe strongly that if more public support were available to judges. If judges could be confident that when they make a correct, fair, just decision that may be unpopular with certain segments of society that they're not gonna be the victim of an attack that may result in their being removed from the court. Now there are groups in this country and have been for a long time that are determined to try and make the judiciary do their bidding, that want to rob us of all sense of independence so that instead of dealing on the basis of the facts and the law, we will deal on the basis of catering to some ideology. And unfortunately, these groups are very well organized, very well financed, and work diligently to accomplish their purpose, which is to undermine completely the independence of the judiciary. And we saw it with reference to even our [U.S.] Congress in the case of this poor woman who was on life support you know and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Schiavo [Terri Schiavo]. Speaker 2: Schiavo case, right, and I don't know if you, you are aware that recently our former justice of the [U.S.] Supreme Court, Sandra Day O'Connor has been travelling throughout the country speaking out about the need to protect judges from being unfairly attacked, and the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times], for example has done a very good job whenever there has been an attack on our supreme court [Supreme Court of California] justices or on our appellate court or even the trial court, they have editorialized in support of the judge if the judge's position was correct-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in accordance with the law regardless of the hysteria. And on these hot-button issues like abortion for example, people simple don't care about the law and they don't care about how right or wrong, you know, the facts are in the case. For example, in abortion cases where there are these groups that insist upon parental consent. They don't seem to care, and I can't believe they don't know, about the large number of cases that result in teenage pregnancies are the result, the direct result of incest or other family abuse, whether it's by the father or by some male relative, and what young girl is going to go to the very people who are responsible for her condition, frequently where the mother is aware of the facts, aware of the incest, aware of the abuse, and lives with that condition and does nothing about it. Now why should that young girl be put in a position of either going to these very people who have abused her or suffering an unwanted pregnancy? Speaker 1: Right, right. So, a part of the problem is in some of our publications, and newspapers or information sources, not giving the public the full facts. Because I believe we do have a fair citizenry that is simply misinformed or not informed at all. Speaker 2: They are, and you know I don't know that I have ever read an article that articulates the reason why these laws should not be enacted, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But then there are people--obviously anyone should have sense enough to know without being told that a person, a woman should not be compelled against her will to carry to birth a child born as a result of rape or incest. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You shouldn't have to be told that. You know it's so obviously wrong if the woman decides not to do it. And yet we get this all the time. Speaker 1: Right. The amount of chauvinism that still exists in this country (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It does definitely. Speaker 1: --is responsible for a large part of it. Story_ID: 486217 Speaker 1: Now you mentioned groups out here trying to force the courts into their way of thinking. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Would you include the Federalist Society [Federalist Society for Law and Public Policy Studies] as among those who are--the Federalist Society is the one in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yes, I know. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. I definitely would. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think they're a great detriment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm very disappointed that two of our current [U.S.] Supreme Court justices, you know, are supportive of the Federalist's positions. Speaker 1: Are members of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --of that group. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. That's very frightening. Speaker 1: It is, it is. The--someone had suggested that the way to make judges more independent is to give them lifetime appointments. Do you feel this might be a reasonable solution to the constant threats that judges are under? Speaker 2: No question about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we have in most, if not all states, and I certainly know we have a strong one in California, a commission on judicial performance, and their responsibility is to investigate any complaints against a judge, determine whether there is any validity to it, if there is not, if it's obviously a false claim, they do not put the judge through the expense of a, what is in effect a trial, which is always conducted before three independent magistrates that are appoint- judges who are appointed to hear it who are always from a different jurisdiction, and if it appears to have legs, they then will subject a judge to a full-fledged trial on it, which is very expensive for the judge. In fact in California now, we have an insurance plan that judges can rely on provided they take certain ethical courses regularly, and our system has worked. Whenever there has been any legitimate claim against a judge, that judge has been removed or disciplined commensurate with whatever the offense is. Now, as long as we have that, and of course at the federal level we have the impeachment process, if a judge who is wrong, acts illegally, unethically, that judge can be removed. That should be the only reason to remove the judge. Therefore there is no reason not to have lifetime tenure for the state judge, just as we have for the federal judges. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And that is the only way you're going to be assured of getting uniformly fair decisions. Speaker 1: Okay. The-- Speaker 2: And I don't know if you are aware of the tremendous expense that judges have to go through in defending themselves in litigation, not litigation, but in contested elections that are brought about by some group, you know, who's unhappy with them for some decision, and then they will support an opponent to run against that judge, putting the judge to the terrible expense of combating that attempt to remove him or her. And in order to raise that money, who are the people that are interested in the judiciary? Only lawyers. So, then we have to go to lawyers and ask them to support us with money. That creates the impression of a bias-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --towards the lawyers that are the donors-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and that means that if that impression is there, then if we have to remove ourselves from a case, you're not able to function. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So, you know it's a Catch-22 situation. Speaker 1: I was not aware of that. Is that, that's unique to California or other states (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, that we have a commission? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: No, no. There are many states and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I think every state. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I had heard in the last election that we just finished I believe it was North Dakota or one of the mountain states in which there was a proposition on the ballet in which any judge's decision could be contested and that judge could be sued over a decision. Speaker 2: That's right, yeah in a private lawsuit, yeah. Speaker 1: That's ridiculous. Speaker 2: It's either South Dakota or North Dakota. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It's one of the Dakotas. Speaker 1: It was one of those. Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact, there are several ballots of that, several propositions and ballots of that type all aimed at defeating the independence of the judiciary, and that's exactly what Sandra Day O'Connor has been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Travelling. Speaker 2: --trying to warn the country about, yeah. Speaker 1: Well I pray that she is successful. Story_ID: 486218 Speaker 1: Wanted to just go back over those twenty-six years. We've cited the Geronimo Pratt case. Were there other cases that you would call our attention to that would be highlighted in your career? Speaker 2: I can't think of. I'm sure there are-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I can't think of any. There are so many cases. Almost every year there is a case where you go home feeling good-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --about the fact that you have really stopped an injustice, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you can do that every year, that's very good, and-- Speaker 2: Well you can definitely, and sometimes, many times and there're cases that don't attract or are not of great interest to the general population, but are vitally important interest to the litigants. Speaker 1: Right, right, and we need to know more. The general public needs to know more of what those cases are and what is at stake in those cases. Speaker 2: Right. You know I am glad you mentioned that. I'll suggest to our, our administrative presiding judges and I think that maybe if we're all conscious of the need to document some of these cases we will do so. Otherwise, as time goes on we forget them now--- Speaker 1: Right, all right. Speaker 2: --because to us, you know, almost every case is important. Story_ID: 486219 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered, your career remembered if you should retire next year? How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered for two things, and that is one as a co-founder of the National Association of Women Judges. That has done wonders. There were, when we organized, Justice Klein [Joan Dempsey Klein] and I organized that association in 1979, we had approximately 150 women judges in the entire country. We had many states were there had never been a woman judge, and we had some where there was only one, and now we have well over 1500. We have women judges sitting on supreme courts in a number of our states where at that time we only had three, and now also we have a support group so that if a woman judge or justice makes an opinion that is right on the law, right on the facts, but unpopular, and someone opposes her at an upcoming election, we have a support group that is there to help her. Speaker 1: Wow, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, and that helps assure the independence of the judiciary or least as far as that judge is concerned. Secondly, out of that organization came the International Association of Women Judges. Now we have an organization that has members from all over the world, from Africa, from Middle East countries, from South American countries, from Canada, from Britain, from Europe, and these women come together just as we did in California. When we had the first meeting here in California, we had women coming from the Deep South, judges. I never will forget Mattie Belle [Mattie Belle Davis], was from Florida, and she had this deep southern accent, and here she was in a room with about 112 other women including some very young black women from Detroit [Michigan]. They became instant good friends. That was the--I tell you we were hugging and crying. It was such an emotional time for us, and that has been, as far as Joan Klein and I are concerned, that has been one of our greatest accomplishments. And for me, another has been the founding of the Democratic Minority Conference, whose objective was to elect more black officials to public office, and we succeeded in that. So, so those two things I feel are just the most important things that I have ever done. And thirdly is, I think I have made a difference on the court. I think I have influenced my colleagues at every level to be more sensitive to, to the needs of people, to be less critical, and to by all means do what we think is right regardless of our antagonists. That's it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was listening and had no idea of the number of now women involved in, you said from 159 to 1500-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but when we compare that number, even though 1500 is a large number, but when we compare to a percentage are we talking about that being about 10 percent or 20 percent? Speaker 2: It's too small a percentage. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. We, we have actually, we have 1500 members, but there are far more than 1500 women judges. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: Not all of the women judges belong to the organization. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: And interestingly enough a lot of the Republican women judges are antagonistic to the association. Yeah, but then also we have a lot of Republican members. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just as I mentioned Sandra Day O'Connor was a charter member, see, and she was of course a Republican legislator in Arizona. Speaker 1: Right. But one of the people who grew in their job-- Speaker 2: No question about it. Speaker 1: --Justice Black [Hugo Black] did that on the U.S. Supreme Court. Speaker 2: Yeah, right absolutely. Speaker 1: I guess Warren, not Warren Burger, but Justice Warren [Earl Warren] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Justice Warren, um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: --did that also, so you're always encouraged when you see people who grow on the, on the court. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 486220 Speaker 1: I wanted to make sure that--am I leaving out anything that I need to ask you about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so. I (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 1: Have I been thorough? Speaker 2: Very thorough. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: And it's been a pleasure to meet you. Speaker 1: Oh well, it's been a pleasure to meet you. I just had no idea--let me just close out by making sure that I don't have anything else. What do you plan to do in retirement? Speaker 2: Nothing (laughter). Speaker 1: I know that won't happen. You're too much of an activist. You'll be out there regularly (laughter). Speaker 2: No, I don't think so (laughter). Speaker 1: But, we're very, very happy (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I'm gonna leave that to all of the young people that I will try to encourage them. Story_ID: 486221 Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the delegates to the first convention of the National--and founding of the National Association of Women Judges. It was taken in September of 1979 at the Westwood Marquis Hotel [Los Angeles, California] and there were 112 women from all over the country that met for the purpose, and they all were of course charter members. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Now did you want to identify yourself in the photo? Speaker 1: Yes, in the center is, in the first row, is Rose Bird, the then chief justice of the California supreme court [Supreme Court of California], and to her right I am seated, and to her left Justice Joan Dempsey Klein is seated. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay and ball point those people out just to make sure we can verify we have the correct one. So, if you wanna point out the chief justice? Speaker 1: Chief justice, right there in the center, that's her, and I am to her right and Joan Klein is to her left. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We, also our convention there's, our convention is to do it with reference to the viewer's perspective. So you would just say viewer's left, viewer's right. Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, you say the viewer's right or the viewer's left. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead, description for this photo. When and where. Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken in Washington, D.C. in one of the congressional buildings, and it was taken in the late '80s [1980s] at a meeting of women elected officials in the federal government, and it depicts, to the viewer's left I'm standing, and in the center is justice, Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the United States Supreme Court that is, and then to the viewer's right, Presiding Justice Joan Dempsey Klein, and we were of course all very involved in the California--rather in the National Association of Women Judges. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This was a meeting, rather this was at the same meeting in Washington, D.C., and Justice Klein and I are adjacent to our then newly-elected United States Senator [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun, and she was of course the first black woman and the only black woman to ever serve in the U.S. Senate. Speaker 2: Again, this was taken at the same meeting as the previous two, and Justice Klein and I are adja- standing next to our first woman attorney general, Janet Reno, thank you. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us about this one. Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 1968 when Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was seeking the Democratic nomination travelling in California. And next to Bobby, to the viewer's right is then Congressman Augustus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] and to the viewer's left next to Bobby is Wiley-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: It's Spencer Wiley, an official of the United Auto Workers [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America (UAW)]. I am to his, to the viewer's left of Spencer Wiley, and to the far left is assemblyman, rather Congressman Gus Hawkins' brother. Speaker 1: This photograph was taken at my residence, and it was taken approximately 1957 or '58 [1958] in Los Angeles [California], and it is a meeting to introduce the speaker from, an attorney from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And in the far, to the viewer's far left is famous civil rights attorney, Leo Branton [HistoryMaker Leo Branton, Jr.]. Speaker 2: This photograph was taken in the early '60s [1960s], and it depicts in the center the famous singer and actor Paul Robeson. That was taken to raise consciousness of the problems that he was having at that time. Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1960, and it depicts to the viewer's far right the then lieutenant governor of California, Glenn Anderson [Glenn M. Anderson]. I am next to Glenn Anderson, and next to me is Congressman Henry Gonzalez [Henry B. Gonzalez], the first Mexican American congressman from Texas. And next to him is the famous actress Bette Davis, and next to her is Henry Lopez, who was a candidate for the California secretary of state, and next to him is Lee Anderson [Lenore Dutton Anderson], the wife of the lieutenant governor. Speaker 2: Okay, this photo was taken in 1985 when then Attorney General Edmund G. Brown [Jerry Brown] was campaigning for the position of governor of the State of California at a luncheon that I arranged at the Wilfandel Club [Wilfandel Club House] on West Adams [Boulevard] in Los Angeles. I am standing in the center. Pat Brown is, is to my immediate left or to the viewer's right. Story_ID: 486222 Speaker 1: Next to Pat Brown is the Dr. John Somerville [John Alexander Somerville] who a number of years ago in, in 1930s established, built the famous Dunbar Hotel [sic. Hotel Somerville, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead with this description please. Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in 1968 in connection with Bobby Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy] campaign for the Democratic primary or in the Democratic primary for president, and to the viewer's right is then State Senator Mervyn Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally] who went on to [U.S.] Congress of course and now is again in the assembly [California State Assembly]. And I don't know the gentleman sitting, rather to the viewer's left, and I am to the viewer's far left. Speaker 2: That picture was taken in 1960 when then Senator John Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] campaign for president having been nominated by the Democratic Party, and I arranged a mass meeting for him at the Elks temple on Central Avenue in Los Angeles [California]. The meeting attracted hordes of people. They were lined up in the street for three blocks. The street had been closed to accommodate them. Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in September 1952 in the supreme court [Supreme Court of California] chambers of the Supreme Court chief justice, that's of California, in Sacramento [California]. I'm sorry in San Francisco [California], and I am being sworn in as a member of the California state bar [State Bar of California] by the clerk of the court. Speaker 2: This photograph was taken in the late '80s [1980s] at the hall of administration, which has now been renamed as the Kenneth Hahn County Hall of Administration [sic. Kenneth Hahn Hall of Administration, Los Angeles, California] in honor of the late supervisor. He is pictured with me and with Justice Klein [Joan Dempsey Klein]. He was a very close friend of both of ours. Speaker 1: That picture was taken in 1982 in New York [New York] at the Astor Hotel [sic.] where the National Association of Women Judges held its third annual meeting. I am pictured with Justice Sandra Day [Sandra Day O'Connor]-- Story_ID: 486223 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The person on the viewer's left is Ju- Presiding Justice Joan Dempsey Klein of the California Court of Appeal [California Court of Appeal for the Second District]. The person in the center (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) We got those. Speaker 1: We have those. And this was the occasion where I as president-elect assumed the position of president of the association. And Sandra Day O'Connor gave the principal speech. Speaker 2: This photograph was taken in the spring of 19--I think it was May of 19--I'm sorry 2005 and marked the one hundredth anniversary. I correct myself. That was 2004 and marked the hundredth anniversary of the establishment of the court of appeal in California. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you repeat the date for me on that. Speaker 2: Yes it was in, I believe, May of 2004. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Yeah. This was taken in 1959 at my home in Los Angeles [California], and seated on the floor to the viewer's right was then Senator Richard Richards, state senator for the County of Los Angeles [Los Angeles County, California]. To his right is his wife and next to her is Geraldine Branton [Geraldine Pate Branton], the wife of famous civil rights lawyer, Leo Branton [HistoryMaker Leo Branton, Jr.]. I don't recall the name of the gentleman next to her, but following that is Jerry Pacht, an old friend, who together with myself was appointed by Senator Richards as his two representatives on the Democratic state central committee, and next to Jerry Pacht is Almena Lomax, publisher of the Los Angeles Tribune. Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in November of 1976 when I--and depicts the occasion when I was sworn in as a judge of the Superior Court [Los Angeles County Superior Court]. My mother [Ada Taylor Hassan] is, has robed me together with my friend Gilbert Kenner, who was the co-founder of the Democratic Minority Conference, and my mother is hugging me there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Go ahead. Speaker 1: This photograph was taken here at the court of appeal in our main conference room, and the occasion was a luncheon that I gave to honor our chief justice, Ronald George [Ronald M. George], who is in the center of course. This is a time when he was being attacked by some right wing groups for an opinion that he authored for the California supreme court [Supreme Court of California] striking down the proposition that required minor girls to get parental consent for abortions. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in December 1991 and depicts one of my closest friends on the court, Presiding Justice Arthur Gilbert, who is the presiding justice of Division Six [California Court of Appeal for the Second District, Division Six], and that court sits in Ventura [Ventura County, California], and he and I served on the municipal court as well as on the superior court, and then he joined me on the appellate court in 1982. Speaker 2: This picture was taken in November of 1961, and depicts then supreme--California supreme court justice Louis Burke administering the oath of office to me and to the other judges assembled there following our appointment to the municipal court. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This photograph was taken of me in 1940, April of 1940 on the occasion of the opening of my real estate office together with my father [Abdul Hassan]. Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in the early part of 1990s [1990s], or the latter part of 1980s [1980s]. The little boy there is the son of doctor, the two doctors, Roberta [Roberta Ritter] and Minton Ritter, and in the center I am his godmother. The little boy is now in medical school, and his name is Harry [Harry Ritter]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in the mid-1990s, where I am congratulating supervisor Kenneth Hahn, who had just been honored on the occasion. Speaker 2: This is another photograph of Justice Klein and myself with Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor at one of our numerous meetings. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the first president of Ghana following its liberation from British rule, and depicts the first president, Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, his wife [Fathia Nkrumah], who was the sister of the president of Egypt, President Nasser [Gamal Abdel Nasser], and the vice president of Ghana. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in the 1950s and was taken at the Pacific Town Club [Los Angeles, California]. It depicts Althea Gibson, who had just won or had recently won the champion--tennis championship at Wimbledon [The Championships, Wimbledon, London, England]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wimbledon, you mean? Speaker 1: No, I can't think of it. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wimbledon. Speaker 1: Wim- yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In England? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And seated next to her is Chet Washington [Chester L. Washington], publisher of the Los Angeles Wave newspaper chain [Central News-Wave Publications]. Next to him is the famous singer, Nat King Cole, and on the far right, the viewer's right, is my husband, Lorenzo Spencer. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me and my husband on the occasion of our wedding in San Francisco [California] on October 15, 1949...