 Story_ID: 66714 Speaker 1: I start out, I ask everyone five questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There's no relevance to them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's jambalaya (laughter). Every time I go to New Orleans [Louisiana], I try to have my fill of jambalaya. I enjoy that. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Unquestionably, Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. We went there for seventeen years straight. I enjoyed it. My wife said it was almost like being at home, when you rent a house, and you have to cook and so forth and so on. She'll only go back if we stay at a hotel, which we can do now. We don't have the children. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I think the fall. I love the fall, the changing of the seasons, the leaves, and I like driving to see those changing leaves and the foliage. Speaker 1: And favorite color? Speaker 2: Hum, blue . And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: Oh, I love to go to the office and say, "This is another day that the Lord has made", particularly on gray days when people feel a little down. And I have been known to do a little dancing jig to boost people's spirits, and they look at me like I'm sort of nutty. Story_ID: 66715 Speaker 1: Okay, Professor, I'm gonna, we're gonna start, and I usually like starting when you're young- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And I wanna ask about your parents. We saw a picture of your mother. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I'd like you to tell us her name and tell us about her family. What, you know, her parents, and where she was from? Speaker 2: My mother, Dorothy Jackson Smith, was born in [Tillery] North Carolina. She was one of three girls born to Fiffie Jackson and my grandfather [Charles Jackson], both of whom died when my mother was relatively young. My grandfather on my mother's side died when she was very young. And my grandmother died when my mother was twelve or thirteen. I can't remember. But they had gone out into this little country town to take care of my mother's grandmother, who was born in Sierra Leone. And therefore, my knowledge of what went on in slavery came in bits and pieces from these memories of my mother, of her grandmother. And it also came from my father's side because the only grandparent that I knew was my father's mother. My mother and her three sisters--two sisters were very close. The loss of the father. My grandmother married again. My mother had a stepfather. And when my grandmother passed away, my mother at age twelve or thirteen assumed, really, responsibility for her two sisters. And consequently, when my mother and dad married some years later, very young, my aunt always lived, my youngest aunt, particularly, always lived with my parents. And she went to high school in Richmond, Virginia. My parents moved from North Carolina to Richmond, Virginia. And my, my mother's youngest sister was sent to high school there. And then when my parents moved to New Jersey in 1926, this youngest sister followed. Now, my mother's other sister- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Story_ID: 66716 Speaker 1: --Back to your mother's- Speaker 2: Grandmother. Speaker 1: Grandmother. What things did she learn or that, you know, you picked up with bits and pieces? Speaker 2: Well, the biggest thing was that she knew that she was Sierra Leone. And I have since read that the, the transportation of slaves, many of them had come out of Sierra Leone. And that was one of the memories that my mother carried with her. She was a, she was very elderly when my mother, you know, was there. And she had been on this plantation. I don't know for how long. My mother didn't ever tell us what her grandmother told her about when she came. Maybe she didn't know the year. I have since read a book, you know, 'Slaves in the Family' [Edward Ball], which chronicles slaves belonging to a particular family in South Carolina. And it's amazing the number of people who came out of Sierra Leone. Speaker 1: You hear of Ghana and- Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, you know, and what is of particular interest about Sierra Leone is the Amistad event [1839]. That's where those slaves were coming from and they mutinied and, you know, ultimately won their freedom because the arguments of [President] John Quincy Adams, who argued not on the basis of civil rights, but on the basis of commerce laws. But a win is a win (laughter). And it was the first such win, you know, on that issue in this country. Speaker 1: Now, I want--did she talk at all about growing up? Did she have any memories that, you know, she shared- Speaker 2: You mean my grandmother, my great grandmother? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I don't remember. My mother never indicated that. She just said that she was, she would talk about life on the plantation, and she would talk with great pride about the fact that she was from Sierra Leone. And I don't think I even knew--I don't remember my mother talking about that until I was almost an adult. But she said to us, "Don't ever forget that that's where part of your roots are." Speaker 1: Now, what about your mother? Did she talk about growing up? I mean I know that, you know--did she- Speaker 2: Yes, they--she talked a great deal about the loss of her mother. That obviously was a great blow to her and a sense of loneliness. And what I thought was always incredible about my mother, this, this assuming responsibility for her two younger sisters. And they were only two years apart. I mean, but my mother was the oldest, and it wasn't a very, it wasn't a very good relationship with the stepfather. For instance, my mother would tell us that she--my family was Roman Catholic on that side, that she remembers a Protestant minister making a comment about, at the time of mother's mother's service, that is woman belonged to a church that if you couldn't read, you couldn't be a Christian. And, therefore, that raised great suspicion in my mother's mind about Protestants who are insensitive (laughter). But those were not easy times for them. And I, I've often heard her, talked about the fact that there was this trunk that held her mother's precious things. I never knew what these precious things were, and how, after the funeral, people came and took things out of that trunk and no--that was a part of my mother's story for years and years, how--and I think it affected--I don't know whether they were relatives. But it affected, it affected her desire not to be close to that, to those members of the family. So she just really included these two sisters and their families and my father's side. Speaker 1: Interesting. My mother had a similar thing happen. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Um-hum, they came--the relatives came after the funeral and grabbed things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Heard that before. Story_ID: 66717 VIDEOGRAPHER: Just to let you know, I don't think we got his name and that other stuff at the beginning. Speaker 2: Oh, my God. I can't believe- VIDEOGRAPHER: We just started with the questions. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Can I have you state your name and spell it for us? I'd like to also know what the "B" stands for? Speaker 1: My name is Kenneth Byrant Smith. It's K-E-N-N-E-T-H, B-Y-R-A-N-T, Smith, S-M-I-T-H. Speaker 2: And I want to have your occupation? Speaker 1: I am a retired United Church minister, but I serve as a senior fellow at the Chicago Community Trust [Illinois]. Speaker 2: And we just want today's date? Speaker 1: Today is November the 9th, 2000. Story_ID: 66718 Speaker 1: Thank you Paul. Now, what--can you describe what type of person your mother was like, or- Speaker 2: It would take my wife to really give a wonderful description. My mother was a very fun-loving person, very strong, very caring. We had a big family. I'm one of ten children, and I'm Number five, and my memory of my mother growing up is that in the midst of a house filled with children, my mother could take herself aside and read. She was an avid reader. I've always thought that if my mother had had the opportunity, what she could have done because she was just, she was an avid reader. She wanted to learn, and really taught my father a great deal about how to read. I mean she did that. She, very giving. I recall when one of my brothers and his wife had a, had difficulties in the marriage, and the marriage was going to pot, my mother and dad took in their youngest child. And at that point, my father was about seventy, and my mother was six years younger. And I thought, "Gee, is this a good thing to do, to take on a teenager?" This nephew of mine was just about the same age as my son. And I raised the question with my mother about that, and she said, "Well, if you needed in your family, I'd do the same thing." But that was the way she was. She, she loved family, and loved it--both of my parents loved having everybody around. So that whenever we went out, every summer, drove out to New Jersey. My father was a retired chef. He would have this huge cookout in the backyard, and all these grandchildren and great grandchildren and aunts and uncles. And he would tell, once I recall him saying, "This is my wealth." I mean he looked out on this family. And I used that phrase in his eulogy when he passed away. Story_ID: 66719 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your father and his family. What do you know about his family? Speaker 2: Yes, my father was one of eight. Speaker 1: His name? Speaker 2: My father was William, William Smith, born in 1898, born in Arkansas. But he knew absolutely nothing about Arkansas. He was four years old when his dad died. His dad was a farmer. And apparently, there was a period in which a great many people left North Carolina and went to Arkansas because there were land opportunities. And this would have been, who knows? Eighteen eighties [1880s], '90's [1890s]. But my grandfather died, and therefore, my grandmother [Edith Bishop] sold off everything, and her goal was to get back to her home place in North Carolina, a little town called Tillery [North Carolina]. I've never been there. The closest big thing next, near it is a place called Scotland Neck [North Carolina]. People always know about Scotland Neck. And my grandmother moved her family from Arkansas back to North Carolina. And so my father always referred to North Carolina as home because he, he really didn't remember anything about it. And my grandmother had a sister and a brother there and they farmed. How often have I heard about what they grew, you know, peas and tobacco and something else. And my mother said that her goal, when they married, was to be there. She said, "I think sometimes if your dad had had his way, we would have been down picking peas and growing things." But she, I think she was the spirit behind their move to Richmond, Virginia where my father by this time had developed the skill for cooking. And they lived there, I think five, six, seven years. And I believe that the--what occasioned this move was not only an opportunity to try to advance themselves, but there was a Ku Klux Klan march through the black community. This would have been in the early '20's [1920s]. And the word went out that this march was going to occur. And like in a great many cities, there's always a black business street, and Second Street was the place in Richmond [Virginia]. And so people cleared off the streets. And my mother remembers being on her knees peeking out the window from the apartment, not--they didn't march down her street, but that's what people did. The word went out to get in, but that day people shot out of those, out of the windows. And people were killed, these marchers. And, but that was the last time the Ku Klux Klan marched through the black neighborhood. I think that was--that and another incident where some friends who had a car, which was rare in those days, came and gave my parents a ride on a Sunday afternoon, and they were stopped by a carload of white men and made to get out of the car and had guns. And my mother said she was very frightened, and she said, "I think your father was very frightened too." And they just did it to harass them, you know, "What are you doing with this car?" And finally they left them alone. Well, that, I think precipitated that we have to move from this place. And I, I'm quite certain that story is not unlike stories held--told by other people in certain communities down there. They had driven outside of the City of Richmond [Virginia]. Well, not that many black people had cars, you know. And I suppose, seeing this carload of black folk, this was an occasion to stop them and have a little fun. So they moved to New Jersey and- Speaker 1: I wanna go back a little bit before that. I wanna ask (unclear), did you father talk about growing up and--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he did. He grew up in an extended family. He had an aunt and an uncle who apparently, they sharecropped on this farm. And they worked. I mean he--I never knew my father ever to stay home from work because he didn't feel well. And, you know, it was amazing to me. He had no car when I was growing up. And he had to take two buses to go to work, but he, he taught us the worth ethic. And he--when you referred to his youth, he talked about having to work very hard. I think they felt that because their father had passed away. And so the boys in that family had to help, help provide. And that's what he did. I don't ever remember him talking about having fun. But he must have. But he married young. Story_ID: 66720 Speaker 1: They married, my parents married very young. Speaker 2: How old were they? Speaker 1: My father was twenty and my mother was like sixteen. And, and they--when my dad died, my parents had been married sixty-two years, and my mother used to laugh and say she couldn't remember when she wasn't married, you know. But I--that was not unusual in that era. And to assume the kind of responsibilities that they did, for family, for extended family. They were the first persons in the family to move to New Jersey, up North, so to speak. And so that was the way station. Everybody came to our house first before they moved on to another place. Speaker 2: Now, how old were--I mean I know how old they were when they were married, but do you know how they met? Speaker 1: Oh, I think it was a little, tiny town down there. I don't really know how. I, to tell you the truth. But my father used to say to me that, when Gladys [Smith, Kenneth Smith's wife] and I married, he said, she reminds me of your mother when she was very young, very pretty. Story_ID: 66721 Speaker 1: Now, you--were you born in New Jersey? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You were born in New Jersey. Speaker 2: I had an older brother--I have an older brother who's two and a half years older--two and a half years older than me. He was the first to be born in Montclair [New Jersey], and then I was the second. And then everybody else was born there. Speaker 1: I would like you to give the names of your siblings and your- Speaker 2: Whether they're--okay. The oldest is Juanita. She's the eldest of all of us, still living. She will be eighty years old on her birthday. She has five children and many grandchildren. And upon my mother's death, we sold our family house to my sister's youngest son. And she lives in that house. And so we can go back to that house. Then the next was Herbert, who was three and a half years younger than my sister. He passed away five or six years ago. He was the only one who followed in my father's footsteps and became a chef. The next, Roger, lived three doors from my parents, bought a house three doors from them, which was very good. It was sort of comforting having him on that block because I could always--I always knew that there was somebody very close to my parents there. He had three--one, two--four children. And he passed away [1995], well, yeah, a year--about 19--well, he died a year after my brother, Herbert passed away [1994]. The next is Albert, lives in Newark [New Jersey], father of four children, still very active, retired, had a disability from World War II. And, but does well. The next is me, and then following me was another brother, Joseph, who was two years younger than me. And he passed away at age fifty. He was a trucker, drove these huge trucks, smoked too much, which I understand a great many people do on these long-haul trips. And he has four children. I always remember that, his passing, because my father--my mother said, "I never thought I would have to live to bury another child." And what she was talking about, we had a sister, Dianne, who passed away at age thirty -four [1969], who had suffered from epilepsy most of her life. And, but her death came because of pneumonia and infection and what not, and it was very hard on my parents. And then Joseph was the second one. So my mother was referring to the fact that she had had--she and my dad had had to bury two children. And that's not the way it's supposed to be. We're supposed to bury them. And it was a very poignant moment, and I, I remember my father walking away from the conversation because he was filled up too, and he didn't know what to say. So, and then after Joseph, there was Dianne, who passed away at age thirty-four. And then I have a set of twin sisters, Hester and Hetty, very well. Both of them have children. One has two, the other one has four. And then the youngest, Peter, who is ten years younger than me, has one son, and he is a widower and a teacher in Newark [New Jersey], and his great dream is that he's bought land outside of Daytona Beach [Florida]. And he's gonna retire and go down and build his dream house and live in Florida, just get out of the weather. But that was our, that was our family. I can recall being in short pants at my oldest sister's wedding. And then right across the street was my mother's middle sister, and she had two sons. And so we, we all grew up together and around the other corner was my father's sister, Aunt Esther, who had no children, who married late in life. And her husband died maybe eight years after they married. So I, I--and when my grandmother left North Carolina, she came and lived around the corner with my father's youngest sisters. So I had this great extended family, and it's, when I look back on it, it was a very joyous thing. There were a whole lot of us. I never had any privacy growing up. I mean even if I went to the basement, somebody was down there. But on the other hand, as my wife said, that your family can have a party without inviting anybody (laughter). You understand that? Speaker 1: I understand it completely. Story_ID: 66722 Speaker 1: Now, you--share with us some of your other, you know, earlier memories of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, I remember, one of the vivid memories that I had--my mother doesn't believe I remembered this, when my brother, Joey, was born, and he's two years younger than me. He was born in August, and when my mother came home from the hospital, he was in a clothes basket. And he was on this table. I guess it was the coffee table. We had a fireplace in that house. And I can remember tipping to see in there, and my mother said, "Be very careful--you're gonna turn the baby over." Now, my mother said, you can't remember that. But I do, I do. Our twin sisters [Hester and Hetty] were born at home, and another memory that lasts with me--and those sisters are now sixty-three years old. My dad was, you know, he was at work, and he came home, and we said to daddy, "We have two babies." He said, "You don't know what you're talking about." We said, "Go upstairs and see." We were all in the basement. We'd been sent to the basement. And my father went in, and he did see two babies. And my mother said, he cried (laughter). He said he didn't cry. But this was 1937. These were not easy times. I, I recall when my parents bought the house that they lived in until they both passed. And they had to have five hundred dollars as a part of this down payment. And they bought that house in 1936 or '37' [1937]. Five hundred dollars was a lot of money to come by in 1937. I also remembered when things were getting easier because the coal bin was filled up. We weren't buying coal every other day. The truck backed up and the whole bin was filled. That was very significant to me, for some reason. I knew that we would be warm (laughter), and that nobody had to go out and get somebody to buy bags of coal to bring. But those were the Depression years. I don't ever remember being hungry or anything like that. My father was a chef. And, apparently, anything left over was brought home. And that's what we ate. So we ate very well. Growing up on the street where I lived, a very short street, maybe ten houses, lots of children, very close families. I, you know, I was almost sixty years old before I heard about the phrase, the African phrase, "It takes a village go rear a child." And every time I go to Montclair [New Jersey], I say to myself, "Well, that's what happened to me." We were nurtured by a village, not only by our parents and our extended family but by these neighbors. Small towns, relatively small towns, life centered around the church and the family and, in our case, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. I mean these were important institutions. All of those things played a role in our nurture. And I look back on it with great fondness. I, I still refer to Montclair, New Jersey as home, and yet, I've lived in Chicago [Illinois] since 1954. Story_ID: 66723 Speaker 1: Now--Paul did you say you were close to two? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Three minutes. Speaker 1: Okay, when--there's one question I need to ask you. And it goes back to your parents, you were saying their parents--both of your parents lost parents. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Did that, do you think that affected them in any way or had created a bond with them? Speaker 2: Oh, I think it did, although my dad's mother lived to be one hundred years old. But I think my father always understood about my mother's loss. And though he was not a very verbal person, he demonstrated this kind of caring by the way he looked after her. And I--and my mother understood that. And not only did he look after my mother, but he felt responsible too for my mother's sisters. I mean they looked to him as sort of a father figure. And yet, he wasn't that much older. I always found that amazing, how at a very young age, they could assume all this responsibility. But you, as my mother said, "You do what you have to do." Yeah, I think they, they shared not only those loss--the loss, the common loss, but the rather perilous times in which they were born and were being reared and coming into maturity. These were not easy times. Story_ID: 66724 Speaker 1: And who would you say you're most like, your mother or your father or a combination- Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's a combination. I, I have this sense of wanting to care for everybody. And I think I have my father's work ethic. I think my father never retired really. I mean he retired from the school where he'd been the chef at this private school for thirty-one years, and he had a stroke. And it was a very minor stroke. He got over that, and my oldest [sic] brother [Herbert Smith] worked for a food service like Marriott [Food Services] or something that had a contract at a college in the next town. And he called my father in January, and he said, "Can you come--we're shorthanded, can you come and help us?" And my father ended up working for that company for another ten and a half years. And so then I called home once, and my mother said, "Well, your dad isn't here." And I said, "Where is he? And he's eighty, almost eighty-two years old, where is he?" And it's not nine o'clock. They all go in at nine [o'clock]. No one is out. And she says, "Well, he's serving a dinner." I said, "Serving a dinner?" "Yes, he has a little catering business." I said, "Well, how long does he plan to do this?" "Well, he doesn't do it for the money. He does it to keep going and having something to do. Well, you call him back." So I called the next day. And I said, "How long do you plan to do this?" He said, "Forever, forever." In other words, so, what that meant to me was that, you have to have something to do. And so my father said, "It's important for me to have to get up and go do something," never took vacations that I called vacations; couldn't get him to go to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. We'd take our mom--my mother, but couldn't get him. Why? He had to stay home and look after the house. It didn't make any sense. That was not a part of his culture, taking a vacation, you know. His joy came out of being at home and having kids come and grandkids (laughter). That's what he liked. I, I have, so I have some of the traits from both of them. I love to have my grandchildren come and visit me. But I'm also glad to see them go home (laughter). Story_ID: 67467 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna know what you were like 'cause you were smack dab in the middle- Speaker 2: Yes--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: --of the family. Speaker 2: --got along with everybody. Middle children do. I think that I was the child that wanted to please my parents. As I look back on it, I really wanted their blessings on everything. So I did every--you know, I never got in trouble in school, never had any trouble because I wanted them to be pleased with me. I think there's a certain degree where that still goes on. I, you know, I want, I wanna please people. I worked after school as soon as I was in Junior High school, not just to have spending change, but buying my clothes. Now, how did I know to do that? Because my older brothers had done that. And, so I worked every day after school, little jobs, once in a little bakery in the neighborhood and then in a print shop. So, I, I felt--I'd always heard about being obedient, you know, and I was very obedient and wanted to, wanted to do what my parents said do. I think they always knew that I had an interest in higher education. I was the first to go to college, and had saved my summer earnings and what not. It didn't amount to very much. And in 1949, I recall my father, two days before I was to leave, taking me to the bank and getting me a cashier's check for four hundred dollars which was a lot of money (laughter). And when I came home, my mother said, and I told my mother. She was amazed. She didn't know my father--he was not a talker, and she didn't know that he had been saving this to give to me to go away to school. So I knew I couldn't fool around, that I had to be in and out in four years. But everybody generally was in those days. It's not like people taking, like my youngest son takes, takes his time. I would come home and work in the [United States] Post Office during the Christmas holidays, and then go away at a camp and work every, during the summers, YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] camps. Enjoyed being around adults, used to go talk to some of the older neighbors. Now that I look back at that, perhaps that's why I was comfortable being a pastor. I don't know. I, I cared very much for my brothers and sisters, but I knew that in many cases, we were different. I wasn't the one that wanted to carouse as much. My parents always knew where I was. So that's about it. Really, it wasn't anything exciting; had my first date when I was, well, I remember going to the movies with a girl when I was like in the eighth or ninth grade and then taking a young lady from around the corner to the ninth grade prom, from Hillside [Elementary] School [Montclair, New Jersey]. But my first real date came when I was a senior. And I used to see this young lady quite a bit. Story_ID: 67468 Speaker 1: Now, you grew up in a mixed community, and I'm- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and so I'm wondering of the block that you were on, was it mixed? Speaker 2: Yes, at that time it was. Speaker 1: And can you tell me what the sort of ethnic makeup was, you know-- (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: German, there were German people who lived in two houses, and then there was an Italian family at the corner. And, in fact, the son, this German family, one German family, he was a policeman. And that, that fellow has been at all the family funeral because he was the same age as my brother, who was two and a half years younger than me. And I think my brothers and sisters have been at his parents, but he was an only child. But schools were very mixed. As a boy, we were always, it was clear that we were in the minority. I could walk to my, well, I could walk to both of the--all three of the schools I attended; took the bus to the high school [Montclair High School, New Jersey], but could walk. Had no black teachers. They just didn't have black teachers in that school system when I was growing up. It's sort of a joy for me to go back now because the principal of the high school is a black woman. And I'm very proud of that. But I thought Montclair [New Jersey] was a little backwards on that issue and some other issues as well, but nobody seemed to have raised the question until I was, until I was a senior in high school and we had a Baptist minister in the hometown with whom I became very friendly. And he would raise the issues, and some people were very critical of him because he talked too much. You ever heard that little comment? "Why is he always opening his big mouth?" Well, Mr. Rice would raise the questions that I now understand were questions of justice and equity and equality. He would do that. And, in fact, he was so effective that I can remember a high school history teacher suggesting to the class that we go to the town meeting to hear Mr. Rice debate the commissioners. There were no blacks on the town commission then, very few black policemen and firemen, even in a little town. But that all changed within--by the time I had graduated from college, Mr. Rice was our [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and I remained close to him until he died. The, things were very subtle in Montclair [New Jersey]. I mean nothing was overt, except that you didn't see any black teachers in schools. Now, black teachers taught in East Orange [New Jersey] and in Newark [New Jersey], but Montclair [New Jersey] was an upper, middle-class community. And the, it was a good school system because it was designed for the people who were gonna send their kids to the Ivy League schools. And so we benefited from that. Taxes are very, were very high and they remain high today. I get the town paper every week, so I keep up with it. And the taxes are very high. Story_ID: 67469 Speaker 1: Now, the black community there, was it, was there a black church there? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were three, large, black churches. Two Baptist churches and a Methodist church. Now, there were some other smaller churches, and Mr. Rice was the pastor of the Union Baptist Church. And I recall that that's where I heard, that's where I heard Roland Hayes sing. That's where I heard Dorothy Maynard. That's where I heard Walter White speak, and he spoke on--this was the aftermath [1939] of Marian Anderson being denied the opportunity to sing in Constitution Hall in Washington [D.C.]. I heard Walter White address that issue. It was afterwards in the Union Baptist Church, so that those churches played a major role in educating the community. Now, my understanding is that the black people who originally came to Montclair [New Jersey], came there as domestics, and they, you know, they'd been living there--my parents moved there in 1926, but there were black people who had been there seventy-five years before my parents came. So it was a conservative black community, you know. People who were very, would be very quick to say, "Know your place". And so when I heard these comments about Mr. Rice ought to keep his mouth shut, he was not, he was not keeping his place. This is not what a minister is supposed to be doing. Well, indeed, it was what a minister was supposed to be doing. Montclair [New Jersey] was a, a white, Anglo-Saxon community, a white Anglo-Saxon Protestant community, although there were three Roman Catholic churches there. No Jewish temple, the whole time I was growing up, although there were Jewish people who went there and I went to school with Jewish kids. I didn't know they were Jews until later on. I mean they just looked white like everybody else, you know. But it was a very Protestant town. It was--though it was in New Jersey, which was an old state, Colonial state, it was very, it had some of what I understand the New England culture is like. Story_ID: 67470 Speaker 1: Now, okay, I wanna go to this--so your mother never worked out of-- (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Was she a domestic? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother, she wasn't a domestic--well, she took care of a woman. She wouldn't say she was a domestic. She took care of a lady--when my mother was eighty years old, she was looking after a woman who was ninety-two. And I said, "Why are you doing this?" Well, 'cause she knew her. That's why she did it. But my mother also worked at the Mountainside Hospital [New Jersey] laundry, and she did that for a number of years. And during World War II, she worked in the arsenal, you know. There was a Picatinny Arsenal [New Jersey], which is, which was about twenty-five miles from Montclair [New Jersey]. She worked there as did a great many people. Yes, my mother worked, and not, not consistently, but apparently, when it was needed. Speaker 1: And your father, what school, you said he was the- Speaker 2: He was the chef at Ms. Beard's School [Now Morristown-Beard School, Morristown, New Jersey]. It was a very upper-class school for white young ladies in South Orange, New Jersey. And he went there around 1926--around 1936. And he stayed there until the school closed. It merged with another school. And he was seventy then, and it was gonna, the school was gonna be located in Morristown [New Jersey], which was about forty miles from Montclair [New Jersey]. And when I was home that summer, I heard him talking, when he would come home from the camp. In the summers, he worked at a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] camp, talking about commuting, coming--going up there and staying and coming home on weekends. And my mother said, "Absolutely not. You're not gonna do that." So my aunt, my father's youngest sister, who lived around the corner said, "Well, why don't you become a crossing guard?" And he said that was for old people. So, he was brooding over this business of retiring. And I hadn't been back in Chicago [Illinois] three weeks when I got the call that he was in the hospital and had this stroke. And, you know, I believe that mood and psychological impact can affect the body. And I, I didn't, I'm not doctor, but I thought that that's what happened to my father, in addition to diet and everything else. But he got over that stroke very well, I mean, you know, the quick action of my mother got him into the hospital. And he got over that. Story_ID: 67471 Speaker 1: Now, you in school. What--I know you were an obedient child, and you wanted to please your parents. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But I wanted to know--I grew up in a small town too. It was about- Speaker 2: It's not only pleasing your parents, it's pleasing all those other people who see you. I mean in a small town, you know, there are no secrets. You can't do anything. Go ahead. Speaker 1: So my question, what kind of student were you? What were your favorite subjects? You know, what were your, you know, what did you dream about? Speaker 2: I think I was an average student. I had to work very hard to get good grades. And sometimes I was lazy like the next person. But I used to--my, my favorite subjects were anything related to history. And I enjoyed foreign languages. I liked English too. I had a good, I had good English teachers who would tell me, "Kenneth, you've gotta write it. You can say it, but you have to be able to write it. And the only way you can write it is to keep writing." And you have to write so other people can read it. In other words, that it makes sense to people. And I think for years--that's the reason why I write out a sermon because of the discipline that I need in writing. And that comes from Mr. Roberts in tenth grade English class. I think, when I went off to college, I wanted to be a teacher. I wanted to be, I thought I wanted to be a college teacher. But I became very active in the Student Christian Movement in this country, and that drew me to conferences across the country, and I began hearing major theologians speak. The first time I heard Howard Thurman was at one of those student conferences. The, my mentor in the ministry who was then the dean at Fisk University Chapel [Nashville, Tennessee], I heard him at one of those student conferences. Plus, I heard people like [Karl Paul] Reinhold Niebuhr and Paul Tillich and so forth and so on. So I began to think about theological issues and then this student YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] sent me to India in my senior year at college. And I was over in India for about four and a half to five months. And while there, it became very clear to me that I wanted to go to theological school. Now, I was a Roman Catholic. Story_ID: 67472 Speaker 1: That's, see, okay, that's--just bear with me for a little bit. You're going a little too quickly. I want to take you to, I mean your senior year, of when you even thought, 'cause I thought you were raised--I know your mother was raised Catholic. Speaker 2: Oh, and we were raised as Catholics, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And was there a--but there wasn't a Catholic church in- Speaker 2: Yeah, there were--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: There wasn't a black Catholic church in Montclair [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Yes, but a Mission. There was a Mission, a black church was in a house. And that's where my sister married, and then, I guess they must have raised money and they built a building. And it was a small building. I mean it looks, it looked small to me then, and it looks even smaller today when I go there, but it was a Mission church. And I don't remember--I think they were just ordinary archdiocesan priests. But there was--where the big Catholic school was, the Immaculate Conception [High School, Montclair, New Jersey], that was at the center of the town. And then there was a big [Our Lady of] Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church [Montclair, New Jersey] in the Italian neighborhood which was heavily Italian. And then there was a church in upper Montclair [New Jersey], a small church. My mother had attempted to get my sister into the Immaculate Conception [High School, Montclair, New Jersey], and she didn't get her in there. And I have a feeling that my mother felt that that was a racial issue. So she did not attempt that with any of the rest of us. We all went to public schools. But we went to the Catholic Church, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, I just want, not to--but what I'm curious about, just from a historical thing in terms of religion, were there many blacks in the South that were Catholic, Roman Catholic? I just- Speaker 2: No, I thought that was an amazing thing. Now, I think--I've asked my mother about that. How in the world was your mother a Roman Catholic? She said because my grandmother was a Roman Catholic. And I didn't understand in North Carolina, but I think--I don't think my grandmother was born in North Carolina. I think she came--I have this sense that she came from Maryland, which is not unusual. It was not unusual. Somewhere back in that side of the family, I think they were Maryland people. I think, 'cause my mother had some cousins in Maryland who were her contemporaries. She wasn't close to them. Story_ID: 67473 Speaker 1: Now, when did you know--now, I know this minister, you, you said you got close to that minister--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --(unclear). But at what point, let me ask you, at what point did you know you wanted to go on to college? Speaker 2: Oh, I think I, I think I've always known that. I'd always known that. My, this very good friend of mine who lives in California, in fourth grade, we used to sit and talk about that. I can remember talking about that when I was in the sixth grade. I always admired people who, who went off to some college and did things. And, you know, Paul Robeson was the big hero in our lives, and he went to Rutgers [University, New Jersey]. He went to Rutgers [University, New Jersey], and then he went to Columbia University [New York] and got a law degree. I mean that was a big thing to us. And I think that was very impressive, and this minister that I got close to, had many degrees. I mean he was, he had his theological education, but he continued to go to school, and he had two Master's degree from Columbia [University, New York] and what not. I was, I was just impressed with that. Then there was an Episcopal priest two doors from us who was born in Canada, and who was a Phi Beta Kappa [honor society], and I used to babysit with their son. And my pay would be her helping me with my Latin. My mother would say, they're very poor. And she was always sharing food with them 'cause ministers don't earn much money, you know (laughter). And, but Father Barry was a very learned man. I used to like to go into his study at home because he had lots of books and interesting books. So I think I always--I don't remember when I didn't have that on my mind. I was gonna go somewhere. Speaker 1: Now, this, this minister, what was--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Mr. Rice. Speaker 1: Mr. Rice, he--how did your--how did you even interact with him? He was a Baptist. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. He was a, well, number one, he lived around the corner from us, though I never went to his house. It was--I really came to know him because when I was a senior in, a junior in high school, I was elected to the Hi-Y, which was the high school boys club, a very important organization. And then I was elected its representative to something called the "Suburban Youth Council", which was really kind of an ecumenical youth group. And Mr. Rice would come to the meetings. Several of the ministers would come. And I was always impressed with hearing him speak. And so I would go to Mass at my church, and then I would go to his church and sit up in the balcony to listen to his sermons because I just hadn't heard anybody speak like that before. And he brought all these interesting people to the church. I just thought that was, you know, I would go home and talk about this. I heard so and so at Mr. Rice's church. Now, it didn't hurt me that my father's sister belonged to that church. But, you know, I--and my mother never raised any question about it. The priest didn't raise a question with her about my going to this YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] Club, but she said, "If that's what he wants to do, I'm not gonna oppose it." But I, I really admired the Reverend Rice. Story_ID: 67474 Speaker 1: Now, how did you end up choosing Virginia Union [University, Richmond, University]? Speaker 2: Well, it was Reverend Rice again. And I had a, my mother's middle sister lived in Richmond [Virginia]. So Richmond [Virginia] was not a foreign place to us. And I was headed for Seaton Hall [University, New Jersey], which was the University of the Archdiocese of Newark [Newark], and, in fact, our priest told me that he'd even find scholarship money for me. But then, the president of Virginia Union [University] spoke at Mr. Rice's church. And I wrote him a letter for information, and he wrote me back, and he underlined a word that I had misspelled in the letter, "stimulating". I never forgot, I've never forgotten how to spell "stimulating". And he sent me this information. And I thought, gee whiz, I didn't expect him to write me. I expected somebody else to write me. And I thought that was impressive, and so I went down, and I looked at the school. It was very small. And it was a good choice for me. Speaker 1: Now, how small is small? Speaker 2: When I was a student, there were only six hundred students there. And half of us lived on the campus, you know, and the other half lived off. And it wasn't far from my aunt and uncle's home. But that was good for me because that's where I was introduced--I saw black professors. I'd never seen that before, you know, who took a great personal interest in me and all the other students and who talked to us about our responsibility for the community. Speaker 1: Now, what year are we talking about? Speaker 2: I graduated from high school [Montclair High School, New Jersey] in 1949, so I entered in the fall of '49' [1949]. Speaker 1: And was it different? I mean you had grown up in a very--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --different environment? Speaker 2: I had grown up in a very different environment. But there were many kids there, many students there who'd grown up as I had, who'd come from Northern communities and--I really felt sort of superior. But I got over that very quickly with the help of some (laughter) very good teachers (laughter), who said to me that, you know, "New Jersey and New England had no corner on brains. And so Mr. Smith, if you're gonna make it in my class, you're gonna have to work." No, they were very--I thought that when I got down there that people really prized education. It's the first time I'd ever gone in people's homes and seen their diplomas hanging up in the living room. That seemed strange to me, but that's how important that was. The, the opportunities were not as plentiful as they had been for me and my generation growing up in that little town. So people prized it. I think they put great value on this. And then I, I just admired the teachers at the school. And their, their, you know, 19--after all, 1954 was not too long afterwards. And many of those teachers were giving testimony in the federal courts on those cases that led to the 1954 Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education]. It was a great place to be, but that's where I learned that it was not only my personal achievement. I had to think about the people from which I came. And I had an obligation to serve them. That's where I picked up the importance of that. Speaker 1: And what else do you think--well, first, did you have any trouble adjusting to living in the South? That's why, I mean that, I mean you--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yeah, I would chafe under the business of riding in the back of the buses, so I would walk most of the time. And many of the students did. That was still during the era where you filled up from the rear of the bus to a certain line; wouldn't go to the movies because you'd have to sit in the balcony or something, or you'd go to the black movie. So you just avoided certain things so you wouldn't have to experience it. For example, when you bought your train ticket, make sure that you got a round trip so that you didn't have to go to the station, until the Supreme Court outlawed segregation in interstate travel [Browder v. Gayle, 1956]. But you'd go to the station down in, on Broad Street in Richmond [Virginia], and you'd end up in a car that was all black. How could that be? (Laughter) Those were the little methods that they used. I, I only sat once behind the curtain in the dining car. You know, there used to be a curtain that hung in the dining car. And I did that going to Atlanta [Georgia] once. But, no, I made that adjustment well because the black community in Richmond [Virginia] had, was, was self-contained. And it protected its children. And I think that's what happened all over the South. And this was upper South, you know. Story_ID: 67475 Speaker 1: Now, what was your major? Speaker 2: History. Speaker 1: History, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I stuck with it. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And thoroughly, thoroughly enjoyed it. I had some very excellent teachers. And it remains, it remains a very important subject to me even to this day. I went last week to a book signing by David Levering Lewis who's just finished his second volume on [W.E.B.] DuBois. And he's an historian at Rutgers [University, New Jersey]. And, but, you know, I enjoy reading that stuff. You know, it's yay thick. Speaker 1: And tell me, what was the--was it American history, and was it taught any differently? Do you think there was more--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I--yes, it was. For instance, when you studied American History at Virginia Union, your companion book was John Hope Franklin's "Up from Slavery" [sic, John Hope Franklin 'From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans', Booker T. Washington 'Up From Slavery']. I mean you didn't use [HM] John Hope Franklin just for Negro History. You used it along with the American History because it was a perspective there that was very important to me, very important. And that's what these teachers did for me. I understood that. I did take a course in African American History. It was called Negro History then. And I recall deciding that I had to do a paper that I wanted to write on the Free Negro. And it wasn't much in Richmond [Virginia], and in those days, the libraries were segregated, and you couldn't, you couldn't go to the white university libraries. So I decided I was gonna go to Washington [D.C.] and to go to the Library of Congress, which I did. And I got an "A" on my paper. But that was a very interesting subject, and I, I picked up on that from [HM] John Hope Franklin. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting. I just actually- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) stop the tape. Speaker 1: --went to visit him. Speaker 2: You went to visit him. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Isn't he marv-- Story_ID: 71521 Speaker 1: --Now, we were at, you know, I was talking to you about, you know, being at Virginia Union [University, Richmond]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And I wanted to go back over the--I mean not go back. I wanna stay with Virginia Union [University, Richmond]. What things--you said you start getting--I wanted to have an idea of the context of the times. You know, these are, you know, you're '49' [1949] to what, '53' [1953]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And you said that you started to get involved with the student--was it Student Nonviolent- Speaker 2: Student Christian Movement. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about that appealed to you, and how did that--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Oh, I think it was the inner-collegiate mixing, and in the South, it was the, one of the few things that brought black and white students together. And, and nationally, it brought everybody together. You had regional conference, state conferences and regional conferences and national conferences. And I attended all of those. So I found that very helpful because I understood these people who were participating, particularly in the South, were, indeed, further leaders down there, particularly, the white ones. And if you could raise some of those issues and get it on their, get it on their minds, they would start to think through, and I think, I think some of the--I don't know many of them. But I, I have kept up with a few of the people out of that. And they've not disappointed me. Speaker 1: Now, what was the purpose of the organization and what did--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: It was to, the Student Christian Movement helped you to think theologically about the issues affecting our country and this is after World War II. For the United States, the race issue was becoming the major opus, magnum opus issue. And so you were thinking through in an informal setting the theological implications of these issues. If you were persons of faith, what do you do? So peace, peace and issues of race were the major things that students were talking about. So it didn't come as a surprise, you know, that two years after I graduated from college, you had student sit-in's. And I thought, gee, I just missed that. But I'm very inspired by those students. I mean I, I really watched them. But, but students had been talking about these issues five and six years before. Story_ID: 71522 Speaker 1: And was it that group that--okay, that group is the group that took you to India? Speaker 2: To India, yes, the Student YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. My participation was through the Student YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. And we had, we had a, a local Student YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] at Virginia Union [University]. And I would go off to represent that group at these conferences. And it was that group--there were four students selected to go, and I was one of them, to India to the World Student--we went to a conference called the World Conference of Christian Youth [December 1952, Travancore, Kerala, India]. This was the third one to have been held. One was held prior to World War II in Amsterdam [Netherlands, 1939], and then one was held immediately after World War II [Oslo, Norway, 1947]. And this was the first one being held outside of Europe. And I went. I recall calling my mother on the phone and saying, "Mother, I have been selected to go to India." "India." She hung up the phone. I mean she got very nervous and hung. I had to go home and sit down and explain that to her. I mean, you know, that--you mean across the world. And I said, yeah. "How are you gonna do this?" I said, "Well, we have to raise money." "Well, how much money?" I said, "Two thousand"--"Oh, my God, two thousand dollars." But they sent Mr. Rice, okay, he got me an interview with a foundation, and that found--and my mother said, "What are you going to ask that foundation?" I said, I'm going to ask them for fifteen hundred dollars. "You're going to ask someone for fifteen hundred"--and I went and they gave it to me. And Mr. Rice's church gave me two hundred dollars. And so we raised the money with no problems. Speaker 1: That was a lot of money then. Speaker 2: That was a lot of money. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: So the two thousand--okay, so you raised, you raised that money with Mr.--so Mr. Rice continued to stay in your life? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes. Mr. Rice, I continued to stay close to him. Even after I came to Chicago [Illinois]. In fact, when I moved to Chicago [Illinois] in 1954, I had spent a year at Drew University in New Jersey. And I ran out of money, so I needed a job. And I came here because I got a job working for the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. And I joined the Congregational Church. This is where I joined the Congregational Church. He wrote a letter to the minister of that church, whose name was [Reverend Dr. William J.] Faulkner, who had been the Dean at Fisk [Memorial] Chapel, whom I had heard as a student. And he said, "I want you to know that Ken Smith has been very active in the Student Christian Movement, and spent a year at Drew [University, New Jersey]," and from that point on, Mr. [William] Faulkner stayed on my case about the theological seminary. And really, that's how I went back. He says, "I think, you know, you, you've gotta do this" (laughter). Story_ID: 71523 Speaker 1: I wanna ask one thing about, more about India since you were there for so long. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I mean that was a long period of time to be away--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. Speaker 1: What was that whole experience like? It's not a, you know, it's not a Christian place. Were you- Speaker 2: Oh, mind boggling. And I think it contributed to my, to the broadening of my understanding of world religions 'cause I don't think I had any notion until I went to India. Although I had read about Hindus and Moslems [sic], Muslims, I don't think I had any real understanding or even appreciation till I got there and moved around with the tiny minority, Christian population of India, most of which is in Southern India. And yet, you go to India, and you see a temple in which a religion, thousands of years old, is practiced. And then I began to read about, more and more about Mahatma Gandhi. And, you know, [Mahatma] Gandhi said he was a follower of Jesus, "But don't call me a Christian." He separated the life of Jesus from the institutional church. It had tremendous impact upon me. The other side of it, you know, all of us at that point in our lives had great admiration for [Mahatma] Gandhi. I mean he brought down the British Empire without firing a shot through his nonviolent effort, and [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], you know, went over there because he was interested in that [Mahatma] Gandhi legacy. And I heard [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] at the Sunday Evening Club speak of this some years ago. But, and, and the other person who had talked about this to my generation was Howard Thurman. And Howard Thurman had spent time in India. So it was a very interesting experience for me. Number One, China had become communist by that time, by the time I arrived there. And there was some question whether India might go because of the tremendous social problems that they were having. I mean I'd never seen poverty like that before. Nothing I saw prepared me for that, nothing. I mean I tried to read everything that they suggested, but it was, it was almost overwhelming. And starving people. I mean, you know, India could not feed itself at that point in time. The [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower era, brought John Foster Dulles to the Secretary of State's position, and Dulles was a very erudite man and a Christian man, a very active Christ--Presbyterian elder. But he was also very hard-lined. And he had little appreciation for the nonaligned nations. And India was one of those. Well, I understood that because I'd spent time there. But Indians too had their Achilles Heel. And it had to do with Kashmir, which was a big issue then, and I would get into great arguments with students in India about Kashmir, and it's still a big issue. As much as I admired India, I think they have an Achilles Heel when it comes to Kashmir. So that just taught me that, you know- Speaker 1: Why did they have an Achilles Heel where--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Well, because if there was a, if a plebiscite was permitted in Kashmir, I think they would vote not to be a part of India. It's basically, I think it's heavily Muslim. Story_ID: 71524 Speaker 1: But you were--were you primarily in Bombay [Mumbai, India] then? Speaker 2: From Bombay, south. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Bombay [Mumbai, India], Madras [India], all the way to the southern tip. In fact, the conference [World Conference of Christian Youth, 1952] I attended was in Travancore [Kerala, India], which is the Southern-most state. Speaker 1: Now, the conference didn't last for four months, did it? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no. What they did was to get me there so that I could visit colleges and universities and speak to student groups. In fact, I even had an offer from the American Consulate to go on a speaking tour while I was there and that they would pick up the expenses because Indians were very interested in knowing about race relations in this country. And I would talk about them. And, you know, they would say well, why are you loyal to that country. And I said because it's my country. Well, I didn't know at one point that somebody from the Consulate was listening and they tried me to do this. And I said, well, I don't think I could do that without permission of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. So I did. I, I wrote the "Y" [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association], and they said, "No. Your credibility would be affected. Right now, you're believable because you're not coming as a government representative," and they were right. But students in India were very left-wing in those days. And I brought literature, most of which I shipped back by boat because had I brought that into the country and gone through Customs--this was during the McCarthy era, I would have been in trouble. But it was a, it was a mind-boggling experience for me. I mean here I was, this little guy from Montclair, New Jersey, being way over in that part of the world, but it, it went a long way to broaden my understanding. You know, in God's house, there are many mansions, and from that point on, I've never been narrow about my religious faith. I'm a Christian, and I'm drawn to this faith by the person and acts of Jesus Christ. But I have to be very careful about being triumphant. Speaker 1: So, you, but you went over there with--did you go over there with some of this superiority you had when you first went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]. I remember you were saying- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I guess, yes (laughter). No, because you see I'd been hanging around with these student groups, and we had debated stuff at these conferences and what not, and that had had its influence. And I'd heard these marvelous speakers. So that was, that was effecting me, that was helping my own thinking about issues. Now, you know, I'd ben reared as this fairly, straight-laced Roman Catholic. This is pre-Vatican II [1962], where the pastor would say that there was only one true church, and everybody else essentially was heathen. Well, I sure came to find out that that wasn't so. And then I had to, to broaden my own understanding even more so to be able to come to understand the great, ancient religious traditions of other people with whom we share life on this planet. Story_ID: 71525 Speaker 1: That's interesting. Now, you came back, and your family, what did they think of you at this point? Speaker 2: Strange (laughter). Strange, no, they were just very happy to see me and that I was well and nothing had happened to me over there. But I came back talking about going to theological seminary, and every time I would mention this in my mother's presence, she'd say, "Well, what, what are you going to--what is that? What kind of school is that?" And I would tell her, and she would not say anything. And so I spent that year at home going, commuting to Drew University [New Jersey], and nothing much was said about it. But it--I knew my mother was pondering all of this. And, and then I came to Chicago [Illinois] and worked, and ultimately went back to school and took my degree and was ordained. And- Speaker 1: And you went to school at that point where? Speaker 2: Here, oh- Speaker 1: At--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yes, at Bethany Theological Seminary, which is now at Earlham College in Richmond, Indiana. But anyhow, my mother, if I were--when I would be invited to speak in Montclair [New Jersey], when I was at home, she would not come. My sisters would come, and weep all through the service, weep all during while I was speaking. And finally, my mother came to hear me speak, and this, you know, I'd been ordained by that time, maybe twelve years. And she wept all through the service. And it wasn't until 1971 that she came to Chicago [Illinois] and, and she came to the Church of the Good Shepard several times, and people liked her and she liked those people. And when I called her and told her that I was leaving to go to the seminary, she said, "How could you leave those nice people?" But that, she was working through, you know. Speaker 1: But she worked--so what do you think? Was it that the--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: She felt responsible for, something that she had done maybe, why I was not remaining a Roman Catholic. And I told her that it was not anything that she had done. She'd done all the right things. I said, "In fact, the only thing that you might have done, Mother, was when I was twelve years old, and the priest"--when I was in high school, and the priest wanted to ask me if I would consider the priesthood, and I told him, yes (laughter), twelve or thirteen years old. And he said, "Well, you'd have to go away and finish your high school training." And I said, "Oh, well, you have to come talk to my parents." So I went home and told my parents, told 'em--and my father said, not a word. And my mother didn't say very much, she said, um-hum, um-hum. And, you know, every time I'd go to mass and see the priest, he'd ask me again. And he said, "Kenneth, we're gonna have to make this decision. Your parents are gonna have to talk to me. We're gonna have to sign these papers." So I went home, I said to my mother, "Look, Father Brennan said we've gotta do this if I'm gonna"--"I am not signing any papers. You're not going away." I was crushed. Why wouldn't she be happy for me to be, you know, considering the priesthood? So many years later, I said to her, "You're the reason why I'm a Protestant minister." Apparently, this was--maybe this had begun way back then. She said, "I knew exactly what I was doing. You needed a family. That's a hard life. You needed a family." Story_ID: 71526 Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: So let me, this--you came here in '54' [1954]. You got your- Speaker 1: I finished seminary [1960], yeah. Speaker 2: And then you found your church home and was that- Speaker 1: No, the Congregational Church of Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois]- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --where my mentor, [Reverend Dr. William J.] Faulkner, who'd been at Fisk [University Memorial Chapel, Nashville, Tennessee], remember? And I'd heard him as a student, and he was the one who really encouraged me to go back to school. And then I worked at his church on staff from 1957 to '61' [1961] as a lay associate. And, and then I was ordained in 1960, and in '61' [1961], I went out to be the organizing minister of Trinity, what became Trinity Church. Speaker 2: Now, [Dr. William J.] Faulkner, what influence would you say he had on black (unclear)? Speaker 1: Oh, he had tremendous influence upon me and a whole generation of students. I mean he was Fisk [Memorial Chapel, Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] for twenty years. And he was a very strong people person. He was a pacifist. He was one of the few black, pacifists that I knew. And he was very devoted to people, great storyteller. He, while he was at Fisk [Memorial Chapel, Nashville, Tennessee], he took time off to go talk to people who had been born in slavery, who could tell the folktales that were passed on by you know, by word-of-mouth. And he wrote a book before he died, called 'The Day When the Animals Talked:[Black American Folktales and How They Came to Be', 1993]', and they contained the stories of slaves that had been passed down orally. You might wanna get that one day. 'The Day When the Animal[s] Talked'. You probably can't buy it, but it's in libraries, by William J. Faulkner, who was born in South Carolina, incidentally, and obviously, was of mixed parentage, way back, somewhere back there. Speaker 2: Now, also, you mentioned Howard Thurman, and I was wondering what- Speaker 1: Well, just hearing him as a student, as an undergraduate, and Howard Thurman was- Speaker 2: Were they (unclear) or was- Speaker 1: Howard, at this time, when I heard Howard Thurman, he was a minister out in California and then Dean of Marsh Chapel at Boston University [Massachusetts]. But, you know, he was the dean of the chapel at Howard [University, Washington D.C.] for many years, and they were contemporaries, very different men. But Howard Thurman was the first black mystic I'd ever met. You know, he could speak to you, and he could mesmerize you by just the way in which he used his hands and his face. I mean the muscles of his face. How [sic] 'Deep is the Hunger' is one of his great books. In other words, he's talking about the spiritual hunger of people that, that it exists in all human beings, and it's deep. And it has to be fed. But he's written a great, a great many books, and was sought after as a speaker. And when I was an undergraduate, he was a very popular campus speaker and conference speaker. And that's where I heard him. I've since heard him in Chicago [Illinois] before he died. But I have all of his books, and I continue to read them. I go back and re-read them, quite a, quite a human being. Story_ID: 71527 Speaker 1: Now, what--I wanna go back to, what, why did you decide you wanted to go, you know, go to divinity--I mean what about it (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: I knew that I had to do something more than be in a classroom. I, the classroom was gonna be confining for me. And while I was in India, maybe I had an epiphany experience that the church was gonna be the vehicle through which I would serve people and the community. And my friends back at college, some of my Omega [Psi Phi] buddies were surprised. That's not what they would have pictured me as. They could picture me in a classroom as a teacher, but not as a minister. But the church became that, and as I look back on it, I was reared to have great respect and be obedient to the church. Remember, I was as Roman Catholic. So the church always remained important for me. I was not leaving the church. I was just changing pews. And it turned out to be absolutely true for me. It became the vehicle by which I could serve human beings and the larger community. And it really wasn't until I came to the Church of the Good Shepard [Chicago Illinois] in 1968, following really a tradition of clergy who had given themselves to the larger community that I, that I became very deeply involved in the civic life of this town. And I, I, you know, while I was at the Trinity [United] Church [of Christ] [Chicago, Illinois], that was in the height of the Civil Rights Movement, we had done, we had marched a whole--it was a small congregation then and didn't even have a building. We, we had participated in activities of the Chicago movement. But when I got to the Church of the Good Shepard, my predecessor had been on the Board of the Urban League. So I, I was elected to that board and ultimately became its chair. And, you know, one thing led to another. Story_ID: 71528 Speaker 1: Now- VIDEOGRAPHER: Five minutes. Speaker 1: Okay, I have just one other question about the--were there things that you liked or didn't like about pastoring a church? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it. Speaker 1: You liked it. Speaker 2: Yes, and had--when the invitation to go be president of the [Chicago Theological] Seminary, I don't think I would have gone to any other seminary [Chicago Theological Seminary]. I went to this one because it was located in Chicago [Illinois]. I'd been a board--on its board of trustees, and I thought this was something that God was asking me to do at this, at the front, almost the end of my ministerial career. But the greatest joy for me came as, from being a pastor. And I really enjoyed that. I think I really needed the feeding that came from the people. That was very important to me and being able to be with people in their moments of celebration as well as their moments of despair. I think any minister experiences that. You, you pass through all of the emotional highs and lows of other human beings. And you're there to help them, to help them as much as you can through that. But you're also there to proclaim the prophetic word of God and about our tasks in this world, to make crooked ways straight and to help justice roll down like rain. I mean you're there to do that too, and I found that very satisfying. It's the, when I look back at my career, that's the most satisfying part of it, serving as a parish minister. I never wanted to be president of the church and all these other things. I thought, I think a pastor was a pretty important thing in life, and that's what I was ordained to do and called to do. The [Chicago Theological] Seminary was, was certainly important, and I could have some influence on the training of future pastors. That's what led me there, by making certain that we had the right kind of faculty to train these people who were going to be serving long after I'm gone and forgotten, you know. So that, I think that's what I felt God called me to do at the last part of my career. Story_ID: 71529 Speaker 1: And--okay, I have several questions. With--well, let's talk about the [Chicago Theological] Seminary, 'cause you were there how many years? Speaker 2: Fourteen. Speaker 1: Fourteen. And you were the first African American? Speaker 2: No, I was the second. I was preceded by Charles Shelby Rooks, who came from the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, very eminent, but I had succeeded him. Speaker 1: And tell me, was that something that they did a search, and, you know, you applied or they found you or were you--(unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: No, no, I was trustee of the [Chicago Theological] Seminary, and which is actually on the search committee. And we had begun to interview people. And finally, one of the members of that search committee called me at the church and said, "Ken Smith, we're bringing these people in, and we're, you know, we're interviewing them. And some of us feel that the person to lead the seminary is right in our midst." And I said, "Who's that?" He said, "You." I said, "Oh, not me." He said, "Some of us would like to talk to you." I said, "Why do you--well, this is very awkward." He said, "No, I'm serious." I said, "Well, if you get down, if we get down to the bottom of the barrel, and we can't find somebody that we--then I'll talk." "No, we don't wanna do that. We wanna talk now." So I did. And then I went home, and dropped it on my wife. Then we stewed about it for weeks and weeks and weeks. And I lost weight. I mean I really suffered. Why? Because I was gonna have to go face that congregation and say, you know, this is what I have to do. And it was, it was terrible (laughter). I had to, I had to face them, and I had to tell them this. And people wept, and I wept, and, but they go over it, and I got over it. We still go to church there. I sit in the pew, keep my mouth shut. Speaker 1: (Unclear) All right. That's, now, what was that whole process like, though, I mean, you know, the transition, what--and I wanna ask that question. Then I wanna lead to a question about the role of the seminary and, you know, and the whole- Speaker 2: It was very different. It was an academic community, and I was a practitioner, but I also knew that my role was to do several things. I had to be a pastor to the institution, but I also had to be an administrator and a fundraiser, and a recruiter of students. And the raising of the money was hard because that was constant. It never let up. I mean it's not like a university or a college that can appeal to corporations and what not. Seminaries have a very narrow window for the raising of money. They can raise money from churches and from church people who believe in the importance of theological education and from certain--some foundations, very few. But my, my satisfaction came in seeing these persons who'd entered seminary go forth to be leaders in the church. And I'm going down to Miami, Florida, week after next to preach at a church, one of our graduates who graduated during my time, whose parents, I had married when I was the associate minister at Park Manor Church [Chicago, Illinois]. And so I knew his parents before he was born. Well, it will be a source of satisfaction for me to go down and see this young man ministering in that church. I went to Wash--I was in Washington [D.C.] for an AARP [American Association of Retired Persons] meeting, and it was a Sunday morning, and I took a cab and went to Plymouth Church, snuck into the back, and here was another one of our graduates holding forth. That is a source of satisfaction. I mean that's what any teacher feels, right? It's--the payoff is seeing what others do. And if I had a role in providing the training for what they do, that's a great source of satisfaction. Story_ID: 71950 Speaker 1: (Unclear)--do is put the [Chicago Theological] Seminary position sort of in an historical perspective in the whole theological community, what role it has played and even what its underpinnings were? Was it, you know, strongly Protestant or did it start out Methodist or- Speaker 2: No, it's been--the Chicago Theological Seminary was founded by Congregationalists, and it was planted next door to what was then the Union Park Congregational Church, which was located at Ashland and Washington [Chicago, Illinois]. That's where the original campus was. It was placed over there because that church had abolitionists in it, and they wanted the seminary, which was gonna be in the city to be close to people who were on the cutting edge. And I thought, that's a very rich history. And once when I was up in the archives, I came across black people at that seminary in the 1880s, which was unusual in those days. But it has always had, as a part of its philosophy, not only the classical learning experience in the classroom, but the practical immersion of its students in the world. One of the famous teachers was a man by the name of Graham Taylor. And Graham Taylor came to the [Chicago Theological] Seminary in the late 19th Century, and it took the trustees at our seminary three years to persuade him to leave Hartford [Seminary, Connecticut] to come here. And he said, "I'll come on one condition. And that is that I not live in the compound." That meant that all the faculty had to live in the same little community with the students. "And I be permitted to start a work like Jane Addams," and he organized the Chicago Commons [Association, Illinois]. And students who went to the seminary had to--and he is the father of what they call, "field work", and all the students that went to the seminary had to go do practical work out on the streets of the city through the Chicago Commons [Association, Illinois]. Well, the seminary has had that in its background over the years. The Chicago Tribune used to attack the [Chicago Theological] Seminary because it had this Graham Taylor who taught religious sociology, but the Chicago Daily News used to defend it because they understood. It's interesting to see students involved in the Pullman strike [1894]. I mean they were encouraged to deal with the cutting issues, and I think that still goes on. Congregationalists never controlled their educational institutions. They helped to found them as independent entities, but they also--and those entities had to go out and find endowment money and so forth to keep them going. But there was never the ecclesiastical control that you would have in other situation. They were free. The [Chicago Theological] Seminary has had an ecumenical air to it for years. In its early days on the West side [Chicago, Illinois], it had a German department, it had a Danish department and a Swedish department. Out of that [Swedish] came North Park College [Chicago, Illinois] up on Foster, and Trinity Evangelical College and Seminary out in Deerfield [Illinois]. And the German part of it became Yankton College in South Dakota. So it's had this ecumenical--and they created these departments to train leaders who were gonna be serving the new people coming into this city before the turn of the century, after the Chicago fire [1871]. I was in Washington [D.C.] once at the National Board of the Trust for Historic Preservation. And one of the staff persons came up said, "I think my husband's grandfather went to your seminary." And I said, "Yes?" She said, "Yes, I think we have a letter at home. When I--I'll go home and bring it to you." So she brought me this eight-page, single spaced, typed, both sides of the paper, letter. He was a student there when the Chicago fire occurred [1871]. And the [Chicago Theological] Seminary students were sent out into the street to do whatever they could. And this was his account of it, a letter to his father. And it was wonderful. It's in the Historical Society, but we published it so that people would know how long this tradition has existed. Story_ID: 71951 Speaker 1: And do you think with it being connected--I know it's co-located with the University of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and there are relationships. I mean there're some dual degrees over there and what not. Speaker 1: Do you think--what role do you think that that played, you know, the--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: It helps and it hurts. When you're going out to raise money, people think that you're a part of the University of Chicago [Illinois], and you don't need money. Why you're over there with the Rockefeller money, you know, it's always been separate. It helps in that it's a good recruiting tool to tell students that they have an opportunity to study in the midst of one of the world's great universities and can cross register and take courses and have access to libraries. That's very helpful. It's a very exciting theological education community, this Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. There're five, free-standing seminaries. Speaker 1: Hold on, was that thunder? Speaker 2: Yes. Five free-standing seminaries, plus the Divinity School, the University, all over there in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And these students can go around and--if you get accepted in one, you can go around and take courses at all of 'em. Speaker 1: What are you most proud of in terms of your accomplishments, you know--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: That I left a balanced budget and increased endowment, what a president is supposed to do (laughter). Speaker 1: That's right. But was it, was it--was the [Chicago Theological] Seminary when you came on, sometimes institutions sort of drift in terms of, you know, where they are. Was it sort of at that drifting point or was- Speaker 2: No, we'd had a very strong leader in Dr. [Charles Shelby] Rooks. And I really credit him with helping the institution to see the incredible laboratory of congregational life in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. And the, and the great spurt of African American students started under him. I mean we'd always had some, all the way back to the beginning, but never the numbers. And I felt very good that during my tenure, that maintained itself. And that, that almost a third of the student body was African American. But I think that my, my--the thing that I'm very pleased about, of course, is the fact that it's on a good, solid financial footing. Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: And it's that way because I introduced, I called upon my friends from civic life over the years to help me (laughter). Story_ID: 71952 Speaker 1: Now, what--you know, University of Chicago [Illinois] is not known for--well, there are two views I have on this, but it's not, the reputation is that it's been racist in many ways, and not responsive to the black community around there. And I was wondering if that ever rubbed--you know, what role the seminary has had vis-a-vis and what discussions have occurred over the years? Speaker 2: Only that in my conversations sometimes with black clergy, if you--because we were over on that campus, it was just a blur. They would just refer to everything as the University of Chicago [Illinois], and some would tell me they didn't feel comfortable over there. But I think we changed some of that. Now, I know those stories about the University [of Chicago], and I would say--and they go all, some of 'em go all the way back. And there's some truth to that. But I also think that in many other ways, the University has attempted to really change. I look now at the relationship between the University [of Chicago] and what Bishop [Arthur M.] Brazier is doing in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], and yet it was Bishop [Arthur M.] Brazier as president of the Woodlawn Organization who challenged the University [of Chicago] thirty years ago. So, so things change. There's nothing, there's nothing constant, but change. And yet that's, you know, it was [Robert Maynard] Hutchins who would not support Earl Dickerson when they raised the issue about restrictive covenants. You know, great [Robert Maynard] Hutchins didn't do that. No, I, I think, I think the [Chicago Theological] Seminary never got caught in that. Part of the reason was that when I went to the seminary, I was somebody that people knew about, apart from the University, you know. I was a pastor and had been active in the city. So they could always distinguish the [Chicago Theological] Seminary from the University [of Chicago, Illinois] by thinking about who I was and what they'd known about me. Story_ID: 71953 Speaker 1: I--'cause I wanna get back to your civic life, but I have another question about seminary and training. What do you think is important, you know, with, you know, that type of educational training in terms of its breadth and depth, 'cause there are a lot of places that ministers, you know, some people are trained just what (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: But what do you think is important to come out of, you know, that type of training? Speaker 2: Well, as I used to tell the students, that you don't come to seminary to find faith. Hopefully, you have that when you come, that you're rooted in your faith. What the seminary provides are the disciplines for the sharpening of your mind for the promulgation of that faith, for the development of skills which will help you to serve people who are pilgrims in the faith. It is not a church, the seminary is not a church. It is a worshipping community. But it's also primarily an academic community. It's a graduate school, not of religion. It is a graduate school which trains people in all the elements of the Christian faith, number one, and Number two, in religion. I make that distinction because the people that support the seminary look to it to send them leaders for their churches. So there's no question in my mind about where the emphasis has to be. We have to provide those people who are going to give leadership at the grassroots. Now, if we were merely a graduate school of religion, we would be involving students in the study broadly of religion, and maybe they'd go out to be teachers. But that wasn't our primary role. Our primary role is leadership. And I'm convinced that we're gonna need this because a church, a denomination, a faith lives or breeds, where? At the grassroots. If it collapses there, it's nothing. Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the, can you--I know, we know that [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson [Sr.] went through, but what are some of the other ones who've come through the seminary that people might not know? Speaker 2: Oh, I can think of Clyde Miller who went to that seminary and went out to Colorado and became the first African American conference minister out there. I can think of a young South African woman who became one of the early chaplains at University of Chicago Hospitals [Illinois]. There are number of pastors who've come through, who may not be known nationally, but who have given just yeomen service. Another man who became one of the lead chaplains in prison ministry in the State of Michigan. There're just numbers of them like that. Pastoral care has been one of the strengths of the seminary. Story_ID: 71954 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I wanna go to your civic activities. You, were you active, I mean I know you were active in the, you know, the Student Christian Movement. And you came here, and you, you know, got involved in pastoring. But were you active? Was that a natural sort of transition where you- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm reading now, just about finished with the 'American Pharaoh:[Mayor Richard J. Daley - His Battle for Chicago and the Nation', Adam Cohen]. I don't know whether you've heard about that. It's, it's the biography of [Mayor] Richard J. Daley, the father, which--is he "J"? Or is his son? VIDEOGRAPHER: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's the father. And I'm at the point where they're talking about CCCO [Coordinating Council of Community Organizations], which was the body that invited Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] to come here. And CCCO stood for the, the Coordinating--the Chicago Coordinating Organization of Community Groups. Al Raby was its leader, and I thought of how I used to go to those meetings because I was the president or chair of the United Church Committee on Equal Justice, and the CCCO [Coordinating Council of Community Organizations] was made up of many various groups. And that was primarily my entry into that. That's how I met Dr. [Martin Luther] King over in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], sitting on the floor. We were raising money back in those days. I mean met him in a very intimate way, you know. But that came natural to me, it came natural to me. And fortunately, I served churches that permitted me to do that, who saw the importance of that. Story_ID: 71955 Speaker 1: Why the United Church of Christ? That's what- Speaker 2: Well, the Congregational churches, that's what I was ordained at, and I joined as a Congregational minister. And the Congregationalists united with the Evangelical and Reformed Church in 1957. And the new name was the United Church of Christ. Speaker 1: And the Congregational church comes out of where? Speaker 2: New England. Speaker 1: New England. Speaker 2: It's an, its origins were in England. Fourteenth Century England, anti-establishment churches, I mean anti-established church. It was a reaction to the Church of England, and a desire for the simplicity of worship and local autonomy, and it came to the American shores with the pilgrims. They brought it here. So it was basically a New England church, and then spread westward, very interested in higher education. In fact, they established, the Congregational churches through the American Missionary Association, which incidentally is an outgrowth of the Friends of Amistad. The people who involved themselves with [Joseph] Cinque and the folk from Sierra Leone basically came out of the churches, out of these old Congregational churches. And they organized something called the Friends of Amistad, and once they had won their freedom and went back to Sierra Leone, they changed their name to the American Missionary Association. And, do you know they went into the South and established five hundred schools, some of them before the Civil War. And some of those schools still exists, Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], Talladega College [Florida], Tugaloo College in Mississippi, Houston Tillotson [University] in Texas and Le Moyne [College] in Memphis [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: So that all came out of this--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yes, and if you go down to Talladega College [Florida], if you would go into that library, you'll see this magnificent mural of the Amistad event [1841] because that was the connection, you know. That story was--and that story was told over and over in black churches in the early days. I'm not sure that it was until the opera and the movie picture that it was told as much. People didn't know about it. Speaker 1: Because I remember when I first heard that--and I saw, the opera was coming out and the (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I said, what is--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: What is this? Speaker 1: --Amistad, I'd heard of it (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 71956 Speaker 1: So, now, you, so you first got involved through CCC [CCCO, Coordinating Council of Community Organizations]- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, that was my, that was my involve--that was the doorway into the Chicago [Freedom] Movement for me, that I was a part of that because I represented our United Church group? Speaker 1: Now, what was Chicago [Illinois] like at that point? And what was--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Hardened, very hardened place. And, and were you here when [Mayor] Harold Washington won? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Do you remember what it was like, leading up to that and the kind of hatred that got expressed? Well, that's what went on here in this city in so many places. I think that was the hardest thing for me to have to comprehend when I came to Chicago [Illinois], how separate we lived and how utterly suspicious people were, and, and also the hatred that surrounded communities. Here, you know, I came out of this town that was where I'd had these integrated experiences, unheard of here in Chicago [Illinois], except in a very few isolated cases. [coughing] Pardon me. So, I would say that that was a very difficult period. I was always expecting something terrible to happen, and I'm not only talking about the riots [1968] because I walked the streets in the riots at the request of the Mayor [Richard J. Daley] until, you know, I'm trying to get people to be calmed down, until one time I said, "This is the last time I'm gonna do this," because in a sense you're getting coopted. You're being asked to quiet people down and yet the conditions in which people lived were not changing. So you have to be careful about not allowing yourself to be used that way. But I was just like a lot of other clergy. If the Mayor [Richard J. Daley] asks you to go and patrol the streets in your collar, you did it, thought that was a responsibility, but I stopped after a point. No, it was a very tense place, very tense. And I think it would be very difficult for the current mayor's father to, to preside in this time. I mean the city radically changed under [Mayor] Harold Washington. I mean it, that was a sea change. And, no, we'll never go back to the exact way it was. I mean I know people criticize this current mayor, but it can't operate like it used to. It was very entrenched--did you grow up here? Speaker 1: I've been here twenty years. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, well, you understand. That was a sea change for this city. I remember going downtown once, and I saw all the protesters working in City Hall (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). That was true. Actually, I was- VIDEOGRAPHER: Six minutes. Speaker 1: Okay, I was working with the City. I, I was a young lawyer, and I had gotten hired as the Cable Administrator under the [Mayor] Jane Byrne administration. Speaker 2: Oh, good. Story_ID: 71957 Speaker 1: Let me, who were some of the people that you interacted and got to know around, you know, this whole time period? I mean you mentioned Al Raby and- Speaker 2: I can't even, I can't even think of some of the names that were in the--but one of my heroes, of course, was [Edwin] Bill Berry, of the Chicago Urban League. And, you know, I later became a board member of that organization, just slightly before [Edwin] Bill Berry retired. But I, I greatly admired him. I thought he was an exceedingly, reasonable, strong person. I would think that he had certainly the greatest influence upon me during that period. You know, I watched him very carefully, and I watched how he moved. Now, there are other friends, whom I've kept up with over the years who were deeply involved. I think of a man like the Reverend James Mack, who was one of the representatives from the United Church, and he used to be the pastor of, hat then used to be called the South Congregational Church. And he's been a long-time friend. But others other people have gone from the city now. I mean, you know, they've gone into other places, but I've been one of those apparently, God didn't want me to leave here. I mean I never got the calls to go other places. But one of the persons that I admired greatly, who lived a very distinguished life, was Earl B. Dickerson, had great love for him. And he, he was an old warrior. And I admired him very much, very much. Some, you know, some people had the freedom to speak out, and he was one of those 'cause he didn't depend upon the largess. I, I became aware of how strong the tentacles were which controlled people during that era, ministers who were very fearful of retaliation if they, if they spoke out or did something. So I never had that feeling. I mean I never had to have it. And yet, when I came to the Church of the Good Shepard, there were people, I guess, who maybe owed their positions to the "organization", I don't know. But they never bothered me. They, they allowed me to, they respected the freedom of the pulpit. I remember getting ready to conduct the services for T. [Theodore] K. Lawless. Do you know that name? Speaker 1: I, I- Speaker 2: It's a very famous dermatologist who died maybe twenty-five years ago. And he'd been chairman of the Chicago [Illinois] Board of Health. And the funeral director came to my study, and knocked on the door and said, Mr. Smith, the mayor is coming. Where shall he sit? I said, "I beg your pardon?" "Where shall he sit?" I said, "Well, we have half of the north side of the church cordoned off for honorary pallbearers." "Well, you know, when the mayor comes, he--and if he goes to other churches, he usually sits up in the chancel of the church, near the minister." I said, "Does he do that at the [Holy Name] Cathedral [Chicago, Illinois] downtown?" "Oh, I don't know." I said, "Well, you find out if he sits next to the Cardinal in the Cathedral downtown" (laughter). I said, "Otherwise, he sits out there with the rest of them." I thought that was incredible. But then, as I thought about that, he was accorded that privilege in a lot of churches on the South Side where he went. But not where I served, you know, and you don't--you keep those things very separate. Speaker 1: That is my mother's biggest pet peeve. I mean she hates. She's, and when you see the- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you know, it's political season. You see the black churches, see them up in the pulpit. I mean that is her, she--(unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I understand--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: --what she means by that. Yeah. Story_ID: 71958 Speaker 1: Now, you were elected to the school board [Chicago Board of Education]. Speaker 2: Yeah, appointed by [Mayor] Jane Byrne. Speaker 1: So what was that whole experience? Speaker 2: It was a mess. It was during the very difficult time--well, between the time that the mayor [Jane Byrne] called me on the phone, and I finally took my seat in--there were two months, and the school system collapsed financially. The superintendent resigned, the president of the board resigned. So by the time I got, took my seat in December of '79' [1979], the communities were just storming the school board [Chicago Board of Education], just lambasting them for their failures and how they had allowed this school system to lose its financial credibility. And we had some hot times, and we had to cut the budget. You know, there was a special legislative session which created the Chicago School Finance Authority. And we had to work with them. That authority then had power over budgeting. It had to approve all budgets and all contracts. It was like, it was like a "little Mac", like Big Mac [Index] was in New York when New York almost floundered, the same people put this together here. And it was a terrible period to be in. But the, when the legislature acted, it called for--every member of the school board [Chicago Board of Education] had to resign or the--their terms would end in April of 1980, which gave Mrs. [Mayor Jane] Byrne this unprecedented opportunity to appoint an almost new board. So she reappointed me because I was perceived as not having been a part of the problem. I'd just gotten on the [Chicago] Board [of Education] in December [1979] after all this stuff happened. But then, I allowed my colleagues to elect me as president, and she was very angry over that because she wanted Tom Ayers, who we found out didn't live in the city. It was just a mess, and--but I said to my colleagues that I would do this for one year and only one year. I had a two-year--when she reappointed me, she appointed me for two years. And I said, I would only serve as president for one year. And I did it, and we, we balanced the budget, and we elected a superintendent, and we got the federal government off our back in that, in that year. And I credit Professor [HM Joyce] Hughes with the genius of helping us work through the issue with the Justice Department because they were gonna use us. I mean this whole business of the segregated schools had been around for years, and they'd been dodging it. But Jimmy [President James] Carter turned it over--well, Patricia Roberts Harris, as his Secretary of Education, turned it over to the Justice Department. And so they were gonna take us to court. But we, we--our [Chicago] Board [of Education] a consent decree, and we locked it, and got the government off our back. I don't think Mrs. [Mayor] Jane Byrne ever understood that until a former dean of the University of Chicago law school said that in my presence, said that in her office. Story_ID: 66752 Speaker 1: --Commitments you've been most proud of and why or civic involvement? Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I think, I've really been proud of all of them (laughter). The Urban League experience was good for me. I felt a real connection to a number of the issues that we were having to deal with in the city [Chicago, Illinois]. And it was the Urban League that proposed my name to the Chicago Board [of Education], to the then nominating committee for the Board of Education. I also chaired the board of the Community Renewal Society and had served on that board for fourteen years. That was an institution, is an institution that connects the churches to urban issues. That was very satisfying. During most of that period, I was a board member of the United Way. In fact, I served on that board for almost eighteen years. And I knew how important that was because that was the support base for a lot of the social service institutions in our community. Maybe the Chicago Community Trust where I'm now senior fellow, which gives away money, was important because of what their grants mean to individual groups and the opportunity to serve as chair of that board, that, that's the last thing that I have done. And they've all been very, very satisfying during the periods that I served them. And this was a part of what I told you I learned very early on, that I had an obligation to the community to, to serve in some capacity. I used to say to my colleagues at the Trust, "I cannot guarantee people grants, but I can get them access to this place. And people know how to find me at the Church of the Good Shepard," they knew. And they knew how to find me at the [Chicago Theological] Seminary. And so people do call me, as they know my name associated with this foundation--and I said this because I've gotten a call from a staff person saying, "All these people are coming down here using your name." And I said, "Well, I usually call and tell you, but do you have a problem with that?" "Well, no, we were just wondering." I said, "Well, that's my job. This is a community foundation. And the community has to have access to you." For some people, going downtown to a foundation office is a big thing. They've never done that before. So if I can ease that, I wanna do it. So that's been satisfying. Story_ID: 66753 Speaker 1: Now, at the point where you are in your life, what do you see yourself doing--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you know, my son asked, my oldest son asked me that. "How long are you gonna be down at the [Chicago Community] Trust, Dad?" And I said, "Well, it started out as a two-year thing, and now it's three years, and it'll end in June," but I said, "I'll find something else to do." I think that goes back to my father, gotta keep going. My friend, Clarence Wood, has become the president of Hull House, and he's been talking to me about coming over to Hull House and doing something, developing some kind of program that would help churches. And I might do that. I mean I, I will, I will have--I'm serving on the National Board of the AARP [American Association of Retired Persons], and I'm a trustee of Talladega College [Florida]. Those are satisfying experiences for me. The National Board of AARP [American Association of Retired Persons] was a six-year commitment and I have served, I'm in the third of those six years now. And I will finish that up. But, you know, I agreed to go on that board because I, I always feared that, as you get older, you might become selfish and think only about yourself and your generation. But I wanna make certain that we have a keen eye for these young people who are coming along and don't try to grab it all for ourselves. And when I say that, I think of communities where there're lots of older people who vote against school bond issues 'cause their children are grown. But these are our children too. Speaker 1: Now, what I also meant by that question, though, is, you've had a very diverse and in many ways, very blessed life, you know, with--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yes, I have. Speaker 1: --(unclear). What things do you wanna do? Speaker 2: Well, I need to write it down. I have two projects. I wanna want the history of Illinois Service Federal [Savings and Loan]. It's in its sixty-seventh year, and I serve on that board, and that history has never been written. And I'd like to write that, and I've started reading minutes. And then I need to, I need to write down these experiences that you have talked about and put them, and put them in some organized fashion. It might be a memoir. It might be, oh, I've talked about writing something under a title, "The Journey of an Inner-City Minister", something, you know. But write down what shaped me and things that I felt deeply about, and some of these heroes that you lifted up, who were the people that influenced you. I need to put that down, if no more than for my children and my grandchildren. Story_ID: 66754 Speaker 1: And speaking of family, there're two sets of things I wanna ask. I wanna ask some philosophical questions, but before I get to that, I'd like--the other night--I can't even tell you how many people said, "Harry Belafonte didn't talk about his family," you know, as if it was (laughter) something he was trying to hide. He didn't get around to it. He only really got to about 1970 (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Most of (unclear) (laughter) it was like a few minutes and then 1970, so I said, no, there was nothing but, since we have you, you know, I'd like you to talk about family. I mean you came from a large family- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and then you have your own family. Speaker 2: Yes, I have my own family. I have three children and four grandchildren. And, fortunately, my, my son, his family lives in Marynook [Chicago, Illinois], and so I get to see my--these three grandchildren very often. And they're all in the church, and they serve as acolytes and my oldest is thirteen, and he's tall as I am or taller. And I, it's hard to believe he's gonna be entering high school next, next fall. But I took my granddaughter--my son and his wife have two boys and a girl. The girl is the middle child. Well, she loves her aunt, my daughter, and so I, I wanted to go visit, drive to Indianapolis [Indiana] to see the daughter. And my wife had a lot of stuff for me to take down. So I took my granddaughter with me, you know. Now, next it'll have to be the youngest grandson because I've taken the older grandson on trips, but that's, those are times for us to be together, and those are very important times. The youngest grandchild, our daughter and her husband's child is two, and so, you know, at that very precious age. And she calls me "Pea Pop". I don't understand how that--I asked my daughter why that? She said, "Well, she saw your picture and said 'Pea Pop'." I guess it's the grand pop. That, you know, she picked up the pop side of it. But family is very important, very, very--I'm very proud of my son as a father and a husband. And I've written him, I've put that in paper, on paper and wrote him that I just admire you and love you for being a good father and a good husband. Now, I have one, the youngest son is in Virginia. He tells us he's going to finish school in June. I said, "Good 'cause I've paid my last tuition" (laughter). He's not coming home at Thanksgiving. But he'll come home at Christmastime. I had to go to Washington [D.C.] once, so I arranged it so I could fly on to Norfolk [Virginia] and visit with him and visit the apartment, which is in my name. But I said to my wife one day, "Why is that some take so long to get themselves straightened out?" She said, "Because when they have fathers who keep supporting them." Well, I was thinking the other day that maybe that's what we're supposed to do (laughter). I mean I don't wanna cripple him. I want him to stand on his own two feet, and, but he ought to be able to turn to me if a crisis comes, and I ought to be able to respond. I'm quite certain that that's the way my father would have done it. And I promised my children that I would send them through undergraduate school, and they could go through without loans. And I've done that, you know. Graduate school, that's something else. They can do that. But I wanna make this commitment. So that's, that's important. Speaker 1: Now, your children, their names and- Speaker 2: Kenneth, Kourtney and Kris[ten], all "K's", all with the same middle initial. Speaker 1: All middle initial but different names? Speaker 2: They're all KBS (laughter). It's the height of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is the (unclear)--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: It's the height of- Speaker 1: And Gladys sort of (unclear)- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Well, she picked Kristen and she picked Kourtney. But it's very nice, and the youngest son has as his license on his car, these vanity license, KBS the III or something like this (laughter). Story_ID: 66755 Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's cute. Okay, I wanna move to some philosophical questions. One is, since we were talking about family, what do you think the institution of--the family, the role of the family plays in, you know, in society? Speaker 2: I think it's a very critical role, and I think where we find that in trouble, our communities are in trouble. And, you know, I know that in part, I am reflecting how I was nurtured, you know, out of this strong family. But I think, I think the sociologists have told us that that primary unit is exceedingly important. Where that falls apart, I think we have all kinds of problems that will be visited upon us for generations to come. I mean where do people experience their first education? It's in that setting. Their understanding and awe, it's in that setting. Their understanding of the other god. It's in that setting. They have to experience this. Where do they, where do they first experience love and being comforted? It's in that setting. When that's absent, I think we're less than human. Speaker 1: And let's talk about faith. What do you see the role--what is faith to you, first of all? Speaker 2: It is the belief in that which cannot be seen with the naked eye but which still guides you. You know, all reality is not that which I can feel and touch with the human hand. But I know it's there. It's like love. You can't see it. You can't touch it like I can touch the chair, but you know when you have it, and you know when you don't. VIDEOGRAPHER: Maybe you could say that again. You covered it up (unclear). Speaker 2: It's, it's like love, you know. You know when you have it, and you know when you don't have it. And yet it cannot be seen with the naked eye. Faith involves that kind of concept. And I think it's the, it's the bedrock of living useful and whole lives. It's that which keeps us from giving up. Story_ID: 66756 Speaker 1: And the role of religion, what is religion to you, which is different from faith? What is that? Speaker 2: Well, religion is the system in which I express my faith. It is the, it is the philosophical context for the expression of my faith. The church is the community where that religion is lived out in part, where two or three are gathered. But religion is not confined to the church. It is lived out in the world as well, but it is undergirded and supported by the community which is the church or the temple or the mosque. Speaker 1: And what do you think the importance of the church or the mosque, you know, of this, to society as a whole? Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's the, it's the place where community gets generated and worked on constantly. And it has a role to speak in the public square about that which is destructive to the human spirit. I think that's its primary role, to speak out against that which is destructive to the human spirit. And where that leads, who knows? It involves speaking the word to the political arena, to the corporate arena, and to all the arenas. It has a major role in the public square. Speaker 1: And as we look into the future, do you have a concern about the role that religion plays in society or, you know, trends that you see occurring? Speaker 2: I just wanna make certain that leaders of all religions will help their people to understand the pluralistic nature, the religion pluralism that exists in our community and not only to help them to understand, but appreciate it. I think the most aggravating wars have been religious wars. And I guess what I, what I want to see religion do and the organized religion is to grasp what St. Paul described as the more excellent way. And he went on to say it's the way of love. But, no, I think that's its role. It's got a corporate role. People can be religious, you know, by themselves. But we were not created to live in isolation. Even the Genesis story of creation, there were two. God created Adam. Adam was lonely, so God created Eve. We live in community. Speaker 1: You don't think someone can commune with their God by themselves? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they can, but I think that it is not like--we live in community. We need relationship with one another. That's why we go to church. We need to express our faith and our religion within a community setting. And organized religion provides that. We're not islands onto ourselves. We live with other folk, and we celebrate with them. And, yeah, we argue with them too. Story_ID: 66757 Speaker 1: And what about the role of the minister in society? I mean you, you know, what, what do you think that role, you know, should be? Speaker 2: He's a--the minister, he or she, they're teachers. They're proclaimers of the word, and they're also persons who give voice to religion's role in public life, not the only voice, but they give voice. And, therefore, they're public people. How they live their lives is very, very, is critically important because people--you need to be able to look up and see their leaders, even of their congregations, as persons of integrity. I think that's very important. I want them to be--well, you know, we don't train ministers only in memorizing scripture. Now, they, we must train them also to understand the human condition and that involves psychology and a whole lot of other disciplines. And for Heaven's sake, I want them to be models in a pulpit. Nothing upsets me more than to go to church and hear the King's English crucified. That just--(laughter). I want 'em to be models. Speaker 1: And what of the statement being of the world, "in the world, but not of the world"? Speaker 2: You live in the world, but your primary, your primary obligation, your, your marching orders come from not the world. So we march by the drum beat of a different drummer, but we march in this world. We relate to this world, but that, that which motivates us, which causes to be, comes from beyond the world. I believe that very deeply. And, you know, that's why Reinhold Niebuhr and [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] could talk about higher goods, you know, a higher authority. That is absolutely true for many of us. Speaker 1: And the minister as a leader, okay, as leader? Speaker 2: Leader of that congregation. Speaker 1: Leader of that congregation. Speaker 2: And he or she may be leaders of other groups, but that depends upon those groups. The, the minister is selected by some group, the congregation or somebody to be in this place. But the authority comes from God, but it also comes from people. Speaker 1: And so the minister has to balance that? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it's like, it's like my saying to Mrs. [Mayor Jane] Byrne once that I take--something she said to me, and I was responding. And I said, I--"Mrs. [Mayor Jane] Byrne, I listen to God, my wife and the congregation that pays my salary." I think I was trying to tell her that I had no--I wasn't in this for personal gain, you know. But, yes, I think every minister has to do that. Story_ID: 66758 Speaker 1: What, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: That, that I've helped to build bridges between people and contributed to the building of the human community. Speaker 1: And why was that important to you in your life? Speaker 2: Because I'm the beneficiary of a community that cared about me, and that cared about the institutions that served me. And I care about those who are gonna come behind me, and I care about the institutions that served them. And that's why I was on the school board. Speaker 1: And do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: No. I, I have been blessed by God. God has given me many opportunities that I never dreamed I would have had growing up, and far beyond anything my parents ever experienced. No, I have no regrets. I have a wife and three children and four grandchildren. So there'll be somebody left when I go to remember me for a little bit. Story_ID: 66759 Speaker 1: And is there--I know you've talked about the people who have influenced you. Is there, you know, and they've been--is there any one, any singular person that you think had the most influence on you? Speaker 2: Outside of my family? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Well, it would be a toss-up between three people, my mentor in Chicago [Illinois] in ministry, [Reverend Dr.] William [J.] Faulkner, Mr. Rice, in Montclair [New Jersey], Professor Jones at Virginia Union [University], and a high school teacher by the name of Skyler. Of those, I would say [Reverend Dr. William J.] Faulkner probably was my greatest, had the greatest influence upon me. Speaker 1: And if you could talk--both of your parents have since passed away, what would you say both to your mother and father? Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you, because that's where my fundamental, my fundamental values came from. They did that. I received an honorary degree years ago, and my mother came here for that. And the man leaned over to my mother and, a black man, and said, "Tell me about your son's background." And she said, "You're looking at it" (laughter). I didn't hear her say this, but Gladys did. And, yeah, that's where it all comes from. Speaker 1: That's it. Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you, ma'am. Story_ID: 66772 Speaker 1: Ready? VIDEOGRAPHER: Um-hum. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother and her two sisters taken about seven years ago. My mother's middle sister on the left. And her youngest sister in the center, who still lives, and she's ninety-two, and my mother on the right. My mother passed away when she was eighty-seven. Speaker 2: Can you give names? Speaker 1: Oh, from left to right, Mabel Poindexter, Lil Johnson in the center and my mother on the right, Dorothy Smith. Speaker 2: Were there three girls in the family or- Speaker 1: Three, that was it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they--my mother and her youngest sister always lived close to each other, my aunt, and my aunt is in the center. She's always lived around us. My other aunt had lived in Richmond, Virginia, and came to New Jersey when she became ill and lived with my mother, and my mother cared for her. Speaker 2: --Son, who is now twenty-four years old. This was taken when he was 14. He loves pictures of himself (laughter). So I keep that on the dresser. He likes to see it there. Speaker 1: Now, who's--what's his name? Speaker 2: His name is Kristen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He is the baby of the family. Speaker 1: And that's C-H-R-I- Speaker 2: K-R-I-S-T-E-N. Speaker 1: Oh, T-E-N, okay. Speaker 2: Now, he's now twenty-four years old, but I always liked that picture. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my oldest son, sitting with me at our church to the left, Kenneth, Jr. who lives here in Chicago [Illinois] with his family. And he now has three children. So I have three grandchildren by him. And not Kenneth, Jr. Speaker 2: Oh, well, I just--this got thrown in. This is a picture of me taken very recently. I'm a national board member of AARP [American Association of Retired Persons]. And this was a picture taken by AARP. Speaker 1: So was it taken in, you think, 2000? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it was taken two months ago. I had a little more hair. Speaker 1: There I am. I must have been thirteen. Speaker 2: That's a nice picture. Speaker 1: Look at my arms, and my jacket which doesn't cover my- Speaker 2: What, they call those mid-sleeves now so you (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Is that right? Speaker 2: --so in style (laughter) (unclear). Speaker 1: And in this picture, there are people from, with whom I'd gone to kindergarten with. Speaker 2: Now, how large was Montclair [New Jersey]? Speaker 1: Montclair is a town of about, between thirty- and thirty-five thousand. Speaker 2: Thousand, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, when I was growing up, it was closer to thirty thousand. It, it got larger during World War II--when I say got larger, I think, my sense was that it did. People sought out the town for--it's basically a residential community, an hour out of New York. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: See if people think I still look like that (laughter). Speaker 2: And so it was an integrated community? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes. The schools were--this, the young man sitting next to me, my best friend- Speaker 2: His name? Speaker 1: His name is Neville Abraham. He lives in Richmond, California, and we have been friends since the fourth grade. Speaker 2: That's fabulous. Speaker 1: It's wonderful (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, this is a picture of me, about 1979, which hangs on the wall of Good Shepard Manor which was a project done by the Church of the Good Shepard [Chicago, Illinois], where I used to be ministered and hangs in the Kenneth B. Smith Room. It, the building was a building for seniors and persons with physical handicaps, and it's located at 67th and Cornell [Chicago, Illinois]. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife, Gladys, and myself taken at some event, easily twenty-five years ago. She looks the same, doesn't she? Speaker 1: Yes, she does. You know, did you meet--did I hear that you met at a LINKS Cotillion? Is that- Speaker 2: Oh, no. I was the minister of the church [Church of the Good Shepherd] (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, of her- Speaker 2: And my wife grew up in that church. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Oh, this is a picture of me in the center, being sworn in as a member of the Chicago Board of Education in 1980. Though I had been appointed to serve, I'd serve six months on an old board. Then the mayor, Mrs. [Jane] Byrne, reappointed me, and I became president of that [Chicago] Board [of Education]. We're in the mayor's office. Speaker 1: Can you identify who else is in the picture? Speaker 2: Oh, gee, Ms. Martha Jantho- Speaker 1: What about--(unclear)- Speaker 2: Oh, this is Professor Joyce- Speaker 1: Let's go all the way over. Speaker 2: Michael Scott, who was next to the youngest member of the board. He's now the chair of the Park District Board [sic, Board of Commissioners, Chicago Park District]. Saul Branzell was a retired labor leader of the, I think the Amalgamated Clothing Workers. And next to Saul Branzell is Professor [HM] Joyce Hughes, a professor of law at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois]. And Ms. Martha--this is Martha Janzo, a very active PTA [Parent Teacher Association] person and League of Women's Voters, and she was on the board. She now works for the Board of Education. Next is Mr. Leon Davis who had been chair of one of the State Boards of Education, and served on that board, and then myself, and then the next person is Mr. Claudio. I think his name, his first name is just escaping me as well as I know it. He was the youngest member of the board, I think twenty-seven. Michael [Scott] was like twenty-nine. And then the next person, gee, his name is just escaping me. And then Mrs. [Jane] Byrne is hiding. She's in front of one member there, and, and those two names are just--Salses (ph.) is the one here, and I can't see the other person. Story_ID: 66774 Speaker 1: This is after my wife and I were married at the church in 1971. We married immediately after service, and this is after the ceremony, and we're coming down the aisle, leaving. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: And you said the year, right? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy one [1971]. Speaker 1: Oh, this is when I became the minister at the Church of the Good Shepard [Chicago, Illinois] in 1968, and this was the vows of installation. Standing with me, the gentleman standing at the mic is Dr. Arthur D. Gray who had once been minister of this church and then president of Talladega College [Florida]. And after Talladega College, he returned to Chicago [Illinois] and was minister of the Congregational Church of Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: Same hairstyle, isn't it? I didn't mean to have it that way. I mean he cut too much off this last time (laughter). VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes, this is my high school yearbook picture. I graduated from the Montclair High School [New Jersey] in 1949, and this is the picture. And this picture was, this was my badge at the fiftieth anniversary of the graduation in which I attended a year ago. Speaker 2: Oh, this is a picture of my two oldest friends. On the left is Mr. Giles, Mr. Elmore Giles, who lives out in Colma, California. We've known each other since we were sophomore at college, not at the same college, but we met at a student conference. And the middle picture is one of Mr. Neville Abraham, my oldest friend, best friend since fourth grade who lives in Richmond, California. And this was taken just last summer, the summer of 2000. Speaker 1: Picture taken on the occasion of my tenth year at the Church of the Good Shepard [Chicago, Illinois]. And my children, my youngest children sitting with me. To my, on the left is my youngest son, Kris, Kristen, and the little girl is Kourtney. Kristen is now twenty-four. Kourtney is now twenty-seven, and my wife, Gladys. Speaker 2: A picture of my best friend, Neville Abraham, on the left, and his wife, who is a Chicagoan [Illinois]. In fact- Speaker 1: Name? Speaker 2: Her name is Wilhelmina Abraham. And I introduced them. And I was the best man at his wedding. Speaker 1: This is a nice friendship. Speaker 2: Oh, it is. And I officiated at both of his sons' weddings. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay. Speaker 2: From college in 1953, from Virginia Union University in Richmond, Virginia. Now, the point is, does that picture look like the picture from high school? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: You think it does? Speaker 1: I do. Speaker 2: Did I say that was 1953? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this was Virginia Union [University]? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Dillard University, and this was an occasion when my wife visited, and it's just one of those nice pictures. And in addition to getting her degree, she also found her husband there. Speaker 1: What did you say about high school? Speaker 2: I said our daughter went to Dillard University [Louisiana], and my wife was visiting her in New Orleans [Louisiana]. And I said, in addition to getting her degree, she also found a husband. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Nice young man. Speaker 1: Kourtney...