 Story_ID: 444273 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Ray Shepard [Ray A. Shepard]. Sir, can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: All right. Cornelius, C-O-R-N-E-L-I-U-S, O, Orvell, O-R-V-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Orvell? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Shepard, S-H-E-P-A-R-D. Speaker 1: Okay, and you have a nickname too, right? Speaker 2: Boots [HistoryMaker Cornelius "Boots" Shepard]. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you wanna tell us how you got that name? Speaker 2: Well, when I was a kid all the schools had on the playground all the cinders from came out of the furnace, and instead of--they'd dump 'em on the school ground kids play on and they would cut a shoe up in no time, those cinders would. And they--my father [Ray Shepard] took me downtown to buy me a pair of shoes, and the boots just came out with the knife on the side. And, when we got down there and they're gonna buy me a pair of shoes. And they called them hobnails, they're shoes and they had a piece come over the toe. And he was gonna buy me these hobnail shoes 'cause they was rubber soles and cinders didn't cut them so bad, they was leather. And I didn't want 'em and he was gonna make me wear 'em anyway. And I acted up and hollered and cried, and went on. So he bought me the boots. And when we got back home, he told my mother [Mabel Smith Shepard], said, "I ought to have killed him." Said, "I bought the boots for him and I'm not gone take 'em off of 'em until he graduates." And from then on everybody called me Boots, so I got relatives don't know my name. I get a letter sometimes, "Boots Shepard," from some of my relatives, they don't know what my first name is. Nobody ever, ever thinks about it I guess. I was in the fifth grade before I learned to spell it. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July the 11th, 1915. Sedalia, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay, and okay, so what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Chef cook, or cook. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were a cook for the railroad, right? Speaker 2: Right. For thirty-nine years. Speaker 1: What railroad company did you work for? Speaker 2: Burlington Railroad [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad]. Speaker 1: Burlington, okay, all right. And, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: I don't know what it is. Wait a minute, look on that paper there, it'll tell you. Speaker 1: Oh, I think it's October the 4th, is that it? Speaker 2: Yeah, 4th. That's what it is, 4th. Speaker 1: October the 4th and it's the year, what? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: It's the year, what? Speaker 2: O' seven [2007]. Speaker 1: Okay, 2007. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: And we're--where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're in Lincoln, Nebraska. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The town. Story_ID: 444274 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five kind of lightweight questions we ask as a warm-up, you know. They only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite food. I eat practically everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yeah, my favorite color is brown and green. Those are my favorite colors. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, I don't have no favorite time a year. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, don't have a vacation destination. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or a saying? Speaker 2: No, don't have a favorite saying as I know of. I can't remember any. Story_ID: 444275 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Ray Shepard] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Mabel Smith [Mabel Smith Shepard]. Speaker 1: Okay. Is Smith her maiden name? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September the 21st, 1892. Speaker 1: Okay. And, where was she born? Speaker 2: Warrensburg, Missouri. Speaker 1: W-A-R-R-E-N-S-B-U-R-G? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what do you know about 'em? Speaker 2: Well, her mother died when she was a kid, and her father [William H. Smith] went back to St. Louis [Missouri] and got her mother [Martha Branum] and brought her to raise, raised his kids, raised his--he had two daughters and two sons. And she came over and he moved around to different towns because he was a Methodist preacher. And he came and brought her back from--brought her in from St. Louis because she--and she raised the kids. And she died in 1930 in Sedalia [Missouri]. I don't know how old she was. Speaker 1: Oh, that's your mother's mother? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. My great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you know--are there any stories from that side of the family about what they--did they go back any further than that? Speaker 2: No, but it--when the kids got up grown, she moved around with him as his housekeeper at different towns wherever the conference moved him to. And, I used to go stay with them most of the time until I got old enough to go to school. He preached in (unclear), Missouri after he left Warrensburg, and Mexico, Missouri, Slater, Missouri, Lexington, Missouri, and can't think of that name, name of the town now down in--Springfield [Missouri] is a-- Speaker 1: Well, as far as you know, was that side of the family--were they in Missouri at the end of slavery? Do you know that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They were already there? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think all of them. There is some--my grandfather's mother and father homesteaded in Dresden [Missouri]--not Dresden, Shrewsbury, Missouri. That's where they homesteaded at. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were someplace else? Speaker 2: They were from Georgia. Speaker 1: From Georgia, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they came from Georgia. And they--his mother and father left and homesteaded another place in Sedalia that was about three acres. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, do you know anything about what, what kind of deal they got as a homesteader? Did that mean that they got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was theirs. Speaker 1: Okay, so they settled a place that was theirs? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was theirs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they had to improve it, build a house on it and everything. And they built a house out of doors from old railroad cars. That's what the house was built out of. And when they died they had three boys, I mean two boys, no, three boys and one girl. And, when they died, they split the property up in the three boys 'cause the two sisters had died, and the three boys they cut it up into three different lots. And my grandfather took the part he had and made a fruit orchard out of it. It had nothing on it but orchard trees. 'Cause he had bought a home where my mother lived and everything. And we used to call it going across the branch. The branch runs through town, and they were on that side of the branch and we lived on the other side. We lived on the south side of the branch, so anytime you go over I said, "They're going across the branch." Story_ID: 444276 Speaker 1: Can you give us your [maternal] grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Yeah. W.H. Smith [William H. Smith]. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know what part of Georgia he was from? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Didn't know he was from Georgia until they sold that homestead place down there and saw it on the, saw it on the deed and everything. And he was dead then. That's how come I know where he was from 'cause we never, never even thought about it. I don't think my mother [Mabel Smith Shepard] ever thought about it, I don't think she knew anything. But that's when we found out, found out about the homestead and everything. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, that's your great-grandfather and your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, he's my grandfather. Speaker 1: That's your grandfather? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my grandfather, that was my mother's father. Speaker 1: Oh, your mother's father, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Grandfather. Great-grandfather, I never knew him. All I ever knew that he was white and he was a policeman in St. Louis [Missouri]. I heard that. I never did know it for sure but that's what we was always told. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mother's grandmother, she was half white. Speaker 1: Okay, so--but it was your great-grandfather that came from Georgia that homesteaded? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Then your grandfather was W.H. Smith? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was the son, he was born up there where they first homesteaded at in (unclear), Missouri. And my mother was born in Warrensburg, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So the people that came from Georgia were black, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: On--okay, so that was a set of grandparents from Georgia and then they--the other--your grandfather's father was a white policeman from St. Louis? That's the story. Speaker 2: My great-grandmother was born in slavery, and she was raised by the master, her and her sister. She didn't know anything about her mother or father or anything. And that was in Fayette--they were born in Fayette, Missouri where they were raised up at. Her and her sister had a sister named Sarah, Sarah Boone [ph.]. She lived in Fayette, Missouri. Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name? Or your great-grandmother, what was her name? Speaker 2: Martha. Speaker 1: Martha Boone? Speaker 2: Martha Branum. Speaker 1: Branum? Okay. Okay, all right, so any stories from that group of people? Speaker 2: No, only thing I know, she went blind and she smoked a cob pipe. And she growed this brand twist tobacco and she'd put it up in my father's [Ray Shepard] cigar box. And we was around there one time and I got a hold of a .22 bullet and put it in her tobacco. And she lit her pipe and that bullet got hot and went off, and when she went and looked around she didn't have nothing but the stem sticking in her mouth. And 'course I almost got killed for it. Speaker 1: Did you do it on purpose? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a kid playing. I didn't know no better. And that bullet went off and scared everybody to death. And my grandmother said, called me a--you nasty, stinking devil. And my mother, if they had child abuse, they'd sent her to the penitentiary 'cause she almost killed me. Speaker 1: Sounds like a pretty rough prank (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Always doing something didn't have no business doing. Story_ID: 444277 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mabel Smith Shepard] talk about growing up or did she have any stories of growing up in Sedalia [Missouri]? Or Warrensburg [Missouri], now, did she grow up in Warrensburg (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she growed up in Sedalia, Missouri-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she died, never lived any place else since she was three years old. That house that she died and that we was raised up in and everything, she'd been in that house since, ever since she was three years old. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your mother grew up in Sedalia. And do you know why your family moved to Sedalia from Warrensburg? Speaker 2: Well, that's when he [William H. Smith] used to--he had started teaching school, her father had. He was a--he taught school for a while and then he, he was ordained at--minister at Iowa Wesleyan [ph.]. That's where he was ordained at. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he was a pretty important person in the community I would guess if he was a Methodist minister and a teacher too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. All right. Iowa Wesleyan is a Methodist school too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Named after John Wesley I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so did your mother--was there like a black community in Sedalia where they grew up (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there was, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, what was it called? Was there a name for it? Speaker 2: No. Lived over north and several railroads came down and split it. On the south side of it was the south side, all white. You had a few blacks lived south but they was scattered in there to different areas. They had homesteaded in there, and most all the blacks and a few whites, and a lot of Jews lived over north where the blacks lived. Didn't go to school together. I lived across the street from the school, and I had two blocks that three white families lived right there with us. Played together and everything but didn't go to school together. Speaker 1: Okay, so the schools were strictly segregated? Speaker 2: Yeah, school was right across the street from where we lived, and two doors down east of us a Jew family lived there, and a block north they had a grocery store. And he was a Jew, he lived there and his family, had two boys and a girl. And four blocks southwest was a Jew family named Stafel [ph.], they had a grocery store there. And then down on the corner of Osage [Avenue] and Cooper [Street] that was three blocks, three blocks from where we lived. That was (unclear) had a grocery store there and two blocks north of him, had another family, Jew family there they were Wasmans [ph.]. Now when you left--when you crossed those railroad tracks you've gone north, and you'd be over north, that's how it was. Right, the Missouri Railroad [Missouri Pacific Railroad] crossed there and the first street would be Pacific [Street]. Next street to that would be St. Louis Street, the next one would be Johnson Street, I mean Pettis Street, and the next one would be Cooper Street, and the next one would be Morgan Street, and the next one would be Johnson Street. Speaker 1: But most of the people there were like--was it mostly like a Jewish neighborhood with, with some black people in it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was mostly blacks. Speaker 1: Mostly blacks? Okay. Speaker 2: They, they just had business there that's all. Speaker 1: Okay, so the Jewish members of the community had most of the businesses? Speaker 2: Yeah, all over there, yeah. Was all over, all the Jews. Story_ID: 444278 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mabel Smith Shepard] have a chance to go to high school or college (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, she had a chance but she didn't, she didn't--I didn't know until 'bout two weeks before she died. I didn't know she hadn't finished high school. She quit school in the tenth grade. I didn't know that, we never even thought about it or heard anything about it until then. Speaker 1: Well, did she have a lot of brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yeah, she had two brothers and one sister. And one of the brothers--the oldest boy got killed in the elevator in St. Louis [Missouri]. And the second brother [Raymond Smith], he was a barber and he worked at Missouri shops. And my father [Ray Shepard] and he went to George R. Smith College [Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Now, George R. Smith College? Speaker 2: Yeah, George R. Smith College. Speaker 1: Now that was a--you say that was a Methodist (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Methodist school, black. Speaker 1: Okay, black school [HBCU]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And it's, it doesn't exist anymore, right? Speaker 2: No, it burnt down in 1928. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they never was able to replace it. Speaker 1: Now, is there a reason that your mother didn't go to school? Did she, did she get married right after or in high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. I didn't know it until I was at the doctor's office and getting ready to put her in the nursing home. And he asked her, how much schooling did she have, and she said, and it knocked me off my feet. Never thought about it, never once asked about it, and never even dawned on it, never heard anything about it until then. And I couldn't believe it. Speaker 1: Well, the general impression she gave is that she was very well educated? Speaker 2: Well, I just knew she'd finished high school, I just knew it, just knew it. 'Cause she did everything, everything right. Be sure we stayed there. Story_ID: 444279 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Give you my father's name? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Ray. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: R-A-Y, Shepard [Ray Shepard]. Speaker 1: No, no middle name or anything? Speaker 2: No, no middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know what year, but he died in 1936, February the 13th, and his birthday is the 12th of January. He was forty-three years old, one month and one day when he died. Now you go back there and find his year. (Laughter) I never have thought to go back there. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in the 1890s too. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born in around there somewhere. Speaker 1: Yeah, now what do you know--and where was he born? Was he born in Sedalia [Missouri]? Speaker 2: No, he was born in Poplar Bluff, Missouri. Speaker 1: Poplar Bluff, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Poplar Bluff. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, his part of the family in Sedalia, his mother moved to Sedalia, he never talked about his father but never knew anything about his father, but we knew his stepfather. His stepfather was a custodian at one of the junior high schools there in Sedalia, white school. And he owned some--he homesteaded some property there in Sedalia across the branch. And he had built another house on it and that's where his daughter lived when she got married and started having kids. That's where she raised her kids at. Speaker 1: What was his mother's name? Speaker 2: Mary Jane. Speaker 1: Mary Jane Shepard [Mary Shepard]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you know your grandfather on that side (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, never did hear nothing about his father, whether he died or what. I don't know. Her married name was--his stepfather's name was Stewart [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father have any stories of growing up that he shared with you? Did he talk about growing up? Speaker 2: Never talked about it. He loved to hunt and fish. Speaker 1: Now, as far as you know, were his people always from Missouri or did they have a story of coming from someplace else? Speaker 2: Naw, they were all, all of 'em but my, all of 'em but my grandfather [William H. Smith]. He's the only one, he's the only one of the family comes from someplace else. So all the rest of 'em but one reared right there in Missouri. Speaker 1: Where did your grandfather come from? Speaker 2: Georgia. He was the one that owned the property that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On your father's side? Your grandfather on your father's side? Speaker 2: No, on my mother's [Mabel Smith Shepard] side. Speaker 1: On your mother's side. That's what I thought, yeah. I was talking about your father's side of the family. Okay. Speaker 2: No, all the, all the relatives Ohrenburgs [ph.], all of them, they find 'em 'round Jackson, Missouri, Poplar Bluff, Missouri, Cape Girardeau, Missouri, and, Cape Girardeau, Jackson, and there's another town all down there together right close to the Arkansas line right out of St. Louis [Missouri] there. And they were all--Ohrenburgs and Shepards were all related. My grandmother on my father's side, his mother was a Ohrenburg. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? How do you spell Ohrenburg? Speaker 2: Now don't ask me that. (Laughter) Tell you right quick, I don't know how--how do you spell Ohrenburg. I don't know. Speaker 1: Sounds German. Speaker 2: I guess it is. How you spell Ohrenburg, Ray [Ray A. Shepard]? Speaker 1: (RAY A. SHEPARD): I think U-N-U-G-A-N-B-E-R-G or B-U-R-G [sic.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's how I kind of wrote it down. B-U-R-G? Speaker 1: (RAY A. SHEPARD): Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Don't ask me 'cause I never-- Speaker 1: (RAY A. SHEPARD): There was a large German settlement in St. Louis. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, all right. Now, did your father get a chance to finish school himself? Speaker 1: Yeah, he went to George R. Smith College [Sedalia, Missouri]. He played football, baseball at George R. Smith College. Speaker 2: Okay, now what did he study in school? Speaker 1: I don't know, never did say. (Laughter) I don't think he finished. But he--I don't think he ever finished George R. Smith College. Speaker 2: He was there but you don't think he finished school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What did he do for a living? Speaker 1: He worked at the shops, Missouri shops. Speaker 2: What shops? Speaker 1: Missouri Pacific Railroad shops, yeah, shops (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, okay, Missouri Pacific. Speaker 1: That's the largest shop, the Missouri Pacific. Story_ID: 444280 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Mabel Smith Shepard and Ray Shepard] met? Did they share with you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't know that. I don't know nothing about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Never was told anything about anything, never was told anything about it so I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know about what time they got married? Speaker 2: No, no, I don't. Be about 1911, 1911 or 1912. Speaker 1: Now did they have any stories about their early life that they shared with you at all? Speaker 2: No, no, never heard it. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did they stay married? Speaker 2: Yeah. They separated, well, I guess when I was about sixteen or something like that because he got his thumb cut off at the shops and they had to send him to St. Louis [Missouri] to the hospital--St. Louis City Hospital in St. Louis. And while he was there he got a job on the dining car as a waiter and then they started railroading. He was running from St. Louis to Wichita, Kansas and then he got a little in trouble there--whupped the steward and shot his gun all at the same time. And he got--and he came home and stayed overnight, next morning we got up, he's gone. Speaker 1: And so he was wanted by the-- Speaker 2: Didn't hear nothing about no warrant or nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And all we heard or all we know he wasn't be--we couldn't find him, and about six months we got a letter from him he was in Omaha, Nebraska. And he went to work for Union Pacific [Union Pacific Railroad] in Omaha. And then he got transferred from there to Portland, Oregon and he worked on the Portland Rose from--Portland Rose from Portland, Oregon to Chicago [Illinois]. And then he got turned down on that on account of his heart after he'd been there a few years. And then he--my uncle, my mother's brother [Raymond Smith] was a barber here and he came back, came back here and stopped--came back to Omaha and then he comes down here with my mother's brother. And that's where he died in. Story_ID: 444281 Speaker 1: Can you tell that story again about the bottles? Now, you said that you used to collect whiskey bottles (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my father [Ray Shepard] worked for the white bootleggers and the gamblers, and upstairs they had the gambling and downstairs they had a front, cigar store. It'd be about four or five feet wide and a (unclear) going across in the back door over here it'll go back, all in the back, that's where the whiskey and everything was. And my father would be back there cleaning the whiskey bottles and filling 'em up. Well, when I'd go in they'd say, "Go on back there, take 'em back there to him, Boots [HistoryMaker Cornelius "Boots" Shepard], your dad's back there. Go back there." And my father would take 'em, and he'd count 'em and tell--and give me a paper, I had ten or twenty. I'd go back out there and give it to the guy at behind the--on the cash register, and he'd reach over and give me--he'd count my money out to me, nickel a bottle. I'd go down the street, turn, come back up the alley, pick my whiskey bottles up, take 'em about two blocks over to the white bootlegger--I mean, black bootlegger and sell it to him and he'd pay me three cents for 'em. So I got eight cents for one bottle. All the rest of the black kids didn't know where they were, where to go and everything. And I wouldn't tell 'em. And I'd be getting eight cents for bottles and they were getting three cents. Speaker 1: Now, put it in perspective now. How, I mean, eight cents per bottle in those days, that wasn't too bad, was it? I mean, that's like getting what now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that was good, that was good. I don't know what they get for 'em now that's 'cause I don't guess they sell 'em like that no more. Speaker 1: No, but it would be like--it wouldn't be like eight cents now, it'd be like fifty cents, a dollar, or something? Speaker 2: No, it wouldn't be that much. Speaker 1: It wouldn't be that much? You don't think? Speaker 2: Might give you a nickel for 'em or ten cents for 'em maybe. Speaker 1: No, I'm saying what eight cents was worth then, what is that worth now? Speaker 2: Eight cents is worth about a quarter of what it is now. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. So it'd be like a quarter apiece then? Speaker 2: Yeah, it'd be like a quarter. Yeah, eight cents was a whole lot. Three cents was a whole lot. Speaker 1: And what could you get with--how much did a bottle of milk cost then? Speaker 2: Bottle of milk? Ten or fifteen cents. Ten cents, twelve cents. Speaker 1: And now it's like-- Speaker 2: Eggs (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's over a dollar now for-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you go, go buy eggs, and mother tells you--before they started raising chickens--you go to the store, give you a nickel or a dime, tell you go get me two eggs, go get me one egg. Whatever you have. Speaker 1: Okay. So that money went pretty far in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. You never know--didn't know what it was--on a Saturday I'd go uptown at the shining parlor. It was owned by the fellow that had that had the bowling alley, and it was (unclear) shining stand. And he would hire--he had two or three boys that worked in there regular. And, if you got in with him, you could go in there and set around with him and you shine shoes and you'd make--your tip was yours. 'Cause everybody got a shoeshine, it was a dime, bet he's gonna tip a nickel or a dime. You could bet on that. And everybody--on Saturday that shining stand would be full of--would be sometimes we'd have three, three guys going--you'd be going down shining three pair of shoes at a time. See. You get that rag and then you learn to pop it, and put it on its heel and then jerk it out and pop it. Then you know it--when you did that, you know you got a tip coming. Then if you could go long toward two like its pop, pop, pop, you got folks--if you're good enough to do that, you bet you gonna make some money on Saturday. Stop by Clover's store [ph.] and Sunday, you bet we gonna have meatloaf and spaghetti. And get that, get a quarter worth of sugar, quarter worth of hamburger and sausage mix, that's for the meatloaf, and a pack of spaghetti and can of tomatoes. You carry that home, you got Sunday dinner made for mama. And that was, that was all right. You didn't buy no ten pounds of sugar, quarter's worth of sugar. Quarter's worth of this, dime for this. You knew it the whole time you had over a dollar in your pocket, when you done been up there hustling at the shining stand and made some money. And (unclear) all the rest of you have a dime or fifteen cents in your pocket, hell, you was rich. Story_ID: 444282 Speaker 1: You grew up in basically the 1920s, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were born in 1915 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was born in 1915. Speaker 1: --so this is Prohibition I think was passed in 1920 [sic. National Prohibition Act of 1919], is that it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so drinking was illegal, and so all the people that drank had to deal with a bootlegger. Speaker 2: Yeah, bootlegger. And white bootlegger, he handled--he would deliver--he'd hire a black guy to drive his car or drive his car, he'd give him a car to drive. And he delivered all the whiskey around to all the different bootleggers in town. See, he'd buy a gallon a whiskey for dollar or a dollar and a half, and you go where to buy it, it'd cost you a dollar and a half for a pint of whiskey. And, if you worked at the hotel hopping bells--I worked at the hotel at fourteen years old. And, at night worked from seven to seven in the morning. Got off at seven in the morning, and go to school. And got fifty cents a night for working, and you got paid every Friday, $3.50. That was your salary. And course, you make $2 or 3 during the weekdays, at night. Weekends you make maybe $5 or 10, it all depends. Speaker 1: So when you were growing up basically--now, where did you first live when you were--well, what's your earliest house that you can remember? Speaker 2: That was it. Speaker 1: That was it, the same place? Speaker 2: Yes sir. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is the place your, you said your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 305 West Johnson [305 West Johnson Street, Sedalia, Missouri], I think I got a picture of it around here somewhere. Speaker 1: And you said your mother [Mabel Smith Shepard] grew up there and she stayed there her whole life? Speaker 2: My mother was there. Never lived any place else since she was three years old. That's where she died at. Speaker 1: And it's three old--what is it, three? Speaker 2: She left there, but she moved there when she was three years old. Speaker 1: What's the address again? Speaker 2: 305 West Johnson Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the house is still there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so your father [Ray Shepard] was there, your mother was there. Did you have any brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yeah, just one brother. There was two of us. Speaker 1: Was your brother older than you? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was three years older than me. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what's your brother's name? Speaker 2: Willard [Willard Shepard]. Raymond Willard. Speaker 1: Okay, so was he a junior? Speaker 2: Huh? No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, so--and, you said you'd sometimes spend time with your grandfather [William H. Smith], right, the preacher? Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to before I was old enough to go to school, I used to go stay with my grandfather quite a bit. Story_ID: 444283 Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sounds, I don't remember much. We all loved to play ball, everybody played ball. Go down to--I just think about I go down (unclear) go down in Missouri, they had a park about three blocks down the street from where we lived--thirty-five acres was given to the blacks with a park 'cause we never had a black park. Had a white park but didn't have no black park, and-- Speaker 1: So you--were the blacks not allowed to go to the other park? You couldn't go? Speaker 2: No, you wasn't able to go there. No, you couldn't play there, you couldn't swim, couldn't play. But you could rent the hall for dances and stuff but you couldn't go there and swing or nothing like that, swimming pool or nothing. Couldn't do nothing like that. Woman by the name of Mrs. Cotton [Sarah Smith Cotton], Cotton family, she would call up people that died and they owned a whole lot of property and they gave us thirty-five acres three blocks down the street from where we lived. And gave 'em thirty-five acres for a black park. And they named it after the principal [Christopher Columbus Hubbard] of the high school [Lincoln School; C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri], Hubbard Park [Sedalia, Missouri]. Story_ID: 444284 Speaker 1: Racial tension when you grew up in terms of--was there any (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not in Sedalia [Missouri] it wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sedalia was--population about 30,000, 15,000 blacks. 'Bout half and half. That's what it was. Only thing about it, we was just segregated at schools. Speaker 1: That's--50 percent black then the town was, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, well, there was no riot or anything like that when you were growing up there? Speaker 2: At one time when George R. Smith College [Sedalia, Missouri] was there, they had a lot of the people give boys going to school at George Smith College--give 'em a job at their house and make a room in the basement for 'em. And they had to take care of the ashes and stuff out of the furnace. And, one time this fellow, Larry [ph.], he went to the show, went to the theater at night and the people he lived with had a daughter and she was at the theater. And so, they were walking home and somebody saw it, and the next morning, they formed up around on one those bars got to drinking, and they'd gone over to George R. Smith College to get him. And that's the only time they come to almost having a race riot. Speaker 1: Okay, so the girl was white? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And, when they formed and started towards the George R. Smith College, and all the black businesses was all on East Main. Pool hall, gambling, all the bars and everything, they were all on East Main Street. And when they started to cross East Main Street to get to Missouri Pacific [Missouri Pacific Railroad] tracks, the blacks fell out and come out of all those joints with shotguns. And the fire department come over and turned the hose on the whites and kept 'em back. And that's the first time--and the waiters that worked at the hotel, they got on top of the hotel, Terry Hotel [Sedalia, Missouri], and dropped soup bowls on the people's heads in the bar. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Yeah, didn't bother 'em either. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: I was about, I'm about fourteen years old when that happened. Speaker 1: By 1930 almost, 1929? Speaker 2: Yeah, about somewhere about--I don't know whether it was or not. Speaker 1: Well, you said--now, you said that George R. Smith burned down in 1928. Speaker 2: Twenty-eight [1928], burnt down in '28 [1928] so it had to be before then. I don't know how (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, do you suspect--this is an important question. Do you suspect that George R. Smith was burnt down because of racial tension? Speaker 2: I don't know what happened or what caused it. All I know is it burnt down and lit up the whole north side I know that. I remember seeing that. Speaker 1: People didn't talk about that? They didn't suspect that it was burnt down because of Speaker 2: Nobody never did say--there was nothing ever said about it. Speaker 1: But it was just on the--I mean, these two things happened real close together now. Speaker 2: It might have been, I don't know. Speaker 1: The white community coming over to George R. Smith to burn it down and then pretty soon it burns down. Speaker 2: Somebody set it on fire, they said. I do remember that. But they never did do anything about it. Speaker 1: So that's worth investigating though I guess. Somebody that's watching this in the future probably needs to check it out and see. Speaker 2: It was over in the east part of town, and that was where all the whites lived over there. Speaker 1: Okay, so whites lived around the college (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, around the school, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's interesting, yeah. Story_ID: 444285 Speaker 1: What was the name of your school, the school that you attended? Speaker 2: Lincoln high [Lincoln School; C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay, and that was like for all the grades? Speaker 2: No, they had a, they had--when I started at school I started in grade school. It was Franklin High--Franklin School [Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Franklin School, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Franklin School. And it went to the fourth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you went to Lincoln? Speaker 2: Then you transferred to Lincoln School, Lincoln. And then the high school and grade school was there and they built a new school before I was graduated. There was a new school there and they added it on to Lincoln School, and it was--and you could--it was the high school. And it changed the name to--started at fifth grade and upstairs it started the junior high. It's sixth and seventh and eighth grade. And then the--come out of the eighth grade you went into high school. And the new school was the high school. Story_ID: 444286 Speaker 1: You liked to play ball, you said before (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, quite a (unclear). I was a ballplayer. Speaker 1: What, I mean, did, people play mostly baseball or football or what? Speaker 2: We played 'em all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) We played 'em all. Our yard was so big that we played football and baseball both out on a vacant lot there. Our house was built on two lots and we--that was a--and then they had a prairie before they built the new school, that was a prairie. And the undertaker owned all that, and we played baseball over there. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you ever see the Negro League baseball players? Speaker 2: Yeah, saw Satchel Paige. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Loved Satchel Paige when they had a baseball team here in Sedalia [Missouri], but I forgot the name of it though. Had a pitcher by the name of Drake, last name was Drake, Plunk Drake [Bill Drake], that was his name. He was a pitcher along with--and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Plunk Drake, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, Plunk Drake. Speaker 1: Okay, he's a pitcher okay. But you can't remember the name of the team? Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of the team. Speaker 1: But it was a Sedalia team? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a Sedalia team, black team, the home team. Speaker 1: Okay, did they play like the Kansas City Monarchs and the other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think they played the Monarchs, I don't know whether they did or not but they--all those towns around there had a, had a town team. Speaker 1: So, when you saw Satchel Paige, was he coming through with the Kansas City Monarchs or what? Speaker 2: He was with the Monarchs then. Yeah, when I saw him play. Speaker 1: Yeah, but did you see him in Kansas City [Missouri] or did he come up to Sedalia? Speaker 2: I saw him in Sedalia and I saw him play here, I saw him play the House of David right here in Lincoln [Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Oh, the House of David, that was Jewish team, right? Speaker 2: Yes, right. And I saw, I saw Goose Tatum and--play with the Harlem-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters]? Speaker 2: Not the Globetrotters, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Oh, the team before the--not the New York Rens [New York Renaissance], but not them? Speaker 2: Naw, it'll come to me in a minute. But, Goose Tatum played first base and then when they, then when they went into service he was stationed out here. And he played basketball--they had a basketball--the [U.S.] Air Force had a basketball team here. And I took the kids and all of 'em went up to the stadium to see him play basketball. Satchel Paige, I saw him, I saw him pitch against the House of David, 1934, right here in Lincoln. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the name of the Air Force base over there? Speaker 2: I don't know what the name of that team was. Speaker 1: No, the base, the Air Force base? Speaker 2: Lincoln Air Base [Lincoln Air Force Base, Nebraska] that's all I--yeah, that's what it was. It was Lincoln Air Base. Speaker 1: All right. Okay, all right. Now what did you like best, baseball or football? Speaker 2: I liked 'em both. I was too short to play basketball but I played basketball in high school [Lincoln School; C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri], yeah. Played on the varsity team too, 5'5", on the court. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, did you have a pretty good team? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a good team. Speaker 1: Now, what did you play in baseball? Speaker 2: Baseball, played center field and second base. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did you play in football? Speaker 2: Quarterback. I played quarterback out at Nebraska Wesleyan [Nebraska Wesleyan University, Lincoln, Nebraska], 1936. I was the only black thing on the campus (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, really? So, you were the--okay, now I don't wanna get you there yet but in high school, now, you started playing in high school. And you told me when I came in that you had three coaches that were all Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] men, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And what were their names? Speaker 2: Lucas [ph.], Paul Harris was the first and Lewis [ph.]. I don't know what Lewis' name was, was his name Paul too? I don't know. His last name was Lewis. And then Lucas. Speaker 1: Lewis, Lucas and who was the other one? You got Lewis, Lucas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Harris. Speaker 1: Harris, okay, Harris all right. All coaches who went to Wilberforce University (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, all graduated from Wilberforce. Story_ID: 444287 Speaker 1: So, you were the quarterback-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you had a story--when I came in you told a story about a fake field goal attempt. Can you tell me about that one and what your coach did? Was this in high school [Lincoln School; C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]? Is this a high school story? Speaker 2: Yeah, Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Tell me what happened, you were playing another town, right? In another town, right? You said you were playing in another town and they kind of--they were like--they called back three touchdowns. Speaker 2: That was in Columbia. That was in Columbia, Missouri. That was in high school, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was in high school. We'd made three touchdowns and they'd called it--called 'em back, and Columbia finally got 'em to made a touchdown but they didn't make the extra point. And, when they kicked off to us, I run the ball down and got down to the where we were close to the goal line. I throwed a pass to my end and he got the ball and he made a touchdown and it was wide open so they had to give it to us. And the score was tied up. And went to kick the extra point, going for the extra point--Lucas [ph.] was the coach and I had--I can't remember who did the kicking--get back like he was gonna kick. And I asked the referee to give me a towel, they gave me a towel, gave me the towel so I could wipe the mud and stuff off the football. I got down and posed for the football like he's gonna place kick it, and he hollered at me, "Don't kick that ball, don't kick that ball." And he took that gray hat off, brand new, throwed it down the puddle of water and stomped it. Speaker 1: He, he didn't think you could make a kick, huh? I mean, you couldn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he said--because the weather so bad and the football wet and everything. He says, "You know you can't kick that ball." Everybody thought I was gonna kick it. And soon as I centered the ball direct to the fullback and he went over my right side, the left side of the line my left guard and left tackle. I know at a time I called the play and called for that left tackle and guard I know (unclear). But usually when I called that play--see, we didn't have to go in the huddle for a play. My first number in a play when I called it, my first number'd be the hole we're going through. Name all the holes, one, two, three, all the way down the line. And if I called, was getting ready to call a play, I just say one. The next number I call is the number of the players, four, is in the play, four. That means the fullback gonna take the ball, see. We didn't have to go in no huddle. Then when I call hike, third number I'd call would be the hike. And that line all charged out together. I had referees and umpires and things calling for to get close, so they'd get so far ahead of the team, they wasn't coming close to me. Waste of play. They won't see that line charge. That was 1935, I was chartered in line and they'd come out of there. They'd come out together, they didn't come out--no one, you didn't see no one going. When I said hike, that's it, all of 'em moved. Everybody moving. And didn't make no difference, I didn't have to pass very much but I could pass. And I could run a ball. And I had a fullback, anytime he had the ball and somebody hit him, you could bet you could see clouds of dirt come up out the ground 'cause he was rough. He and I were the biggest men on the team, we both weighed 169 pounds. Speaker 1: You were the biggest men on team? Speaker 2: We were the biggest men on the team. All the rest of 'em were tall but they didn't weigh as much. They were tall. You had a fullback, 6'1", and I don't think he even, I don't think he weighed, I don't think he weighed 150 pounds (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, this is during the Depression [Great Depression], right? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-five [1935]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so you were a football star in high school then? Now, what was your fullback's name, what was his name? Speaker 2: Cecil Yancy [ph.]. Speaker 1: Cecil Yancy? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He died at Wisconsin, that's where he died at. He had a business over there. He went to Lincoln University. Story_ID: 444288 Speaker 1: Let me ask you a little bit about school. Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was that? Speaker 2: Math. I loved math and I loved--they call it woodwork, we called it manual training. I loved manual training, that's what I wanted to be when I come out of school. I wanted to be a cabinetmaker. I tried to go--started to go down to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] 'cause our manual training teacher, he was--that's where he graduated from. And, all down then they had told me where to come on but they didn't tell me whether they was gonna give me anything or not. And I wouldn't go 'cause I said that's too far for me to get away from home don't know how I'm gonna get back or nothing. (Laughter) And knowing nobody there and no money to give you. So, I didn't go. Speaker 1: Now, did you--were there certain--do you have certain memorable teachers, favorite teachers in school? Speaker 2: Well, no, I liked all my teachers. All my teachers 'cause that's the thing about going to a black school, you went to a black school if you was a slow learner, you're gonna learn something anyway. 'Cause they're gonna make you learn it. They're gonna see that you learn. It ain't like now, kids go to school now if he's slow to learn, they don't give a damn whether he gets it or not. Don't make them no difference. When you went to a black school, I don't care how dumb you were, you gonna learn something. You might miss a whole lot but you gonna come out of there learning something, knowing something. And you can make it all through life too, whatever they teach you. That's the way that was. Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you involved--who is, who was the principal of your school? Speaker 2: C.C. Hubbard [Christopher Columbus Hubbard]. Speaker 1: C.C. Hubbard, okay, the same one they named the park after. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. That's what the school was named of. That's what the school was named after when they segregated it, named it Hubbard High [Lincoln School; C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now did you--were you involved in--did you ever run for class president or anything like that when you were in school? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you make good grades? Speaker 2: No, no, I was a dummy (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well, you stated--I don't think that's true but you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a dummy. Math, I was good in. Manual training I was good in. When you got to English, I didn't know nothing. General science I did pretty good in that. I didn't care about--averaged about eighty-five or lower. Speaker 1: That's not bad. Speaker 2: It was bad enough, 'cause sometimes I know one way when we read Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and our English teacher, I don't think these kids ever had it. Have to get up before the class, pick out different verses in there and you had to learn 'em. And then get up before the class and recite it. And that's what we had to do. And I had trouble with the long one. I said, "They're not here, I feel they're not." That's what I had trouble learning. And I never will forget, last day of school, and they had all the classes--let the class out, they all went up to my house and partied. We're up there partying and we had the radio going and all we were dancing and the radio said, and a little girl comes up there, "Boots [HistoryMaker Cornelius "Boots" Shepard]." "Yeah?" "Miss Kenny [ph.] wants you." What does Miss Kenny want with me? Said, "If you didn't get over there and recite that chapter for her, you wasn't get your certificate tonight." Man, I flew out of there. I said, "Miss Kenny, I can't learn that." "Oh, yes you can, you're going to." And I kept on, kept on, and I kept on, kept on. Finally, I got up there and started it and when I'd get to something and kind of stumble, she would tell me. Story_ID: 444289 Speaker 1: Sir, did you ever--did you, now, you ultimately became a chef. Did you do any cooking at home? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [Mabel Smith Shepard] taught my brother [Willard Shepard] and I a little bit 'bout cooking because when she'd go somewhere like to the conference--she'd go to the conference, she'd fix stuff for us and then show us how to fix it. And when she'd go to the grand lodge chapter or wherever she went, she'd always cook stuff and then to tell us how to fix something if it ran out or if we used it all up. Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me just get on that for a minute. Now, you said your mother was a member of the lodge? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, where, with which lodge? Speaker 2: Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star]. Speaker 1: Eastern Star, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And she was a member of the church conference I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The--this would be United Methodist? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, it's United Methodist now, but in that time it was just A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]. Speaker 1: Right. Methodist Episcopal church? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. What other organizations were your parents involved in? Speaker 2: None as I know of. Speaker 1: Was your father [Ray Shepard] part of the union in the--on the railroad? Speaker 2: No, at that time it didn't have a union then, didn't have a union then. Speaker 1: Okay, that's before A. Philip Randolph started the union [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters]. Speaker 2: Yeah. He started the union, the first railroad union for blacks was made by Randolph and-- Speaker 1: Right, I'm gonna get to that later but I just wanted to know what your parents were in. Did, did you know--was there a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in town or anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Urban League or anything like that? Speaker 2: Well, they had an Urban League. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know anybody in the Universal Negro Improvement Association in those days? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Marcus Garvey's group? Speaker 2: No. No one but our principal [Christopher Columbus Hubbard]. Speaker 1: Oh, he was in it? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He was in it. And the book of black history, says, 'Who's Who in Negro History' [ph.], well, he's in that too. Our high school [Lincoln School; C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri] was in that. That book was--that book came out in about 1933. Speaker 1: This is Carter G. Woodson's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know who-- Speaker 1: 'The Negro in Our History' [Carter G. Woodson], is that the one you're talking about? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's 'Who's Who in Negro History.' Speaker 1: 'Who's Who in Negro History,' okay (simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 444290 Speaker 1: So when you were getting ready to graduate from high school [Lincoln School; C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What did you think you were gonna do? Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanted to be a cabinetmaker-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause I was good in math and manual training. I was good at that. I could--I used a lathe, I've got--when I left home I had went out in the country and got a piece of wood, a log of wood, of walnut and come back home after school, made lamps out of 'em, made a pair of lamps out of 'em. My mother [Mabel Smith Shepard], when I left home, I left all that stuff there when I was a kid. My brother [Willard Shepard] and I both, we made stuff like that all the time. When they bought the lathe, I learn how to run a lathe and take a stick of wood, take and put it on the--had the band saw. Learned that saw and turn a--take a stick wood, cut it, get it squared up. You'd square it up and put it on that lathe and take that thing little closer and take your little compass and see how round you got it and how many (unclear) you wanna put in it and all like that. You draw it out on paper and then put it up in front of you and you do the lathe. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, but you ended up going to college, right? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You ended up going to college and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I ended up going to college. Speaker 1: Now, where did you go and how did you get there? Speaker 2: Right here, right here at Nebraska Wesleyan [Nebraska Wesleyan University, Lincoln, Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Nebraska Wesleyan, okay. Now, how did that happen, what happened? Speaker 2: Well, the--when I went to school--went to--come to Lincoln [Nebraska] back to Lincoln that--in September, I was been up here in '34 [1934] in the summer for my dad [Ray Shepard], and when I came back to Lincoln I went to church and the minister there was raised up with--and his wife was raised with my own mother and father. And they, of course, from the same church my grandfather [William H. Smith] preached at and everything. But he didn't preach here, and one of 'em, when church was out he asked me, said, asked me did I play football. I said, "Yeah." He said, "What are you gonna do tomorrow?" I said, "I don't know, nothing. I just came up here, thought maybe I'd find a job." Well, I said, "I can get a better job here than I can in Sedalia [Missouri]." And I came up here, and so he said, "Well, where will you be?" I said, "I'll be at home." And that Monday about noon he called and my auntie answered the telephone and he asked me, said, "What'd you got to do this afternoon?" I said, "Nothing." Said, "You know where Wesleyan University is?" I said, "Yeah, not too far," 'cause I'm living right over on 30th [Street] and Apple [Street]. And I'd go right up there to Overland [Trail] and walk out to the school. And he said, "Well, you be out there at three o'clock this afternoon and go right to the locker room where the coaches are." Said, "Go out there and they want to--he wants to talk to you." I said, okay. I went out there, I didn't have the least idea of going to school. School'd been going on a week or two weeks before I got there. And I went out there and he said--something's missing. Said, "Can you kick a football?" "Yes." "Can you thow a football?" "Yes." He said, "What position did you play?" I said, "Quarterback." He just stood there a while. He said, "What formation did you run?" I said, "Run the T formation." He said, "Well, that's good, that's what we run." That was it. And told me to go over there to the locker room, and they threw me a pair of shoes, socks, pants, athletic sweater, everything. Say, we had to give parties to raise stuff in high school. White kids got theirs free. We had to give parties to raise money to buy ours. So, he sent me there and then when I got my uniform and everything, told me to put it on. Speaker 1: Now, this is a white school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Right up at the top of the hill there. Speaker 1: This is a white coach? Speaker 2: Yeah. And went out there and got out there and had the center to come out, told the center to center the ball. He said, "Let me see you kick." And I centered the ball and I kicked, and I kicked about three times. He said, "You're kicking good but you're holding the ball wrong." I said, "What'd you mean, holding the ball wrong. Ain't no other way to hold it." He didn't know I was left-footed. And when he woke up and saw I was left-footed, he said, "No wonder I'm thinking you're wrong, you're left-footed aren't you." I said, "Yeah. I kick with my left foot, I don't kick with the right foot." So he says, "Well, that's all right." Said, "Well, you kick it all right." And then he had me take several plays from the center, and the center kicked the ball, and he had me throw several passes, did that. Said, "Okay." He said, "Go over there and they'll give you a slip to go down to the bookstore and get your books." So, I went over there and they give me a slip, went on down to bookstore, got my books. Speaker 1: Okay. (Laughter) It was just like that, huh? Well you--you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, just like that. And got fifteen dollars a month. Story_ID: 444291 Speaker 1: So he gave you a scholarship to go to school [Nebraska Wesleyan University, Lincoln, Nebraska]? Speaker 2: The Wesleyan Foundation [Nebraska Wesleyan Foundation] did it. See, they had the Wesleyan Foundation here and I think he was a member of Wesleyan Foundation when he was at the university. Speaker 1: You talking about Ray Shepard [Ray A. Shepard], right? Speaker 2: Ray. Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, so, well, how did things go? How did you do on the team? Speaker 2: Well, everything--the first class or one or two was an English class, and I hated English. And the first thing--first hour I get there in school, they're giving a test. I don't know a bit more what they're talking about or nothing. So I just sit there. I didn't know nothing 'bout what they're talking about. Next class I went to, went to the history class, and I knew history pretty good. I remember history (laughter) so we started in history and when we got around to it, got through with us, the teacher there, old man Cullum [ph.], he was the English teacher--I mean the history teacher. And he said to me, he said, "You know history pretty good, don't you?" Said, "Did you have it in high school?" "Yeah, we had it in high school [Lincoln School; C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri]." He said, "That's what I know." I said, "How do you know that?" Said, "'Cause that's what you give me and in your report, yours is a high school report you're giving." Said, "You got to add a little bit more to your vocabulary." I said, "Well, what difference does it make as long as I'm right?" (Laughter) He said, "You got to learn, you got to build your vocabulary up." That was it. And, then after we played the--we played the Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] team, their freshman team, we played them, and I played quarterback. And when I got, when I got through that--and the next week was supposed to go up to York [Nebraska] to play York College and the coach saw me in the hall. He said, "Come here, I wanna talk to you." Said, "I had to have a meeting with the team try to see who would be your roommate." 'Cause I'm the only black. And said, "Then I had to call there to see if they'd take you in the hotel." He said, "So you made the traveling team." I got to thinking, hell, they got to go through all that. And I just happened to think, if I'd been out there and nobody said nothing--had nobody talk to me. I had one guy that talked to me and he lived not too far from where I lived, and he would come by and pick me up and, good morning, and give me a ride to school every morning. Named Clinton Brick. And I said, I said, "This ain't for me." I said, "Get out here, got nobody to talk to, ain't nobody talks to you, nobody friendly." And the coach, though, he was real nice. I've run into him several times after I left school. And he told me, said, "You got to get in those books and dig in those books a bit harder." Said, "But you made the traveling team." See, I said then, this ain't for me. Can't be nothing but a teacher or a preacher or a social worker. I ain't getting nothing I want. Story_ID: 444292 Speaker 1: And I haven't--and I worked extra, down at the hotel, around the hotel there 'cause most every hotel in Lincoln [Nebraska] had a--had black waiters. They hadn't started putting waitresses in yet. And I could go over there and work extra, serve a banquet or something, dollar and half a banquet. Maybe got a dollar tip, maybe got a two-dollar tip. But that's what I was doing. And I come out of there and the superintendent from the dining car department looked and saw me and he remembered me by my dad [Ray Shepard], from my dad. He said, "Say, you wanna fight?" And I hadn't recognized him, I said, what's the matter with that old man, is he crazy? And he said, "How you doing?" I looked at him and then it comes to me who he was. I said, "All right." He said, "You want a job?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "Well, go down to the station there, go there to that woman and have her give you an application." Said, okay. I went down there and she said--I told her what had happened. She said, "Well, sit down here, I'll make the application out for you. And I can send you to the doctor today, and if you pass it, I can send you to work tomorrow morning." I said, okay. She filled the application out, I went to the doctor, passed the doctor, I was back down there by three o'clock. She said, "You pass?" I said, "Yeah, I passed." She said, "Can you be at work in the morning, six o'clock?" I, "Yeah, I can be at work." Shit, I was gone three months before they ever found out where I was. Wesleyan [Nebraska Wesleyan University, Lincoln, Nebraska] didn't know where I was. They had that check for me, my check come in February, first of the month check come and they had it out there. They couldn't--didn't know where I was. 'Cause they had a--they had built a dormitory car in the yards down there and they just moved the dining car office up here from Kansas City [Missouri]. And a lot of the waiters and cooks come up here, and they stay there in that dormitory car right there in the yards. I moved in with 'em and stayed there. When I, when I think it was--I didn't find my--I didn't get my check until February, I mean, March. 'Cause they didn't--nobody knew where I was. And they-- Speaker 2: When did you start, when do you start? Speaker 1: I started 27th of January. Speaker 2: Okay, and didn't get paid until March? Speaker 1: Got paid, got paid the, got paid the first of the month, I mean, the 11th and the 12th. So I got my check the first of February. First check got the 11th of January, I mean, 11th of February. I didn't have a check coming. Check--time went in the 15th. And the check comes the 27th. And so, it was March before I got my check. But later in March I was ready for another payday in March when they got the check, found out where I was. Speaker 2: So how did you like that? How'd you like working for the railroad? Speaker 1: Oh, I loved it, I loved it, I loved it. I stayed there, I was the fourth cook. Wasn't nothing but a clean-up man. On the Pioneer Zephyr out of here to Kansas City [Missouri] and back in here every night. And whoever cooked, and all I'd do when they served--had a little buffet with a little gas plate there to cook on. And I'd go back in the baggage room, baggage room right there, and I'd go back in the baggage room and sit down. And when they get to serve, like when they get to Kansas City, we going into Kansas City they tell me to come on up. I'd have to come up and clean it all up. And when they were able to go up, go back when dinner start serving, then I'd go back there and set down, when they'd be going to Omaha [Nebraska], then I could come back up, or come back out and clean it all up. Then we come on down to Lincoln, I'd be ready to go over to crew quarters, stay all night, furnish us sheets, clean sheets anytime you wanted 'em and blankets and everything right there in the crew quarters for you. Get you a bed and stay there. Story_ID: 444293 Speaker 1: So you were like a dining car porter? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Were you a dining car porter? Is that what you were (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was a dining car--I was a cook. Speaker 1: Fourth cook, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Fourth cook, now, did you ever think and say, well, maybe I should have stayed in college [Nebraska Wesleyan University, Lincoln, Nebraska] or, you know, I could have been a football star or any--did you ever think-- Speaker 2: Well, I think if, at that time, if they would been playing--if they'd have been football players or baseball players like they are now, I think I would, I would have made one of 'em anyway. I think I'd have made one of 'em. I'm pretty sure I'd have made football. Speaker 1: Okay, but in those days there wasn't that kind of career in sports, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, wasn't no career for you, wasn't no career. And you find the average man my age, if he's got an education and everything, ask him what his mother and father did for a living. Or just ask him what his father did. Wasn't but two jobs out there for you. That was either the post office or the railroads. And that's what he's gonna tell you, my father was a railroad man. My father worked at the post office. Those were the only two jobs blacks had, see. You didn't have to worry about it if you got a job with that. I went to work on the railroad, hell, I got a good job. And my brother [Willard Shepard] was working at the Missouri shops and he came up there Easter to see me and I took him down--I was running from here to Creston [Iowa], back in here every day, down to Creston every night. And I took him down there to Creston with me on the train and brought him back. He went home and took a leave of absence from the Missouri Pacific [Missouri Pacific Railroad] and come up here and got a job on the dining car. Ended up living here. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the name of the railroad that you started off with? Speaker 2: The CB and Q, the Burlington Railroad [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad]. Speaker 1: Okay, Burlington. And that's CB and Q? Speaker 2: Yeah, CB and Q. Dining car department. Speaker 1: Okay, now what does the CB and Q stand for? Speaker 2: Chicago, Burlington and Quincy. Speaker 1: Quincy, okay, all right, okay. Chicago, Burlington and Quincy. So the headquarters was in Chicago [Illinois] I guess, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, headquarters here, the sub-office, had a office out here. Had a dining car office out here. See, their shop is here, they have a shop here. Speaker 1: Now, I've been told--now, other people I've talked to who were--worked for the railroad said that the toughest part of the job was staying awake. Speaker 2: Well, see, I didn't have to do that 'cause at ten o'clock at night we close up and we go to bed. But that was the toughest job for a porter, that's what--what's the name, guy that was-- Speaker 1: A. Philip Randolph? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what he was. If you was a Pullman porter and you were working, working out of New York, you'd get on a train going to California, you couldn't--you didn't go to bed. They had a stool like I got in there, sits in the corner and that hallway from up and down through there. Bedrooms all on this side, all this here is a hall, and windows all there. And right when you go, go into the door to go into the next car, you'll--there was a stool there. That's where the porter sat, on that stool. He didn't have no place to sleep. Speaker 1: So he had to be on call all the time? Speaker 2: No, he wasn't on call. He sat there, he better not go and better not nod. He's just sitting there. Everybody's in bed sound asleep, he's sitting down there on that stool. Speaker 1: Well, he had to be up in case somebody wanted something. Speaker 2: Yeah, in case somebody wanted something he had to be there. And, if the conductor come through and catch him nodding, and write him up. He ended up with no job all like that. And you had some nasty, nasty conductors, and some of 'em were real nice too. You had some nasty ones and you had some good ones. They'd catch the porter asleep, especially if you didn't like him, (laughter) he caught hell. But see, cook, didn't bother me 'cause ten o'clock come, dining car is closed. Called them the crew quarters, we had a crew quarters. We go on to crew quarters and go to bed, get up at five o'clock, go back, work all day long 'til ten o'clock. Speaker 1: Those were long hours though. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Long hours. Story_ID: 444294 Speaker 1: --It wasn't that intense if there weren't--except for breakfast and lunch and dinner, right? Speaker 2: Sure, lunch and dinner. You're tackling one little meal--when I first--when they first put me on one of the fast trains, the Aristocrat, number six out of here, run from Chicago [Illinois] to Denver [Colorado]. And it had a lot of dude ranchers from back east and everything, and people going up to Yellowstone Park [Yellowstone National Park] and all that. And I changed pants--they could call me in from up to Cody [Wyoming] on the 12th of September and I got on that--they put me on that train as second cook, and I changed pants three times from here to Chicago, soaking wet. All my clothes soaking wet. And those kitchens (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From the heat? Speaker 2: And the second cooks who had been falling out every day. And the first thing the old chef told me, said, "You gonna fall out drinking all that water." I said, "Water ain't gonna hurt me." Shoot, and the grill that you work on, on the dining car, it was up to here. It hit me right in the face, and I would take a wet towel--I'd take a towel, get it wet and throw it over my head like that. That kept it from burning me. Lot of those, those old second cooks up there was blistered where the heat blistered 'em in the face and all like that. And I would take a towel and wet it, and only thing you could see was my eyes. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're describing, you're describing a pretty tough situation. Trying to cook in tight quarters with a real red hot grill in your face. Speaker 2: Cold, and you had to ice up your wells where the refrigeration was all ice, you had to ice that up. They come there and throw it up in that kitchen door at you and you do it. But didn't take me long to learn it. I don't know, I don't know what it was. I guess--I just liked the idea, I just liked the idea of making my money. Shit, I didn't like the idea I got to ask you for a quarter or a nickel to buy me a candy bar. And then you gonna preach to me and tell me, I just give you a nickel yesterday or last week. You must think money grows on trees. Shit, I got tired of hearing that. I wanted my own money, that's what I wanted. And when I finally got something or ever if I ever, ever get a good job, I'm not gonna get married until I'm able to take care of my family. 'Cause my mother's father [William H. Smith] helped take care of us. And when I went to work on the railroad [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad] and I went home for Christmas, I'd been working, wasn't quite a year yet, 'cause I went home for Christmas and January I'd be a year. Story_ID: 444295 Speaker 1: Now you started in 1936, was it? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-seven [1937]. Speaker 1: Thirty-seven [1937], okay, all right. Speaker 2: I went to work on the [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad]--'cause I started playing football at Wesleyan [Nebraska Wesleyan University, Lincoln, Nebraska] in '36 [1936], played at Wesleyan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, when I, when I went home for Christmas--and I hadn't wrote to my wife for--hadn't heard anything of her for two years I guess, 'cause I didn't write to her or nothing while I was gone. And went to a dance, Christmas Eve dance and my--one of my best friends had brought her to the dance. And I went over to dance with her and when we got through I told her, I said, "I'll take you home." Said, "You can't take me home. P.H. brought me to the dance." I said, "Ah, hell, P.H. don't care." I went over, asked P.H., "What?" "I'm gonna take Loretha [Loretha Jackson Shepard] home." He swelled up and got mad but he didn't bother me. He knew better than to bother me. And I walked her home and my brother [Willard Shepard] and 'em waited down in front of the restaurant until I came back from taking her home, and then we went on in the car. And then that went on and he tried to--and I went back--before I went back I went back to see her on a Sunday I think it was. And I told her I wouldn't be back 'til March. I won't be home, okay. So I didn't come home and then in March, I didn't go. I didn't go in April, didn't go home 'til May. Went home in May and went over to see her. And she (laughter) first thing we did, got in an argument 'cause I hadn't been home. "What you been doing? You got a girl up there, got you a girlfriend up there?" Yeah, I got a girlfriend up there. Wouldn't say no. Yeah, I got a girlfriend up there. "Well, you, why don't you go back and see her." "Well, I thought I'd come see you," something like that. Oh, we just carried on. And so, that night we're sitting there talking and I said, "Let's get married." She said, "Well, don't I have a say-so?" "Well, you ain't said nothing." And finally, she said, "Okay. When we gonna get married?" Get married tomorrow. And that's what we did. Got up the next morning and I was there, she said, "What you doing up so early, Boots [HistoryMaker Cornelius "Boots" Shepard]?" I said, "I ain't been nowhere, I been right there." "You stayed here all night?" "Yeah, I stayed all night." "How'd you get by me?" "I didn't go nowhere, I stayed right in the living room." What you gone do? I said, "We're gonna get married today." Huh? I said, I was gonna get married. Went over to get the marriage license, she couldn't get--I couldn't get the license for her because she was eighteen so I had to--her mother had to come and get 'em. So I come back home, back to the house and told her mother--I said, "You wanna go down to city hall with her to get the marriage license?" Loretha can't get 'em 'cause she's not old enough. She went down and got the license. And then I went where Loretha was working, I went out where she worked, picked her up, came back, went over to the preacher's house, over to the--and got married. Five dollars. Speaker 1: This is 1930 what? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-seven [1937], 1938. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938], okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, February the 21st, 1938. Story_ID: 444296 Speaker 1: Go ahead, now, you just got married, you said you caught a bus to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Caught a bus, went back to Sedalia [Missouri] and walked in the house and told my mother [Mabel Smith Shepard], I said, "Mama, I want you to meet my wife [Loretha Jackson Shepard]." "What?" I said, "Meet my wife." "When did that happen?" I said, "Today." "Why didn't you tell somebody?" "I don't know." She didn't like it neither but she didn't show it. So, we stayed there and the next day, the next day I caught the train out of there and brought her to Lincoln [Nebraska]. And she got up here and I reported to work. And they sent me right out so she was here by herself. (Laughter) And when I came back through here the next day, she was on a train sitting over there going home, going back home. And I got over there, and she said, "Too lonesome for me, I'm going home." Okay. And she went on back home. And I stayed up there until I got off, I think I didn't get off until it was about I guess April. I got off and I went home, and she was gone on back to work for the people she was working for when I got married. And then she stayed, I think she stayed there a while. I came back to Lincoln. And then got off again, went there then she came back with me. And stayed in Lincoln the time I--she comes talking about buying a home. I said, "I ain't buying no home." Everybody black or most all the blacks had roomers from railroad men moving in there anyway. And I said, "I wanna stay," said, "so I can move on twenty-four hour notice." That's what I said. All the homes over there where the loan center is, north over there, I could have bought any home in there for six or seven hundred dollars. Didn't have sense enough, you know, didn't realize. Didn't know nothing about property. Didn't realize that. And I'm paying twenty dollars a week--no, ten dollars a week for a room. But we had the whole use of the house so--and that was that. Then when it got up where I needed the house, my oldest son, Ray [Ray A. Shepard], was born before I rented a house. When he was born I was running from here to Creston [Iowa] then. And I come in that morning on the 26th of June and they said, "You got a wire over there in the office." I went over to the office, here's your wire. "How you doing, daddy?" Wire said he was born 26th of June. I told, I told the sign-out lady, I said, "I'm going home." Speaker 1: So, what year is this? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940], June the 26th, 1940. I said, "I'm going home." She said, "When will you be back?" "I don't know, but I'm going home today." And they said, "Okay, we'll have somebody in your place." And I went home, and he's born in Sedalia over near my home, and they was in the hospital 'cause Marshall [Missouri] didn't have a black--there was no hospital for 'em, and Sedalia had a black hospital. So they had brought her way over there to where he was born. And I went home and went over to the hospital, and I hit that hospital door, and he was crying and sounded like two people. I said, "What, she got twins?" And they started laughing. They said, "No, it's just him." I went to see him and there he was. Story_ID: 444297 Speaker 1: Okay, so now you got a family (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I named him after both of his grandfathers 'cause they never got to see him. Ray Anthony Shepard [Ray A. Shepard]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then when we got transferred to Chicago [Illinois], I went into Chicago, go to work. They had a train was running--I was running to Denver [Colorado], running, and I went and got off in Denver, and when I got off for my four days off, I went to Marshall [Missouri] and got her a transfer back to Lincoln [Nebraska]. And I went and rented a house, bought five rooms of furniture from Sears Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.]. And the man said to me--manager said to me, said, "Don't you have a credit union?" I said, yeah. He said, "Well, why don't you borrow the money from the credit union?" Said, "We ain't never had nobody go that high." I said, "They told me they didn't have no money. They wouldn't have no money 'til next payday." And I said, "I ought to go get my wife [Loretha Jackson Shepard] and kid." He said, "What is your name?" I said, "Cornelius [HistoryMaker Cornelius "Boots" Shepard]." He said, "That's the same name of my dad. I'm gonna let you have that furniture." He sold me five rooms of furniture. And the only thing we didn't have was a refrigerator and a stove. We had everything else. And I went and bought a secondhand stove, and I went to the light company and got a brand new General Electric refrigerator. Didn't have to pay nothing down, pay so much every month. That's how I started, and I paid sixteen dollars a month rent for the house, five-room house. And everybody got mad at me, people that lived here. You paying more, you paying more for rent--when I moved in the other house--said, "You paying more rent than anybody in Lincoln." Eighteen dollars, at eighteen dollars a month. And they were hollering. People, some of them people they got hollering mad 'cause I was paying eighteen dollars. Then, sixteen dollars was high, that was high. But when I paid eighteen--rented another house, five-room house. All redecorated on the inside and everything, hardwood floors and everything, eighteen dollars a month. I stayed there, that was nineteen--that was in 1940, December the 12th, when I brought him back. He was six months old, brought him back to Lincoln. And we stayed in Lincoln (unclear). Speaker 1: Now, he was the first one. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How many children do you have? Speaker 2: Eleven. Eight boys and three girls. Speaker 1: Okay. Wanna name 'em for us? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Wanna name 'em for us? Speaker 2: Yeah. Ray, Cornelius [Cornelius Shepard, Jr.], Willard [Willard Shepard], Lois [Lois Shepard Hendricks], Stewart [Stewart Shepard], and Roddy [Roderick Shepard], Elinor [Elinor Shepard Howard], Juanita [Juanita Shepard Henderson], and Leonard [Leonard Shepard]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Leonard's the baby. Speaker 1: Okay, now you have quite a few grandchildren, now too, but I'll ask you about them at the end of the interview. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, but, that's, so that's a pretty good sized family to take care of. Story_ID: 444298 Speaker 1: Oh, I was gonna ask you about the union (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Union? Yeah, the union, well-- Speaker 1: Yeah, now, that's a big part of trying to make this work, right? So, you said in 1937 and '38 [1938] A. Philip Randolph was trying to organize a union. Speaker 2: That's right. He started out trying to organize. They got it organized in thirty- in 1940 [sic.]. That's when they got really organized. They were going, but they hadn't got a contract, hadn't been able to get a contract yet. Speaker 1: Okay, so same year that Ray [Ray A. Shepard] was born, A. Philip Randolph finally organized the union of sleeping car porters [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, did you have to--did you join it as a cook or how, how did that work? Speaker 2: I was a cook but it took--he had the waiters and--waiters and cooks wasn't, and then they come out and they froze--they boycotted everything, you couldn't work for the railroad if you didn't belong to the union. And that's when they got it organized good, you had to belong to the union. And it was a closed shop. You didn't join the union--you didn't belong to the union, you wasn't gonna work. You didn't work for the railroad. Speaker 1: What happened if you tried to work anyway? Speaker 2: You wasn't--you, you didn't have to try to work 'cause you wasn't gonna get the work. Speaker 1: Okay, so the company wouldn't hire you unless you you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the company couldn't hire you. Speaker 1: They couldn't hire you, okay. Speaker 2: No, they couldn't hire you. Speaker 1: So, now, did you have to--were you a part of any--do you remember the meetings and what they were like when they were trying to organize? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. We went to meetings. One thing they talked about, about how many hours you had to work and how many hours you got before you got time and a half and all that. When they first started out, we had to work 240 hours a month to make your salary. Anything over 240 hours, you got time and a half. Speaker 1: How was that different from the old days? Speaker 2: Old days? Speaker 1: Before the union? Speaker 2: Whatever your salary was, that's what you got. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And like our fourth cook job, I was working fourth cook, I know what my paycheck was. My paycheck would be every payday, every two weeks, $35.95. And when they got the union organized and went to paying you by the hour, I made thirty-seven cents, thirty-eight cents an hour. Story_ID: 444299 Speaker 1: I had moved Loretha's [Loretha Jackson Shepard] sister and my mother-in-law, both of 'em to Seattle [Washington], brought the youngest girl here and put her in NYA [National Youth Administration] school. And when she finished that, they sent her to Seattle and she was out there a year. And she sent back and got her mother and her other sister. And her oldest sister, I brought her here and I had her a job, had a job waiting for her when she come in. See, I worked around out to the country club, (unclear) hotel, Lincoln Hotel [Lincoln, Nebraska] and all those different places, different clubs and things on my time off from the railroad [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad]. And I got acquainted and I knew--I got so I knew anybody in Lincoln [Nebraska] worth fifteen cents. I knew 'em. And, I got the job for Loretha's oldest sister, brought her here. She stayed out on a place. Then I brought the baby girl here when she finished high school and I put her in NYA school here. And when she finished that, they sent her to Boeing [The Boeing Company], and she went out of here and went right straight to Boeing and went to work. And after she was there-- Speaker 2: Bowens what, what is it? Speaker 1: It was in, oh, Lord-- Speaker 2: No, I'm just saying what's the name of the place, Bowens what? Speaker 1: Boeing aircraft. Speaker 2: Oh, Boeing aircraft, okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, in Seattle. That's where she went to work at. Speaker 2: Boeing, okay, yeah. Speaker 1: And then she sent back and got her mother and her other sister, and her other sister had married a boy, and he'd gone in the [U.S. military] service. And then she had a baby, so she brought them and they stayed with me about thirty days and then they went on to Seattle. And that's where they all ended up down there. Speaker 2: So you were able to help a lot of people in the family because of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I brought 'em all, I moved 'em all. Story_ID: 444300 Speaker 1: Did the bosses try to stop the union [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters] from being organized? Do you remember that, did they ever try to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the bosses didn't do nothing, they didn't, they didn't do nothing, they, they didn't do nothing. Speaker 1: So nobody got threatened or anything? Speaker 2: No, nobody no, they didn't bother you. Speaker 1: It was just pretty easy to set it up. Speaker 2: See, railroad always been where they just would come up and fire you. See, railroads was always like that. Either you go to (unclear) with a job or go uptown there and get a job. Man come in and you ain't even seen him and tell you, you fired, go home. Well, the railroad you couldn't never do that. When you gonna fire a man on the railroad, you had to prove what you fired him for, you had to prove what it is. He had to do something real ridiculous to get fired. They might give you some time on the ground or something for something you did, but you didn't get fired. Speaker 1: Okay, that's even before the union, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: They didn't fire you. You had to do really do something. But now, if you had any kind of record, police record, and I don't give a damn what it was--if you had a record where the police got you for fighting. You can bet they showed up and say--when they took that record and if they--if it didn't get on that record--if it got on that record, you didn't have no job. You couldn't have no kind of dealings with the railroad whatsoever with the police department, nothing. Don't be no outlaw. I don't care what you done, wasn't nothing. I've seen guys here that--I was the first man hired in '37 [1937], I was the first man hired. And a lot of guys were older than me, they was my brother's [Willard Shepard] age and everything, they had been arrested for stealing coal and all that. And it comes out in their application. They didn't have no job. Speaker 1: Now, when you say you were the first man hired, you were the first Speaker 2: I'm first man hired in 1937. Speaker 1: By the Burlington (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By the Burlington Railroad [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad]. Speaker 1: You mean the first black man hired? Speaker 2: I was the first man, white or black. I was first man hired in 1937, January the 27th. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Now, did you--now, I don't know what that is but--now, you became a chef, right, a head cook? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, how did that happen, tell me what happened? Speaker 2: You go there and you work and you learn as you go, and they move you up. Started out a fourth cook, you do pretty good at that and next thing you know, you're a third cook and you handle that a while. And you get good enough, and all the time too you're working off the range, learn to work off the range. And when you learn, they see you get so you can handle your stuff on the range all right, then you go to second cook. Then second cook, sort of learn how to make pies, learn how to make rolls and you learn how to cut meat and all that. And after you get good enough at it, and if the chef, see, tells in the office he's good enough, he can do it. And they put you out--send you out on a run and you did good on it, go back the second trip they still got a good report on you. You got a job, your seniority starts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then that's way it was. But you work so long as an extra man or on the same job as a third cook until you get an opening. Speaker 1: Now, how long did it take for you to become a head chef? Speaker 2: Took me two years. Speaker 1: Okay, that's not long. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. I come, I come third cook, made third cook in two months. Made second cook in nine months. Speaker 1: Okay, so you--the job was called first cook (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Chef cook, chef cook. Speaker 1: Chef, chef cook, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right, so you made the chef cook, and by 1939 I guess then you were the chef cook? Speaker 2: Yeah, I made it in 1939. Story_ID: 444301 Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about some of the people that were passengers on the train? Did you meet any celebrities or anything, or any-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I met--I can't think of his name now. What picture was that he played in? I can't think of it now. Speaker 1: I've heard some of the people I've interviewed, they talk about some of the celebrities, guys like Jack Benny and Fred Allen, different people that would be on the, on the trains. Speaker 2: Yeah, I met--oh, I can't think of the name now. Speaker 1: What did he do? Speaker 2: He was a--played in this picture. What the hell was name of that picture? I can't think of it now. Something about death, uh. What the hell was it? I can't thank of the name of it now. Speaker 1: Was it pretty common to see movie stars and entertainers on the trains? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't no common to see a movie star. Well, on the California Zephyr it was but not on the--before they put the California Zephyr in you didn't see 'em. After they put the California Zephyr, then they had to-- they'd have a big luncheon or something special for them. You had to learn how--they'd want a drink and wanna have a party in the afternoon, after lunch and--have to learn how to make hors d'oeuvres and all that stuff. You had to know all that. And by me working 'around in town at the hotel, I had it caught that's how I beat a lot of cooks who was working before me. That's how I got to be chef before they did because I had worked around the hotel and, and picked up stuff from the hotel for cooking. And, when they come in and say, well, so and so is on here and they want some hors d'oeuvres this afternoon. Lot of cooks didn't--I had some cooks, young cooks just started, they didn't know what they're talking about, they said hors d'oeuvres. But I had learned all that in the hotel and go there and fix 'em. They were--where'd you learn that at? I wouldn't tell 'em, but I'd picked it up in the hotel. 'Cause, see, 'round the hotel there all the lunches and things, they have hors d'oeuvres before the meal and everything. And you learn all of that from there, that's where I picked it up from. Speaker 1: You ever get a big tip from somebody for fixing a favorite meal or something (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I got pretty good tips, had some good tips. Had fifty-dollar tips lot of times, sometimes. And you take, like when I went on the--I worked on the business car and on long weekends I worked in town. And they had what they call the Italian Village [Lincoln, Nebraska] out here on 58th [Street] and Hanover Street [sic. O Street]. I worked there on Saturdays. Football game, if I had anything in my--any kind of money in my pocket then I'd take it out. Go to work there, out there four o'clock in the afternoon and come home two or three o'clock Sunday morning. If I didn't have $150 or $200 on me, I had a bad week. Story_ID: 444302 Speaker 1: And when I got transferred to Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Now, to put that in perspective that--I mean, that's real good money (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had a, yeah-- Speaker 2: --'cause the average guy working in a GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] plant was only making about eighty bucks [dollars] a week. Speaker 1: I had been--I've seen a homecoming--one time I guess I made over five hundred dollars on a homecoming. And what had happened, they had a girl here going to school from Sedalia [Missouri]. Her father--her name was Rosenthal, she was a Jew and they owned the men's clothing store there. And all blacks--they had a black guy that worked there. And all blacks bought their suits there and everything, and I don't know if it was homecoming and I heard she was here going to school so when I went out to the village [Italian Village, Lincoln, Nebraska] to go to work that night, they said, "You got 150 down there--down in the basement, Boots [HistoryMaker Cornelius "Boots" Shepard]." I said, "Okay." And I go down, I check out my pop and everything else and everything, and they'd always have--they'd have their own whiskey. All I was doing was setting it up for 'em. And got down there and got to talking and one of the guys hired, I'd known him. All the time always talking to him. And I asked him, I said, "Say, do you know a girl here by the name of Rosenthal?" He said, "What?" I said, "Do you know a girl going to school here by the name of Rosenthal?" "What'd you wanna know for?" He wondered where I knew her. I said, "Well, I don't know personally," but I said, "I remember when she was smaller," when she--and I said, "I know her father real well." I said, "In fact, I used to work for him, for her father." "You did?" "Yeah." He said, "Come on over here." Went over there and he was drinking Canadian Club, I never will forget. And he said--I've forgot what her name was now. Virginia [ph.] was her name. And he introduced--she said, "Do you know Virgil Kitchen?" I said, "Virgil and I are very good friends." And then I said, "Do you know Mabel Shepard [Mabel Smith Shepard]?" "Sure, who don't know her?" I said, "That's my mother." He said, well--she said, "Well, you're Boots, aren't you?" I said, "Yeah." Said, "Oh, I know you. Yeah, I heard of him." And that was it. Later on, some guy was sitting down there, I don't know who it was. I didn't know him but he was sitting there drinking and he called me an N, and course, at that time, at that age, if anybody said that to me they had a fight. And I don't care where it was, church or anyplace else. A fight was on. And I wasn't gonna lose it, that's the way I was. I did that all through life. Don't hang that name on me, don't curse me or nothing. If you did, you better to be ready to fight 'cause you gonna have to fight. 'Cause the fight is on, and I didn't care where it was, who it was. I don't care if it was Mr. So and So's son. He had no business doing that to me. And I was that way--I been that way all my life. So that was it. And this guy called me the N, and I went over after him, pulled him over the table and some of the guys on the team that knew me, they were taking and stuffing money, five-dollar bill, ten-dollar bill and all that in my shirt pockets to get me to quiet down. I bet when I got home I had over two hundred dollars in my shirt pocket around there where they'd done stuck it in my pocket to get me to stop. Speaker 2: 'Cause you would have messed the party up. Speaker 1: Yeah, I had messed it up. 'Cause I didn't care nothing--I don't know I didn't--I was always--I just taught that way. My mother was a--my mother is that way. She didn't take nothing off of nobody. And my dad [Ray Shepard], he was just the opposite. Don't fool with him, 'cause he'd hurt you. He'd hurt you. But, me, I didn't hurt nobody to much but you'd called me out of my name, you did the wrong thing. You gonna have to fight. Speaker 2: And so, so it wasn't a fight, you didn't fight him? Speaker 1: No, they didn't let me, they stopped me. But they kept giving me money. The more money they pushed in the worst I got. (Laughter) I had a tough time sometime. Speaker 2: Who would guess that story, I mean, that's a story I've never heard before. Speaker 1: I did it because--I don't know, I was just taught that way. I was taught that way from a kid though. My father taught me that. Anybody tell you they gonna do something to you, you try to stop 'em before they do it. Anybody get in your face, you knock 'em out of your face. Anybody curse you or talk about your mother, you hit 'em in the mouth. And I carried it all through life, I've carried it all through life. Speaker 2: Okay, now what was--so is that the most money you ever made in a job like that. I mean, you know, as a-- Speaker 1: At a time? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess so. That's about the--portering extra or hotel, hopping bell, working, I mean, working at the country clubs, serving a party, yeah. But I always made good money. Story_ID: 444303 Speaker 1: How did World War II [WWII] affect what you were doing? Did it have any effect on your job (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, unh-uh. No, just worked more, worked more, worked longer hours. Sometimes you leave home and you wouldn't get back for maybe almost thirty days. Speaker 1: Now, you weren't drafted then, right? They didn't draft you? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't drafted. Speaker 1: Why not? What happened? Speaker 2: Well, I was living in Chicago [Illinois] time the reservations came up and I was at an all-black draft board. It's right there on Michigan [Avenue]--on, not Michigan, 55th [Street] and Michigan. That's where my draft board was. And that was an all-black draft board so they didn't bother me, and every time they send me a letter, I'd be putting another kid on there. I was out here and they'd send me a letter and I'd put another kid, so and so and so and so. And, they never bothered me. And one time, the last one they sent me when they put me in A-1, and they sent me a slip to fill out, and I had to take it to the draft board here to get it filled out. And wanted me to leave it with them and let them--I said, no, I'm gonna mail it back myself. 'Cause, if I'd have left it here, I'd been drafted 'cause they'd have drafted me out of here. But, if I sent it back to Chicago, where they didn't bother me 'cause it was an all-black draft board and they're getting enough blacks without bothering me, never did bother me. Story_ID: 444316 Speaker 1: Now, sir, now how long did you work for the Burlington [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad]? Speaker 2: Burlington, worked for thirty-nine years. Speaker 1: Okay, so is that the only railroad company you worked for, for the whole time? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, and now what--tell us about when the railroad changed to Amtrak, when did that happen (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Amtrak? Well, when the merger went through the Burlington owned the Northern Pacific [Northern Pacific Railway] and the Great Northern [Great Northern Railway], Spokane and Seattle railroad [Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railway]. They owned that and the C&S Rail [Colorado and Southern Railway] down in Texas, the Burlington owned all---CBQ [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad], owned 'em all. And all of 'em went on separate names, and they operated on separated names. Like the train in Texas was called the Colorado and Southern, and it runs from Denver [Colorado] to Fort Worth [Texas] and Dallas [Texas]. And the Great Northern runs from Minneapolis [Minnesota] to Seattle [Washington], and the Northern Pacific runs from Minneapolis, from Chicago and to Minneapolis and then and to Seattle. The Spokane in Washington, it runs from Seattle to Vancouver [Canada], Vancouver all up in there. Now the Burlington owned all those railroads but they operated on their own. That's what they were, everyone of 'em was different and everyone of 'em paid a different salary. And when they tried to get the merger through--when, when--and, oh, what was the guy's name took over. When he took the railroad over, Burlington Railroad, he wanted to get rid of all the passenger trains. He didn't want no passengers. He didn't want nothing but freight. And California said, well, if we go to bed we'll be running, running all the time and we wake up the next morning to go to work, we're two or three hours late and don't know why. And it wouldn't make connection with the other trains or nothing. And he did--he was doing all--'cause of all that because he wanted to get rid of the passenger trains. And then he organized them, they was trying to get the merger through, and that's why they had the--Warren [ph.] was the cause of 'em, kept 'em from getting the railroads merged. Speaker 1: Who was that now, I'm sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Warren. Because he was--what was he governor of Illinois or--he was some big politician. He was a big politician. Was he--Warren. I know it well but I can't think. Speaker 1: Not Earl Warren, the [U.S.] Supreme Court, not the-- Speaker 2: I guess he was on the Supreme Court, wasn't he? Speaker 1: Earl Warren, you talking about? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's who it is [sic.]. Speaker 1: He was; he was chief justice of the Supreme Court (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Justice, that's what it was. Speaker 1: Okay, I dared not think it was him but okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's who it was. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And he blocked the merger. Every time they'd try to get it, he'd block it so they couldn't get it through. So, when, when they come up and Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and (unclear) told him--Nixon had a forked tongue and nobody believed him. And when they appointed him, got him in there and he got to be governor and the first thing he did was start to organize Amtrak. Merger got the--he took his, he took his office in March and the 21st of February the merger went through. Speaker 1: Okay, so Nixon--the Nixon administration really orchestrated the merger, okay. They created Amtrak. Speaker 2: Right, right, Nixon did it. They had signs all up and down the railroad, "Get rid of Warren, get rid of Warren." And put Nixon in there, the merger went through. He took his office, 103 days later the merger went through. And then that was it. And then when what's his name came over and took over the Burlington and he wanted to get rid of the passenger trains. And that's what he did. Trains never run on time. Got trains--you come in from New York, you wanna make a connection with a train going to California, you don't get there on time you got to lay over and wait. And you want a train coming from California, you coming in here to get to Chicago, you got to lay over. You late, you gonna miss your train. Speaker 1: So you were saying the new ownership deliberately sabotaged the train schedule to convert 'em to freight (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right, that's what they did. Speaker 1: 'Cause I guess there was more money in freight than there was in passenger. Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't want nothing but freight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They didn't want nothing but freight. Story_ID: 444317 Speaker 1: So this is cutting out jobs, a lot of jobs, right? Speaker 2: Didn't make no difference, they didn't care. Money man don't care, money man, big shot don't care long as he's, long as he's benefiting himself. If he benefiting himself for more money, he don't care what the, what the rest of the people are doing. Speaker 1: So this was all going on about the time that you were retiring, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, before I retired, yeah. Speaker 1: Just before you retired, now you filed a suit, right? You filed a lawsuit? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell us about the lawsuit and what happened. Speaker 2: The lawsuit I filed--they, when the merger went through they--federal government made 'em sign a contract that everybody would be paid equal. The Northern Pacific [Northern Pacific Railway] paid more because they had all white cooks. And the Pacific, the Northern Pacific paid more 'cause they had all white cooks. And the Washington, and the Seattle and Spokane [Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railway] train, they had white cooks so they got--they paid more money. But the waiters were all black. And they still got more money than they would pay the waiters more than what, what we were paid. And, when they did that, well, the Burlington Railroad [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad; Burlington Northern Railroad], everybody got the equal pay. They brought everybody's equal pay up but except the Burlington men 'cause we were all black. Speaker 1: Okay, so the cooks, the Burlington cooks didn't get the same rate since the others, okay. Speaker 2: No, we were all black, waiters and cooks were all black. And Burlington didn't tell us about it, and the union--they bought the union off. They was dealing undercover with the union. Speaker 1: Okay, so let me walk through this again. So, the--when they made the merger, the, the rail lines that white cooks were paid higher and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were already making more money than we did. Speaker 1: They kept 'em higher than you. Okay, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, their salaries were more than ours but when the merger comes, they had to bring everybody's salary up to the same. That's what the government made them do. Everybody got the same salary. If you were a waiter and you worked for the Burlington, you had to get the same salary as that man on the Northern Pacific would get, or a cook, whatever you got. Story_ID: 444318 Speaker 1: So you had to file a lawsuit to get the same salary? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to Equal Opportunity [Office of Equal Opportunity]. See, when I bought this house was when I found out about it. And they--I had to give them permission to give my--the amount of my salary. And the loan company, they wanted to know how--what kind of guarantee I have on my job. I had to give 'em permission for the railroad [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad; Burlington Northern Railroad] to give it to 'em. Well, when they give it out, they give 'em my salary and everything. My salary was too--I was making $228 a month less than what I ought. That's what I was supposed to get, I was supposed to get my guarantee. That's what the--they had took two years, the best two years of my salary and broke it down in my guarantee. And, if anybody had over ten years, they had to take the best two years of your salary and figure it out and break it down and what--for your monthly salary. That's what they did. And, when they gave it to us, they put my salary down as certain and when I went in the office to see if my application went through for my loan, and they said--guy at the loan office said, you told us you made such and such a thing. I forgot what the salary was then. He said, "But they're saying you make more than that." I said, "Make more than that?" I said, "Wait, I'll show you," and I reached in my billfold and just luck I had, I had my check stub in my billfold and I took and showed it to him. He said, "Well, wonder what this is." And I said, "Let me see it." And he wrote it out and give it to me and looked at it. So then I go in--when I go in, I go in the office about it. I went in the office and I asked 'em, I said, "How come I'm supposed to be making so much and so much and I'm not making that much?" Oh, that was--we put that on there, that was your guarantee. I said, you mean if I don't make that much money you've got to give me the rest of it? Well, I notice this one cook opposite me, he was getting it 'cause he was one of the (unclear), I'll say. I won't say nothing else. (Laughter) I would call him something else but I won't say it. But, anyway, they were paying him, and I used to--I've been wondering--I said, "Every time I look up, this man over here has just stopped in the office to see Mr. So and So." I said, "Well, once every time he go in there, well, I relieve him and he relieves me." I said, "If he's getting any money, I should be getting some too." So then, then, that's when I begin to dig. I begin to dig, see what the hell's going on. How come I'm getting so much and he's getting so much? And when I bought this house and it showed up on the--on my application, where they had went over my record and everything, and give it to the loan company. Then I go into the labor department [U.S. Department of Labor], and they told me to go to the union. I went to the union, and the union gives me the thought that they were working on it. I made one trip to Seattle [Washington] and on the way back, when I got back home, I had a letter from the railroad that you will get your equalization pay the 11th, no, it was 12th when I filed, when I filed it, and on the 27th, we got our equalization pay. Just that quick, didn't let it go no further. They thought--and they sent me a check for three hundred dollars 'cause I filed a case. Well, they--when I filed, the Equal Opportunity called me and wanted to know, was I satisfied. No, I'm not satisfied, I want all my money. I said, "They cheated me for two years." I said, "I want all my money." So they said, okay. And then I retired. Never heard a thing from 'em. Never heard a thing from Equal Opportunity or nothing. Story_ID: 444319 Speaker 1: So you never got your money? Speaker 2: I waited for it, then I went to Senator Exon [J. James Exon]. He was the big senator, United States senator out of here, and I went to him--went to his office and his secretary wanted to know how--did I have anything to prove it and I said, "Yeah, I got everything." And I had all the papers and everything and I showed it to her. And she said, "I'll make a copy of it," 'cause he wasn't in town. And she made a copy of it and everything, said, we'll be getting back in touch with you in five days. I come home, went out on the road, come back in five days. I come back the letter was here, and said they--and they found out why I hadn't heard from the lawyer in Chicago [Illinois] that was handling the case for Equal Opportunity [Office of Equal Opportunity]. He had left the Equal Opportunity there and gone up in the middle of Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and took, took my case with him. See, 'cause he knew I had filed suit, that killed it, he'd get some money. He get the money out of it and boom, that's it. And when they found that out, Exon made 'em bring it back to Chicago. They brought it back in Chicago and that's where it sued. And when they, they sent me--and I'd been up there working and had made--been making that money. So that made me--I didn't get as much as some of 'em got because I had been up there making that money. 'Cause I'd took a third cook job when the runs went up big, I took a third cook job when I could have held a chef cook job over here with the Burlington [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad; Burlington Northern Railroad]. I took a third cook job, I was making a dollar, I was making a dollar more an hour than I was making down there as chef cook. And I worked third cook, so I was making--I'm making the money so they, they, they, that kept me from getting as much as some of 'em got. But they had to pay a hundred--when they settled my case, they had to pay 144 men. That's what they had to pay. Speaker 1: So you made it--by you following up you made it better for 144 other people? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. See, they'd just, they was, they wouldn't have got it and some of the guys that out here and worked out the (unclear) shop, they paid them off too. They got paid too. And then it's a funny thing, not a one of 'em has ever said thank you to me. And most of 'em that worked in the shops here, they didn't know I'd filed it, they didn't know how come they get they money. Speaker 1: I was wondering if they really understand what happened. Speaker 2: No, some of 'em didn't know. Now, the waiters and cooks all knew 'cause they knew. But out here it wasn't--I didn't never read nothing. Ray [Ray A. Shepard] kept me posted on the paper because he used to read it in the New York paper and he'd send the clippings to me. Out here, they never even carried it in the paper. Speaker 1: That's something, something. Speaker 2: It took me thirteen years to get it, but I got it, and got every damn penny of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause they offered to pay me and I refused it. I want all mine. I don't want no part of it, I want it all. Speaker 1: So you filed the suit, was it '74 [1974] or '5 [1975]? Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it took you thirteen years to get it. Speaker 2: Yeah, took me thirteen years to get it. Speaker 1: So, 1986 before you got it. Speaker 2: Well, I got it. Got a letter from Exon telling me, the first of September you should receive your check. If you don't receive it, notify me. And I had a session at the fair, I come in from the fair and got out of the car, went to the mailbox to get the mail and there my check was. Speaker 1: Do you think, I mean, when you look back at it, do you think they were trying to wait you out to make sure that they didn't think you might--you think they might of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they didn't try to wait me out, that just tried to--they was trying to pay me off without paying anybody else after I sued 'em. They was wanting to pay me but they didn't wanna have to pay the other, but when they paid me then the government made 'em pay everybody. Story_ID: 444320 Speaker 1: Now, this is something I didn't ask, it just occurred to me though, and it goes way back I guess to your whole railroad experience, but did you have--I know a lot of black people back in the days past used to ride the rails for free because they had to a lot of times to get from place to place. People would jump on--just jump on a train. Speaker 2: Yeah, well them hoboes, yeah, they'd do that. Speaker 1: You don't see that much anymore but a lot of people in those days. I know, my father hoboed even (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You don't never see 'em. I don't think I've ever seen a hobo in the last ten or twelve years. See, they'd just ride freights and, and if you had a--during Depression [Great Depression] they had in a freight car they'd haul animals now, if they had a sheep, sheep car with sheep in it, they didn't allow a hobo to get on there. If a sheep was on there they was shipping sheep, you don't get on that train. No, they'd stop the train anywhere and put you off. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any hobo stories? Speaker 2: No, no, never run into no--oh, I run--I've seen 'em sometimes, and sometimes I see hoboes sitting along the on side of the road somewhere, when I saw how far they were back. And sometimes people would let 'em get up close enough, throw something out. Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought maybe since you were the cook you might have given 'em some food, you know, you might give 'em something to eat every now and then, yeah. Okay, but seem like there'd be some good--now, those were the days when you started--those are the days of the Scottsboro boys and a lot of other famous cases about hoboes. But you didn't have any stories yourself about hoboes? Okay. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. It was--I don't know, I guess I was just a person that I wanted my own, if I wanted something, I didn't want to be depending on somebody else to do something for me. I wanted my own. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wanted to do it myself. Story_ID: 444321 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you did and your whole career with the railroad [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad; Burlington Northern Railroad], is there anything that you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 2: No, I don't know nothing I'd do. As far back as I could look on life, I don't know nothing that I would go back to wanna change. I think I'd do it the same way I've done. 'Cause I have no regrets and I like--I enjoyed every bit of it. I guess I just like action, and my father [Ray Shepard] didn't do what he should have done for me. Speaker 1: Now, did he ever come back? Did he just kind of disappear? Speaker 2: No, just stayed there 'til he died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother [Mabel Smith Shepard] kept the insurance up on him and she went and got him, brought him back home and buried him. Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did he live? Speaker 2: Right in Lincoln [Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Okay, right here in Lincoln? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, right here in Lincoln. And, I don't know. I looked at it like this, the year I graduated from high school [Lincoln School; C.C. Hubbard High School, Sedalia, Missouri] I had built--made lawn chairs, built bird houses and sold 'em to the neighbors all up and down the street. And I had paid for my robe and my gown, my invitations and everything. And I wanted a pair of shoes--got everything but a pair of shoes. And I wrote to my father and told him--I asked him to send--I got everything for graduation, I need five dollars for a pair of shoes. At that time, you buy a pair of shoes for five dollars. And, I ain't got the five dollars yet. And I got a son now, my youngest son [Leonard Shepard], he reminds me so much of my father. I've never talked to any of my kids about my father. He was around--my mother and father never did get no divorce but they separated, and my mother never did marry. And she would come up here and got him and brought him home and buried him. Paid the funeral bill too. Kept the insurance up, everything, she did all that. Story_ID: 444322 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know, I don't know. Treat everybody right and be honest, that's the main thing. Main thing in life is being honest, being honest to yourself and the other person too. That's my main drive, be honest. And a lot of times you know something is not honest and you don't say anything about it, be honest. I don't care if it's your brother or who it is, be honest. Don't say I can't do that 'cause that's my brother. He ain't gonna think no more of you if you stand on his side and he's on the wrong side, he ain't thinking no more of you. He ain't thinking no more of you. Now, if I come up and something wrong and I can help him, then he'll think a whole lot of me. But if I stay on his side and know he's wrong, he ain't thinking no more of me. Story_ID: 444323 Speaker 1: There's a story that I was asked to remind you about Lois' [Lois Shepard Hendricks] baby. Tell us that story, what happened? It was one of your grandchildren, right? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know what happened. All I know when I came home, when she told me she--when my wife [Loretha Jackson Shepard] told me she was pregnant and I guess everybody said I'd kill him. And I didn't, I proved to everybody that couldn't be her fault, couldn't be his fault. Had to be her fault, wasn't his fault. He couldn't have did nothing--he didn't do nothing unless he left her. That's the way I look at it. Story_ID: 444324 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was buried in Wyuka Cemetery [Lincoln, Nebraska], and they have a place out there where they bury all the babies, called it baby land. And that's where the undertaker buried him, buried at. Her husband [Joe Hendricks] went out to see the baby the second or third day, that baby wasn't there. And she went to find out where it was, said, "Oh, we made a mistake." He was in baby land so we moved him over where your family is. Then my wife [Loretha Jackson Shepard] called and they told my wife, wife said, "Well, I don't have any family out there." So, they couldn't buried him where my family is. And (unclear) and Lois [Lois Shepard Hendricks] and them went to him, and they had to come to get the baby to take him there and move him. Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute now, let me get something straight now. Ray [Ray A. Shepard] mentioned off-camera, white baby land and colored baby land, what are those? I don't understand that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's just baby land, didn't say white or black but wasn't nothing buried there but white babies. No black babies had ever buried in there. Never go out there 'cause it was baby land. That's what the undertaker took him for, and they buried him in there and found out he was black, moved him. Speaker 2: Oh, they moved him out of there when they found out he was black, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They had to move him out after they buried him. Speaker 2: What happened, what happened? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What happened? Speaker 1: Well, they paid my daughter and her husband a little money, and he bought a new car and they left, went on, and they went on back, went on to Detroit [Michigan]. If they'd waited 'til I got here, I'd said, we'd probably been owning Wyuka. They--'cause I knew everybody like I know everybody in Lincoln [Nebraska] that's worth fifteen cents, everybody in public office and just like one of the inspectors on the railroad [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad; Burlington Northern Railroad] told the people in the office about when I sued 'em, said, "Don't fool with that man." Said, "That man knows everybody in Lincoln, and everybody knows him and everybody knows his family." Said, "Don't bother him," and they did. And he said--and he told 'em, "I told you not to mess with him." Say, "'Cause he knows everybody, everybody knows him." Said that he was out here to a ball game and said he was telling people, telling them he worked for the railroad and who it was. And then said the first thing they come up, "Do you know Boots Shepard [HistoryMaker Cornelius "Boots" Shepard]?" Yes, sir, name comes up, and he said, "I went down, I went up the street and I looked up and a boy was hollering, 'Extra, extra,' and I asked him, 'What's in the paper?'" "Hey, buy one and read it." He said, "I know he had to be Boots' son." Come to find out it was Orvell [Cornelius Shepard, Jr.]. Orvell, over by the Lincoln Hotel [Lincoln, Nebraska] sells on Saturdays, selling newspapers, had all that. Story_ID: 444313 Speaker 1: Tell us again. Speaker 2: This was in 1942, Stewart [Stewart Shepard], I mean, Orvell [Cornelius Shepard, Jr.] was born and he was six months old. And they come around selling coupons for--I had met her in the studio to have my kid's picture taken, and my wife [Loretha Jackson Shepard] bought a coupon. And, when I came in she told it to me and then she called and made an appointment with 'em to take the picture. You had to call and get an appointment, they give her an appointment. When I went up there to take--up there took him in and we was sitting there and wife sitting there and girl and all, she didn't know it either, and she told us to have a seat. He was busy right at the time. And, ah, I guess we'd been sitting there about ten or fifteen minutes and he come out the door out the room and looked and saw me. He stood there a minute then he said, "Come in, I wanna talk to you." What the hell you want with me? I went over there, he said, "I'm sorry but we don't take colored folks." He didn't say black, he said colored folks' pictures. I said, "You don't?" And before I knew it I said, "Well, you'll wish you had." And I went over there and the woman gives me my receipt back, come right out, went right across the street. And this lawyer, one of the top lawyers in Lincoln [Nebraska] here that belonged to the country club, and I knew him and his family and everything. And I went right on up to his office. And I showed him the coupon and told him what had happened. I'd like to speak to the owner, talked with him a while. And then he said, you know, this is what this war is all about. I never will forget to say that. To get away from these days and times, get away from all that prejudice. He said, "It'd been cheaper for you to take that boy's picture, six months old baby's picture, than--'cause it's gonna cost you more than that now." And hung up. He told me, said, "You forget about it. Anybody wanna call you and wanna talk to it, don't talk to 'em 'bout it." Said, "They don't have nothing to say," said, "this is a little studio just getting started." Said, "But we're gonna teach 'em about--." I went on home. And I guess about two or three months, he called me. He said, "I got you three hundred dollars, come down and get it." And I went down and got it. And he didn't charge me anything. Give me the three hundred dollars, I said, hell, it's gonna cost me, gonna cost me about twenty dollars to have the picture made and I got three hundred dollars. Hell, that was (laughter). Speaker 1: Have you looking for more coupons I guess, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. The man and thing would come by selling 'em and then my wife bought it. He didn't know it either 'cause he wouldn't have sold us the coupon. And I know when I walked in up there and give it to the woman at the desk, she didn't know it either. 'Cause she took it, just said, "Have a seat." Said, "He's busy right now." Just as nice as she could be. And then he came and looked and saw me, and stood in that door and asked me to go up to 'em. We don't take colored people's pictures. Come found out they came from--I done forgot where, it's somewhere where is down south where they came from. They just had moved into Lincoln. And that lawyer, he's something else. Speaker 1: What was the lawyer's name? Speaker 2: John Doyle. Speaker 1: D-A-R? Speaker 2: L-Y. Speaker 1: D-O--what? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): D-O-Y-L-E, Doyle. Speaker 1: Doyle, Doyle, okay. Speaker 2: Doyle. Speaker 1: D-O-Y-L-E. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 444314 Speaker 1: I only have one more question, but is there anything I haven't asked you that you think I ought to ask before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't know. Far as waiters and cooks concerned, in the wintertime you'd only carry two cooks on the dining car, and a waiter in charge, and a waiter. And if you happen to have a big load, extra load, and they put extra, give you extra help, you had to put a steward in there. A white man. Had to have that. You couldn't have, you couldn't have--couldn't go up there with just blacks. If you had to put a steward on there and then you had to help too. If you didn't have a steward, you'd never get no help. And then in the summertime, they'd hire stewards. Go out there in the street and hire anybody just so he's white and put him on there. And half the time the waiters have to teach him about how to handle the paperwork and everything. Then the first thing he'd do, the first one he'd bite would be the one that done showed him all the way. And I used to be the main leader of that. First time he did it--we had one fellow here by the name of Cook [ph.], and he was one of these office boys. And when they was sent this superintendent's boy, was in the university and he married and he was going with his daughter. So he give him a job for the summer on the dining car. And something come up and first thing he did was to bite the boy that'd been teaching him. And I, and I laughed. I was out in the dining room when it happened, and I laughed, I said, no better for you, you teach him everything, now you done taught him. Now, you was the first one he bit in the ass. (Laughter) See, I was, I was just, just trouble. And that's what it was. I thought, that man, that settled it. Happened, that man would see me right now--he wasn't--he's about the same age of me. He lives up in Seattle [Washington]. And wherever he sees me or his wife either one, they run and grab me, they run and grab me. I said--he said, "I can't never forget you." He said, "You made me see the light." Story_ID: 444315 Speaker 1: That leads to my last question. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That--the last question is very similar to legacy but the last question is, sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Just as I am. Just as I am. Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you so much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: I think of myself of being a good father and a honest man. I don't know nobody I ever mistreated but I've been mistreated. I was mistreated a long time. But it didn't stop me, didn't stop me. I kept going for what I wanted and what I got. I don't have much but I sure grateful, thankful for having it. Being able to get it accomplished, what I've accomplished. I'm proud of it and if they asked me to do it again, I'd do it all over again the same way. Do it the same identical way 'cause I've enjoyed every bit of it. And I don't know nobody I hate or dislike. I don't know nobody. I know people that done things, but I don't hate 'em. I don't dislike 'em. And I wouldn't do anything to hurt 'em. Somebody, if it's somebody I know and they come and ask me something about 'em, if I couldn't say nothing good, I say, "Well, I don't know 'em that well." If I can't say nothing good about 'em, don't say nothing. That's my motto. If I can't say good, I don't say nothing about 'em, he ain't did nothing to me. I ain't got no right to. If he did anything to me, it's gone by and I made it. So, why hold onto it. It can stay there. And anything you do or wanna do, or if you wanna do something, you got to want to do it. You can't go out there and just I'm gonna do so and so and so. You got to want to do it. And you got to figure out how to do it, and don't let nobody stop you from doing the right thing. But if somebody comes to you and wants talk to you or tell you something maybe you got--you wanna do so and so and so and so, and maybe some older person or it could be a younger person come and talk and tell you, "Boots [HistoryMaker Cornelius "Boots" Shepard], I wouldn't do that." So and so and so and so, that isn't right. So and so and so, now, he's talking to help me. And if I sit there and listen and let it soak in, if it helps me, I'll follow it. If it don't help me, I'll tell him so. That don't help me a bit. But usually, if you set down and listen to it, somebody explains something to you and you pay attention to it, and not be stubborn and just don't wanna listen, then if you listen, it'll change your mind. It'll change your mind. If you see somebody do something and you can help 'em, help 'em. That's just like I can be here and haven't--I don't know I can't say, no. I don't know why, but I can't say, no. All these things have happened to me and so and so and so and so, I can't say, no. I go ahead and help if I can. Sometimes I should say no. I know I should have said no, I know it but I wouldn't done what I done. I know I should have said no. But I didn't. I didn't do it. And I don't regret it. I might have lost but it didn't make any difference, didn't hurt me. That's the way I look at things. It's a wonderful thing. Don't never try to do wrong. Don't try to do wrong to nobody even if you don't like 'em. Leave 'em alone. Wrong ain't paying, ain't paying nobody nothing. And wrongdoing don't pay off, wrongdoing don't pay off. You might do wrong, keep doing wrong and you think 'cause you getting by with it, that it's paying off. Soon or later down the road there it's gonna pay off to you. And it ain't gonna be a good payoff. I don't care what you say. It's got to, it's got to--it's just that way. Ain't no use to thinking it's gonna be good 'cause it ain't gonna be good. A hard thing...