 Story_ID: 13099 Speaker 1: I need your birth date. Speaker 2: Tavis Smiley, T-A-V-I-S, Smiley, S-M-I-L-E-Y, [birthdate] nine thirteen sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay, and I need to have today's date. Speaker 2: What is today's date? Speaker 1: It's July 26th. Speaker 2: 26th of July, 2001. Speaker 1: And I need to have your address and your profession. Speaker 2: 44, The Smiley Group, Inc., 4434 Crenshaw Boulevard, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] 90043 I think. I don't remember the zip code here. Speaker 1: And your profession? Speaker 2: Broadcaster. Story_ID: 13100 Speaker 1: What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Anything my mother [Joyce Marie Smiley] makes except liver and onions, anything except liver and onions. I have very eclectic tastes. My mother's a great cook, but I refuse to eat liver and onions. Anything other than that, I'm good. I'm easy to please. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: (Pause) Summertime. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere where I can sleep quietly. I'm not--when I go on vacation, I'm not one of those persons that goes and does a lot of sightseeing and doing everything and so you come back, you need a vacation from your vacation. I just need to be somewhere where there's quietness and silence, and I could do that in the mountains, I could do it near the water, I can do it in desert, as long as I can sleep for like seven straight days for the first week of the vacation and the second week I go out and have a little fun. Speaker 1: And a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Daisy Robinson], 'Big Mama,' said to me all the time "once a task you have first begun, never finish until it is done. Be the labor great or small, do it well or not at all." Speaker 1: That's nice. Okay, well we'll get started--. Story_ID: 13101 Speaker 1: My mother's name is Joyce Marie Smiley, married to a man named Emory G. Smiley, Senior, and my mother was born in Mississippi. My grandmother, my maternal grandmother [Daisy Robinson], who I refer to as 'Big Mama,' affectionately, passed away in 2000, 1999 actually, passed away in 1999, and my grandmother was the daughter of a sharecropper. John Robinson was my [maternal] grandfather's name, and my grandmother didn't know much, quite frankly, past a couple generations. It's been rather hard to track on my mother's side. We know a little more about my father's side, I think, but my mother's side is--doesn't go back terribly far. As a matter of fact, when we finish this conversation, I'm headed to a family reunion for my mother's side of the family down in New Orleans [Louisiana] so that's about what I know about that. Story_ID: 13102 Speaker 1: Did your mother share any stories about growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, all the time. My favorite story about her growing up, my mother [Joyce Marie Smiley] was a big, I mean the biggest, the hugest--excuse my ebonics--the hugest James Brown [singer] fan. This is in the heyday of the 'Godfather [of Soul]', and she won tickets through a radio contest to go see James Brown in concert when he was coming through Gulfport, Gulfport, Mississippi, right on the Gulf Coast. She went to see James Brown in concert, and she won these tickets so they were front row seats, and so James Brown in his concert, of course, shimmied his way in, mash potatoed his way over to the edge of the stage. My mother was just screaming like a young child. She was about sixteen years old at the time, in high school, and was just screaming. He got to the edge of the stage, and he was shaking his leg like he did, and she reached out and grabbed him by his leg, and James started kicking, trying to get away, and she was a big James Brown fan and would not let this man go, would not let James Brown go away. The cops had to come out on the stage and beat my mama off of James Brown, literally had to beat her off of James Brown. She went to jail, got arrested. My [maternal] grandmother [Daisy Robinson] did not--my grandmother wouldn't--Daisy, 'Big Mama,' would not bail her out so she made her stay in jail for a night for acting like a complete fool and not letting go of James Brown's leg, and then many, many years later, although my mother would take exception to one of those manys, so many years later, a few years later, I come along and end up being an undergraduate student at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], and guess who's coming to Indiana University to perform? James Brown, so I get tickets and my friend and I, my best friend and I, went to see James Brown, and afterwards we hung out backstage. I got to meet James Brown and tell him the story about my mother, and he remembered that story. He didn't remember the city, but he remembered the moment because the first - it was the only time anybody's ever grabbed his leg and would not, just literally would not let him go, and had to be beaten off his leg by the cops. He remembered that story, and that was as a student at Indiana University, and then fast forward a few years later, and now I'm out of school, and I'm hosting my own T.V. show [BET Tonight with Tavis Smiley] on BET [Black Entertainment Television network], and I had the chance to have James Brown as a guest on my television show so this James Brown story has kind of run through my mother's side of the family from her meeting him in high school to my meeting him in college to my interviewing him on my T.V. show so it's been kind of gone full circle. Speaker 1: That's wonderful--that's a cute story. Story_ID: 13103 Speaker 1: Now your father--give his name, and I'd like you talk about his, you know, that side of the family. Speaker 2: My father's name is Emory, E-M-O-R-Y, Emory G, G stands for Garnell, Smiley. My father, unlike my mother [Joyce Marie Smiley], my mother was one of five kids. My father was an only child, and I had the most wonderful--I loved both sets of my grandparents obviously. My father's parents, he just lost his mother earlier this year so earlier--that would be the year 2001. She just passed away. We called her 'Mother Adele' [Adele Smiley] and 'Daddy Emory' [Emory Smiley], and she passed earlier this year, but I've never met in my life two nicer people. My [paternal] grandmother, 'Mother Adele,' was absolutely the nicest. [Maternal grandmother Daisy Robinson] 'Big Mama' was a no-nonsense kind of person, would do anything for you but straight no-nonsense. But Adele was just, would give her last dime to a stranger, just the nicest people I've ever met, and my father, as I said was an only child, and he finished high school at a little place called Midway, Georgia, population like twelve people or something, a little, small place called Midway. I think they call it Midway because it's midway between two cities, Hinesville [Georgia] and Savannah [Georgia]. It literally is the midway point, I guess that's how the city got its name, Midway. It's midway between, you know, two little cities, Hinesville, and, of course, we all know Savannah. So literally you blink your eyes, you get through there. It's like one red light in the whole town, one stop light. It's really a very small, very small place. And my father, the house that my grandmother birthed him in was the same house that she died in so all the years of their life they never moved from the house that they were in when they - when 'Daddy [Emory]' and 'Mother Adele' got together, they lived in a little shotgun house. You know, shotgun house, you can shoot a shotgun through the front door, and the bullet goes straight out the back door. It's just a straight through, just one little room basically so they ended up in - she died in the house where she birthed my father. And so my father is the hardest-working person I've ever known in my life. He got his discipline--I say it to people all the time, that I get my discipline, my discipline and my work ethic, I get from my father. My mother is--I get my abiding faith from my mother. My father is a hard-working man, and you would think that as an only child he'd be spoiled to death, and in many respects he was. I mean my mother--my mother and father got divorced years ago, and I watched my father in his divorced state just not take care of himself as well as my mother took care of him so there was some aspects of his life where he was used to being spoiled and taken care of, but when it came to his work ethic, his discipline, I never met anybody in my life who works harder than my father so--that's my daddy. Story_ID: 13104 Speaker 1: Did he share any stories about growing up, you know, in a small town? Was he a talker? Speaker 2: My daddy is definitely not a talker at all. My father [Emory Garnell Smiley], if you know him, will talk to you a little bit. He's just a very quiet, not shy--I make a distinction. My father, if you get him talking, he will talk so he's not shy at all but just a very quiet, laid-back kind of person. My mother [Joyce Marie Smiley], you see me, you see my mother--gregarious, talkative, outspoken, opinionated, you know, anal, just you know. When you see me, you see my mother. My father and I are night and day in terms of personality, but my work ethic, again, I developed from my father. Story_ID: 13105 Speaker 1: Now how did your parents meet? Did they tell you how they met? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure. My mother [Joyce Marie Smiley] was working in--my father [Emory Garnell Smiley] was, and for that matter still is, a career Air Force officer so he's still in the Air Force. He was stationed at a place called Grissom [Keesler] Air Force Base which is in Biloxi, Mississippi. Biloxi and Gulfport [Mississippi] are right next to each other--my mother grew up in Gulfport; he's stationed in Biloxi. So my father was stationed in Biloxi, and my mother was working on the base in the mess hall, and that's how they met. He was coming through the line every day getting his tray, and that's how he and my mother hooked up, and that's how they met. Story_ID: 13106 Speaker 1: Give your siblings' names and the order. Speaker 2: I should--well, I should explain this first. My mother [Joyce Marie Smiley] and father [Emory Garnell Smiley] have six boys of which I am the oldest, and people who will read about me or know my story know that I have--they always refer to having nine brothers and sisters. There are ten of us. There are ten of us because my mother had a sister who was murdered back in 1970 who had a number of kids. My mother and father adopted and became the legal guardian of those four kids so the six of us--at the time there were only two and a half. My mother had two kids, she was pregnant with her third, and we adopted these four kids, and she went on to have more kids. When all was said and done, you know, it's kind of a strange twist to the Brady Bunch story. There were ten of us, and the order of the ten then is as follows. The oldest is Pam, Phyllis, me, Garney, Paul, Patrick, Maurey, Doobie, Scooter, and Dion, a few nicknames in there, but those are the ten. Story_ID: 13107 Speaker 1: And tell me, Tavis, what your earliest memory is of growing up. Do have an earliest memory? Speaker 2: Well, I remember being--my earliest memory, the first memory that I have of being child, is actually one of my most scary moments. I think it must have stuck in me because it was so scary. My grandmother also lived, my maternal grandmother [Daisy Robinson], not unlike my paternal grandmother [Adele Smiley], also lived in a shotgun house. She's in Mississippi. My father's parents are in Georgia, Midway, but my [maternal] grandmother, 'Big Mama,' lived in a shotgun house, and I recall as a kid, maybe two or three, very young, but I remember this very distinctly, being in her bathroom, and her house, you know, it's just one level, the house is just sitting on a couple of bricks basically. I remember being a child sitting in her bathroom on the toilet as a little kid, and there was a wino, a drunk who always hung around her neighborhood. I remember being about three years old sitting on the toilet one night, and I was sitting there, just, you know, like a little kid singing "ha, ha, ha," sitting on the toilet, and I looked over to my left, and this wino is staring at me just sitting there drunk, staring at me in the window, scared me to death. I jumped up off the toilet, went running down the hallway, tripping over my underwear. I don't want to gross you out, but stuff trailing me down on the floor, just scared me to death as a child, and I remember that about my [maternal] grandmother's house. My [maternal] grandmother had a really, really high bed. Her bed, she liked her bed high off the floor so I remember as a kid just struggling and struggling and struggling, trying to climb up in this bed. It seemed like the height of the Sears Tower in Chicago [Illinois] or something but the really high bed she had. I used to love to hang out in bed with my [maternal] grandmother, and the other memory I had, of my earliest memories, again around the age of three because when I was almost four, we moved to--my mother and father got--my father got transferred to an air force base in Indiana [Grissom Air Force Base] away from the one in Gulfport [Biloxi], Mississippi, and so when I was three, we moved to Indiana so these are memories that I had when we were living in Mississippi for the first two or three years of my - the first three years of my life. My grandmother had a porch on her house with a rocking chair, a couple of rocking chairs, and the building that we sit now in, the Smiley Building that we just built, I insisted that we have two rocking chairs in my lobby because I love rocking chairs. I've never had one since I was a kid, and I've never had room for it in my house, and I got a big office building so now I've got room for two rocking chairs so there are two rocking chairs in our lobby, and ironically whenever somebody comes in this building and waits to meet somebody wants to sit, not on the couch, not on the gorgeous leather couch, but they want to sit in those comfortable rocking chairs, and my grandmother had rocking chairs on her porch, and she lived, like I said, right there on the Gulf of Mexico, on Gulfport so there were always rainstorms, thunderstorms coming through the area, indeed a couple of bad hurricanes, tornadoes that came through that area, but anyway, I used to love to sit on her porch in the rain and just rock and rock and rock and you eventually fall asleep with the rain all beating on the little tin house all the way around, so I remember those days fondly so now I got my own rocking chairs. Those are my earliest memories as a child. Story_ID: 13108 Speaker 1: Do you associate--are there any smells or sounds that you associate with growing up? You know, I don't know if it's different, it may be different, but you know how we, you know, associate some things. What would they be? Speaker 2: "Boy, get down off that!" (Laughs.) "Didn't I tell you--?" "If I have to come in there one more--." "I brought you in this world, I will--." Those are the kinds of sounds that I associate with childhood. When you have nine brothers and sisters, you hear that every day, all day--"Bring me that belt! Naw, naw, go outside, and cut me a switch, and it better be a good one, cuz if you bring me something flimsy back, then I will go out there and cut my own switch, and you don't want me to do that--!" You know, those are the kind of--anybody raised in a black family or certainly a family with ten kids in it, if there was any discipline at all, then all those things sound familiar so those are the things, those are the things, those are the sounds that I remember, you know. Story_ID: 13109 Speaker 1: Now did you--you were the oldest boy, then right? Speaker 2: Oldest boy. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have--did you feel responsibility of being the oldest boy? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely. I mean there are two girls in my family and eight boys, as you said. I'm the oldest boy of the eight, and so there's always been a certain responsibility that goes along with that. I mean I was the first one to drive, first of all, so I'm the one who had to run everybody to baseball practice, basketball practice, and track practice, etcetera, etcetera. But then there is the, you know, the pressure to be an example for your younger siblings. And then as my parents got divorced, I was in college, sophomore or junior in college, but my younger brothers, of course, were still at home, some of them still in elementary school so it was a rather traumatic--my parents were married thirty some years and then got divorced--so it was a rather traumatic experience for some of my younger brothers. So then the responsibility came not just to be a big brother but to be, in some respects, a father figure as well, because all the kids stayed with my mother--nobody lived with my father during the divorce or after the divorce. So it was the responsibility then to be--to help them, to make sure they got their grades, make sure that they went to college, make sure that somebody paid for them to go to college. And so I've stepped up to that responsibility, stepped up after they were divorced. And now, of course, there's the responsibility I still have, you know, to make sure that, again, I continue to lead by example. So yeah, I felt--I could feel a real shift in my responsibility to them after my parents got divorced. Speaker 1: You were in college then, right? Speaker 2: (Nods in assent). Story_ID: 13110 Speaker 1: Okay let me--I want to go--when you moved from, Georgia, right? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mississippi to Indiana. Speaker 1: Mississippi to Indiana. Do you remember that and how it felt, I mean, because it was a new--you know, you're moving from the South to the North? Speaker 2: Well, what I remember about it was that I didn't, you know--I had to make friends, and I remember making friends, and my parents were very spiritual, my mother happens to be, as a matter of fact, a minister, an evangelist, so the first thing they wanted to do when we got to Indiana was find a church home, they wanted to find a church. And it didn't take long for our search--as a matter of fact, I don't know if we went to more than a couple of churches before we found the church that I basically grew up in, a little place, a little small church, still a small church, called New Bethel Tabernacle back in Kokomo, Indiana, and Kokomo is about an hour north, due north, of Indianapolis [Indiana]. So we went to this church, and I recall making friends, there was a guy at the church who was the exact same age as I am. His name was 'Junebug,' so 'Junebug' and I hit it off and became best friends as soon as we got to Kokomo, Indiana. And the interesting part was we lived outside of Kokomo so we lived in a trailer park in a place called Bunker Hill, which is where the air force base is in Bunker Hill, Indiana, Kokomo, about thirty minutes down the road, twenty-five minutes down the road. So we lived in a trailer park, in a trailer home, with basically all white people. So I lived in a white environment, I went to an all-white high school, I mean elementary, junior high, high school, all-white school, and yet we went to a church in a black neighborhood thirty minutes up the road. So I remember as a child, you know, just having to navigate two different worlds. I was, you know, I was having the black experience when we went to church and the--a more holistic experience, I guess, when we went to, was in school or where I lived, so it was always interesting to kind of bridge the gap between those two worlds, but as I have gotten older now, I appreciate the fact that I had a chance as a child to learn how to navigate and be--to maximize my effectiveness in both of those worlds. Story_ID: 13111 Speaker 1: Do you think you were nurtured in the white environment, you know, growing up? I'm talking about in the school, you know, because the white environment--do you think that? Speaker 2: I was. I was fortunate, absolutely, not only nurtured, but I mean every year I was elected class president every year, Most Likely to Succeed, Mr. Senior, Mr. Popularity. I was--it was never an issue for me quite frankly, except when it came to dating, and then again, my parents [Emory Garnell Smiley and Joyce Marie Smiley] wouldn't let me--my parents were very strict--I couldn't date until after I was out of high school--that's how strict my parents were--I could not date in high school. My first date didn't come until I was on my way to college, and so it wasn't like I was asking a bunch of white girls to go out with me in the first place. But it--my teachers, I still communicate with many of my teachers to this day. My second grade teacher I still correspond with, from second grade. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Vera Graft. Speaker 1: White or black? Speaker 2: White woman, all white, nobody black. I never had a black teacher in my life until I got to college, and then it was because I took an African-American Affairs class. I never had a black teacher in my entire life. Speaker 1: Now, give me the schools you went to in order, your elementary school. Speaker 2: Nead, N-E-A-D, Nead Elementary in basically Peru, Indiana, the Circus Capital of the World, then to the school system we were involved in. The school system was called Maconaquah, named after an Indian, the Maconaquah School Corporation, and Nead School was part of that corporation so I went to Nead Elementary. Then I went to Maconaquah Middle School and Maconaquah High School [Bunker Hill, Indiana]. Story_ID: 13112 Speaker 1: Now what was the young, I mean, Tavis Smiley? I know you said were you always talkative because you're--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, always. Speaker 1: Okay. Not a shy--? Speaker 2: Only when it comes to meeting women, that's it, (laughs simultaneously with interviewer) and that still happens, but other than that. Speaker 1: I can't believe that (laughs). Speaker 2: That's the only aspect of my life where I'm shy. I can be in a room with ten thousand women, and unless I am introduced to somebody, it's really hard for me to walk up and say "hi, I'm Tavis," no matter how attractive I might find a woman. "Hi, I'm Tavis. What's your name? Nice to meet you." I've just never been, never been comfortable doing that. I think again it goes--I think we are the total of our experiences. Because I couldn't date until I got to college and because I grew up in a family with a bunch of testosterone, all these boys, I just never mastered the art of how to approach a woman in that kind of way, and so I am not shy about anything in my life except walking up to a woman and introducing myself, other than that, I can handle it. Story_ID: 13113 Speaker 1: First and foremost, my formation has come from my abiding faith, you know, and my church experience, and I, again, every day thank God for that, that I was--most of what is in me is there because of my spiritual upbringing. So the church definitely was very formative for me. Growing up in a family with nine brothers and sisters teaches you more lessons than you ever know. You don't even know what these lessons are or that you're being taught them, quite frankly, until you get older and look back on your experience as a child and look at who you are. Today you realize that what shaped a lot of that was growing up in a family of nine brothers and sisters, being one who is willing to share, in my case being outspoken, speaking up quickly so you'll be heard. I eat fast. I eat fast to this day because, you know, in our family, if you wanted seconds and it was a meal that you particularly liked, you better eat fast so you can get another helping, another serving of it, so there's all kind of things, some silly, some quirky, some irreverent, some very serious, but primarily my church, my family and my church are the two things that - my church, my family and, again, the experience of having grown up in these two worlds, white and black, are the three things I would say that most formed or have formed whoever I am today. Story_ID: 13114 Speaker 1: So give an example of your family life, what it was like. Could you give just an example? Speaker 2: We were very impoverished. My father [Emory Garnell Smiley], as I said, was and still is in the Air Force, and you do not get rich on an Air Force income, and my father at times literally worked seven part-time jobs cleaning office buildings. There were so many kids in our family [ten], obviously, that he started a little janitorial business on the side, never got rich off of it, but started a little janitorial business called Smiley and Sons, and we would, after school, do our homework and then go and clean office buildings in the local area [Bunker Hill, Indiana], basically office buildings that he got contracts to clean on the [Grissom] Air Force base, so he'd meet people on the Air Force base who ran the commissary or the person who ran the dental office or whatever, the credit union, the Air Force Credit Union, so we would go to these buildings after school, after we did our homework, and clean these office buildings, and we had like seven or eight contracts at one time, seven or eight buildings, and we would do that every day, and so that's what it was like. We'd get up in the morning, go to school. My parents believed in education. We didn't skip school. We didn't miss school. We did not skip doing our homework. My parents went to every P.T.A. [Parent and Teachers Association] meeting, every parent-teacher conference, just, you know, did not miss any aspect of making sure we got an education, and even though they did not have - my mother [Joyce Marie Smiley] and father did not have anything more than a high school degree, they stayed on us about getting an education, and so, you know, it was - we were impoverished. We grew, and we--I have a lot of comedian friends who I tease now because a lot of comedians, black comedians, will make jokes about white folk in trailer parks, trailer park trash. You see it on Jerry Springer and everywhere else, these folks who are the quote unquote trailer park trash, but that's the environment that I grew up in. We grew up in a trailer and not a big trailer, a regular trailer that had three bedrooms in it. My mother and father had one bedroom, my two sisters and my [maternal] grandmother [Daisy Robinson], 'Big Mama' who came to live with us, had the second bedroom, and me and my seven younger brothers had the third bedroom, and that's how we grew up, basically. Story_ID: 13115 Speaker 1: Now so these things--so you're growing up. These things are influencing you. You were Pentecostal, right, you said? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So did you speak in tongues and things like that? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Oh, yeah. I was saved in our church when I was about sixteen--about sixteen--and, you know, I wouldn't trade anything for that. I mean my spiritual underpinnings are the most. I believe that there are three things in life that sustain all of us. I call them "The Three Fs," and they are in this order--your faith, your family, and your friends. Those are the things that sustain us when life gets difficult and rocky--your faith, your family, and your friends--and there's nothing more important to me than my abiding faith, and beyond my faith, there's nothing like the power of black family love. My family is second on that list, and I've been blessed to have great friends, but those are the three things that sustain us, and without any of those three, it seems to me that life isn't really worth the living. Story_ID: 13116 Speaker 1: Now when you were young, what did you want to be? Speaker 2: A baseball player. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right--. Speaker 2: I wanted to be a first baseman, a first baseman in the major leagues. I grew up in [Bunker Hill] Indiana, and right next door to Indiana is a place called Cincinnati [Ohio], and in the '70s [1970s] Cincinnati [Reds baseball team] won two consecutive--should've won three consecutive World Series with Johnny Bench and Pete Rose and Tony Perez and Dave Concepcion and Ken Griffey, Senior, and Joe Morgan, a second baseman, just a great infield, great outfield, and Sparky Anderson was the manager, so I grew up a big Cincinnati Reds fan and always wanted to play first base for the Cincinnati Reds. When I got to be thirteen, I realized that I was good, but there were guys on the team who were better than I was and made a rather a mature decision, I think, for a thirteen-year-old, and that was to give up baseball because I didn't think--even at thirteen I was thinking "I want to be a major player--" when I say major player, I don't mean in the major sports arena, but "I want to be somebody, I want to make a contribution to this country and to my community," and "I want to do something that's big." And part of that came out of being part of a very poor family and being teased. Kids can be very cruel, as you know, and so we got tired of being--I got tired of being teased about the holes in my shoes and about wearing the hand-me-down clothes, and you know, it was funny because we'd get stuff from Goodwill [Industries International], and my parents could, you know, buy what they could afford. The good news for me was that I was the oldest boy so whatever we got, I got to wear it first, but my younger brothers, I really felt sorry for them because they got handed down. My mother [Joyce Marie Smiley], to this day, still has two or three outfits that every single one of us wore. There was a green sweater that has been patched and repatched and repatched and repatched that every one of us wore, all eight of us wore that green sweater at some point in our development. And so it was a very impoverished environment, but I decided at thirteen that I wanted to make something of myself, and I realized that I probably wasn't good enough to make the major leagues at first base--I realized that even at thirteen--and so I started putting all my time into my extracurricular activities, my books, my activities, and it paid off for me because I don't know that I would've ever made it as a first baseman, but I'm glad things turned out the way they did--or they have. Story_ID: 13117 Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a guy named, who is now deceased, Douglas Hogan, Junior. Doug Hogan was the superintendent of our school department in our church [New Bethel Tabernacle Church, Kokomo, Indiana], Sunday School department rather, at our church at New Bethel, but he was also a member of the Kokomo [Indiana] City Council, and so when he joined our church, I was already there, but he joined our church and became the superintendent of our Sunday School department. I got to know him and really became very fascinated by what he did as a councilman, and I became fascinated because I spent enough time with him, and I watched him respond to the needs of his constituents, making sure the potholes were filled, that the kids had summer jobs, that the parks were upgraded, etcetera, etcetera. He was an excellent councilman. In terms of service delivery, in terms of responding to his constituents, none was better than him on the entire city council in the city of Kokomo, and I got a chance to see first-hand. I helped him. I used to go to his house and spend time with him and help him open up his mail because he was a small town councilman so he didn't have a secretary or anything, but he's writing and responding to his constituents with his own--writing his own letters, etcetera, etcetera, so I started assisting him as a kid, helping him respond to his constituents' concerns, and that's when I came to understand that this public service arena was something I was interested in, in terms of doing something that could make a contribution to the community, and I saw what a good feeling he had, and quite frankly, on the projects that I helped him on, I realized rather quickly even as a child how good I felt when we responded to the needs of a constituent. When we got that social security check and found it and delivered it, when that pothole was filled, and there was more stuff in the park for kids to do and just respond to those needs made him feel impactful and powerful and good, and it rubbed off on me, and so I was bitten by the political bug when I was like thirteen, thirteen and a half, and then I had a chance to meet [U.S. Senator] Birch [Evans] Bayh, who at the time was a U.S. Senator from the state of Indiana who went on in 1980 to be defeated by a guy named [Vice President J.] Dan[forth] Quayle who went on to be a U.S. Senator from Indiana until he got picked up by [President George H.W.] Bush to be on the [1988] ticket for the White House, but Birch Bayh, I met him as a child, and I got a chance to see what Doug Hogan was doing, Councilman Hogan, on the local level, and then I realized oh, this guy named Birch Bayh does this back in Washington [D.C.] on the national level representing the state of Indiana, and I was like wow, that's really cool, and I was fascinated by D.C. and the Capitol and the White House and all of that, but here was a guy who was making a difference locally who I got to know and a guy making a difference nationally who I got to know, and I first met Birch Bayh. He came into our town on a campaign swing for re-election, and he actually sat and talked to me for like fifteen or twenty minutes, just sat and just entertained all of my questions and spent time with me, and part of it was his personal touch that made me feel very special and very important by a guy who was this popular, and I went back to school the next day with all of these Polaroid pictures that Councilman Hogan had taken of me and Birch Bayh talking and hanging out, and my teachers were so impressed because here's a U.S. Senator who I am like buddies with now, and it was just really cool, and that's when I realized that there was something other than baseball that I could do that would also be--allow me, rather, to make a significant contribution to my community. Story_ID: 13118 Speaker 1: Now what were the classes, you know, the subjects that you were most attracted to in school? Speaker 2: History, American politics, anything that had to do with the contemporary study, any of the sciences that had to do, I should say, with the contemporary study of current events, politics, American history. Speaker 1: So you were--did you not play athletics in high school? Speaker 2: Not high school I didn't. I did up until--I played up until high school, and then I got, you know, as I was making that transition from junior high to high school, I started wanting to do things like join the National Honor Society and the speech team, the debate team, Student Council, class officer, all those kinds of activities. Story_ID: 13119 Speaker 1: How did you choose Indiana University? Speaker 2: Very simple. They kind of chose me. One, they were an in-state school, and I could afford to go there, although I received offers from a few other schools. Actually, I found a university called Denison [University, Granville, Ohio] in Ohio and Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] in Ohio. There were a couple of other schools that were interested in me coming, but I went to Indiana [University, Bloomington, Indiana], one, because they were in state, and I could more readily afford that. My parents [Emory Garnell Smiley and Joyce Marie Smiley] couldn't afford to send me to a private school like Oberlin, and finally I got a partial scholarship to be on the debate team at Indiana University so that's why I went there. Speaker 1: Did you like it? Speaker 2: Loved it. Speaker 1: And how did it form you? What are the things that happened? I know that there was an incident with--but that was different--with Denver Smith. Speaker 2: That formed me a great deal. Denver [Smith] was a friend of mine who was on the football team and, to make a long story short, was shot and killed by the police, white cops. That was my first--I didn't even know the term then, racial profiling. We know that term now, but that was my first incident with racial profiling and police brutality, and I'd come from a community--you know, I grew up with all white people, and it just never occurred to me that racist white cops existed. We didn't have that problem in my little small town [Bunker Hill, Indiana]. I knew everybody white. They knew me. I was best friends with everybody, class president and everything else. It just totally stunned and shocked me to see that people could behave that way, and then it happened to a friend of mine, and so that shaped me in a formidable and very serious sort of way, and then I started taking more black studies. Up until that incident, I had really not enrolled in black studies classes. That wasn't my thing at the time, but I started taking the African-American studies courses and really just coming to understand that our community needed advocates because I found myself on the front line protesting and going to council meetings, city council meetings in Bloomington [Indiana], to speak out on behalf of my friend and this ugly incident with Denver, and I was being interviewed by the local newspapers about why I was a student activist, and I'd never seen myself that way. It was just an incident that touched and moved and affected me in a way that I could not be quiet about it, and all of us get faced with that challenge at some point in our lives. Something happens that motivates us, that moves us, that challenges us to speak out because of all the things I did in college, that was the most--that experience was the one that most formed my thinking in terms of the advocacy work that I do today, but, again I, quite frankly, had a chance then to use the skills that I had developed in high school. See, a lot of my black friends in school had come from Gary [Indiana], you know, places like that, where they went to Indianapolis [Indiana], where they went to live in an all-black neighborhood, went to an all-black school, and didn't know how to navigate the way I did. I was like soaring right along because I had the experience of being black in church and all my other things and then growing up in a white environment, living around white people so I got to Indiana [University], I was just rolling. I was, you know--I could move, manipulate, and navigate in ways that my black, sure enough black friends, could not do, and so I had a good time at Indiana [University]. Story_ID: 13120 Speaker 1: At that time you also got out of the Denver [Smith] experience, you got to know the mayor. Speaker 2: (Nods head for yes). Speaker 1: What's it? Tomilea? Speaker 2: Tomilea, [Mayor] Tomilea Allison. She was the local--she was the mayor there [Bloomington, Indiana], and she got to know me, and I got to know her through all of my ranting and raving and protesting on Denver's behalf with the City Council, with the city of Bloomington, Indiana so I ended up basically getting an internship to work for her. I spent a year, year and a half, as an intern on her staff. I turned that experience--she wanted me to turn that experience into a positive opportunity. She wanted me to see that the city wasn't a bad city, that she wasn't a bad mayor, that all cops are not that way, and I was majoring in public sector studies anyway so for me to have an internship with the mayor of the local city was cool, and it was the foundation and the framework, the foundation, rather, for the internship I later landed with a bigger mayor, a guy named [Mayor] Tom Bradley, here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] so in the end the Denver Smith experience was tragedy in a lot of ways but also out of that experience came some personal growth for me. Story_ID: 13121 Speaker 1: You also said around that time that your parents were divorcing. What impact did that have on you because this is--you had grown up in a very close family? Speaker 2: And a very nuclear family, as it were. It was very--it had a great impact on me. I was taken aback by the shock because I wasn't living at home [Bunker Hill, Indiana] then. I was in college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], and so I did not see it coming, and my brothers, quite frankly, didn't see it coming. My parents [Emory Garnell Smiley and Joyce Marie Smiley] never argued in front of us. They never fought in front of us. Whatever they were dealing with was dealt with behind closed doors. They did not want to bring us--I respect them for that--but they did not want to bring my siblings into it. They didn't want to hurt anybody and whatever, but they obviously were having problems of their own, and there was a great deal of angst and whatever else, hurt, anger that the two of them were experiencing, but we never knew it, and when I got a call that my parents were separating and divorcing, I was just stunned because I had grown up in this nuclear environment, nuclear family. We were in church every day, seven days a week. It just never, ever occurred to me in my wildest dreams that my parents would ever be divorced, and it was just, it was stunning to me, very stunning. Speaker 1: Did you guys try to get them back together or it was just? Speaker 2: No. My parents, it wasn't about getting back together. We didn't know why they were apart. It just wasn't--and my parents, because of their southern heritage and because of being very spiritual people, and "the Lord's gonna work this out," "we're gonna pray on this." It just wasn't--we were not able--my parents were not into --we weren't having any come to Jesus meetings around the dinner table with them explaining to us what's going on. Nowadays parents talk to their kids like they're adults or like they're their best friends, and I don't know if that's good or bad. You know, sometimes I think kids know too much and that we are too open with our kids, although I believe in communication, obviously, but my parents were the exact opposite. To this day, I could not tell you. I know a little bit more now than I did then, but to this day I can't tell you what my parents were both going through and why they got divorced in detail. Speaker 1: And you said that turned you into sort of a know-it-all, you know, that you didn't feel that you needed school, you know, to finish school. You were in a--you said that in the book. Speaker 2: Well, what happened was--when my parents were going through this divorce, it hit me in a very hard way, and I wanted to just drop out of school. It wasn't the divorce that made me feel that way. What happened was that I couldn't--I was burnt out on school. I wanted to get away. I was emotionally spent. My brothers had come down for the summer. I had a summer job in Bloomington. They came down for the summer and spent, you know, weeks with me, living with me in Bloomington so they could get away because I knew that they needed a break from this whole thing, too, so I had them come down. I just worked a little harder. We saved a little money, and we--you know, we're eating beans, pork and beans every day, but it was fun because they were glad to be away from home. I was glad to have them around me so I wasn't alone, and we just had a blast hanging out together for that summer. It was the summer of '85 [1985] so they came to Bloomington and spent most of the summer with me so we were like, you know, hanging out. I was a junior at the time in college, and so I was, you know, relatively responsible. I had a car so they were staying with me. We had a good time, but I wanted to get away, too, and I knew that in the summer when they left, I was going to fall back into this state of depression, disappointment or disillusionment I guess it might have been. I don't know, but I started planning for what I was going to do in terms of, you know, plotting my own course. Story_ID: 13122 Speaker 1: What I wanted to do was an internship. I wanted to quit school [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], but I was convinced by an advisor that's stupid. "You only have a year to go before graduating. You're gonna quit? Why don't you take a semester off, though, and go do an internship?" And that's when the search began for an internship, and I ultimately wanted to and ended up doing an internship, a very long story which I won't bore you with, but I fought for six months - actually, nine months. I fought for nine months to get an internship with [Mayor] Tom Bradley in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and it was tough because he didn't know me from Adam. I wasn't a student at UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] or USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] here in L.A. I was a kid at school at Indiana University. Why did Tom Bradley wanna--why would he want to give me an internship? And that picture, which you [interviewer Julieanna L. Richardson] cannot see over your shoulder, is a picture of me during my internship days as a kid interning for Tom Bradley, which is why it's so important for me. But I came to L.A. and did an internship with Tom Bradley. After nine months of begging and writing, they finally gave me an internship, and it was the internship that made me feel rather invincible. After having worked for the mayor of a small city like Bloomington, I come to L.A. for five and a half months, five months, work for Tom Bradley. Oh, I'm ready for the real world now. I don't need to go back to school to finish up my degree. I'm just ready to stay in L.A. and start working full-time for the mayor, and the mayor's like--he called me in one day. He says "Tavis, you go back to school. You finish up your degree, and if you want to come back and work for me, if I'm still mayor, I'll give you a job, but you need to get that degree and go back to school and finish up school," and it was only because of Tom Bradley that I went back to school. Story_ID: 13123 Speaker 1: Tell me what that whole experience was working for [Mayor] Tom Bradley. I mean, one, he has a reputation. I mean, why did you choose--that I would like to--because there are other people, there are other people. Speaker 2: No, that's a good question. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You could have gone on to be-- Speaker 2: That's a good question. The reason why I did not go to [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia], I had heard horror stories from all of my friends in college who had interned on the [Capitol] Hill in Washington because all they did were--they were pages, but all they did was do just that: open the pages of people's letters, file stuff away, answer phones. They did not have a chance to be engaged in any real way, in any meaningful way. I had already interned for the Mayor [Tomilea Allison] of Bloomington [Indiana], and I was doing hands-on work. My assignment for the mayor was something called the Bloomington Community Progress Council, BCPC, Bloomington Community Progress Council, and my work--it was an organization of business leaders and local people, members from the [Indiana] University staff who came together every so many weeks, every six weeks or so, to talk about and come up with strategies and ideas for how they could improve the city of Bloomington, make it more user-friendly, etcetera, etcetera, so it was called the Bloomington Community Progress Council, and I was the mayor's staff person to that committee so I was doing real work, making some--you know, come up with ideas that we actually implemented to make Bloomington a more user-friendly city so I wasn't about to go to Washington after having done that already. I wasn't going to Washington to open no letters and file no papers and answer no telephones and run some letters across to Congressman So-and-so's office. Not me, I'm not a page. That's not what I want to do. I want some real hands-on experience. I felt then that going to Washington, I wasn't going to get that. I would do better going to another municipality, going to another city where I could get my hands around some local issues, and when it came to talking about a municipality, my first choice was Tom Bradley. One, because he was a fraternity brother of mine. I'm a Kappa. Tom Bradley is a Kappa. Not just a Kappa, he was the former Grand Pomar, the former National President of Kappa Alpha Psi, so one, we're fraternity brothers. Two, and quite frankly more important than being fraternity brothers, I admired his work. I admired his leadership. Three, of any mayor in this country, black or white, he had a stellar reputation. Four, he had--this is 1985. In '84 [1984], a year prior, he had shepherded the '84 [1984 Summer] Olympics here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and those Olympics were a huge success, not just in terms of on the field but off the field. In the city of L.A. crime went down during the Olympics, not up. Crime in L.A. went down during the Olympics because of Tom Bradley's leadership. Four years earlier in 1980, the [Summer] Olympics had been in the city of Montreal [Quebec, Canada]. They had bankrupted the city of Montreal. Indeed, if you go to the city of Montreal today, there's a stadium that still sits half built that they never completed for the Montreal Olympics. It basically bankrupted the city of Montreal. Tom Bradley took the Olympics, brought them to L.A., and showed the world how to put on an Olympic games and make money, and so when the Olympics were done in L.A., not only has crime gone down, traffic congestion had gone down. The U.S. won everything. When all was said and done, the city of L.A. had a $200,000,000 plus surplus. We had $200,000,000 of extra money after the Olympics were over with, and that money to this day is still being spent. We started something called the L.A. Amateur Athletic Committee, and that organization still gives out money to local organizations doing work. They still have money. Tom Bradley, God rest his soul, is dead [d. 1998]. We're on the second mayor since Tom Bradley, and they are still giving away that money that Tom Bradley raised during the Olympics. Peter Ueberroth, who ran those Olympics, went on to be the Commissioner for Major League Baseball so it was just a great story all the way around, and I'm like "if I'm going to do an internship with somebody, I want to go to a guy who is the man right now," and Tom Bradley--there was no mayor in the country at that time that was hotter than Tom Bradley. He was the talk. He was the toast of the nation for what he did with the L.A. Olympics, and so if I'm going to do an internship, again, as a young person, I'm already thinking big. "If I'm going to do an internship, I want to go straight to the top," and that's why I went after Tom Bradley. Story_ID: 13124 Speaker 1: Do you know what is interesting about this is that that didn't mean that you weren't going to be pushing papers, you know, and opening letters? Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: Because, see, that's what. Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, I know you had chosen this person, but how did you end up? Speaker 2: Because I made it clear to them [Mayor Tom Bradley's office]. I made it clear to them that--when I finally got through to somebody nine months later and they agreed to give me an internship, I sat down with them. I came out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], flew out here, and before I formally accepted sat and talked with them and made sure what my assignments were going to be. I said "you know, I hope you don't think I'm going to drive my car all the way, 3,000 miles from Indiana to California and be pushing no paper and opening no mail, not gonna happen," and they said "no, no, no, we're gonna give you serious projects, and by the time you come back, we'll have a list of what you're gonna do, blah, blah, blah." When I got back here, what do you think they had me doing the first week? Opening mail, and I was like "you know what?" I walked right into my supervisor's office, and I said I made it very clear, "this is not what I came here to do. I will get in my car and drive right back to Indiana, but I am not going to stay in L.A. and have my time wasted. I want to grow. I want to learn. I want to be developed out here," and they respected that, and if you talk to the folks at the Tom Bradley's office, those who work there to this day, they remember those conversations very vividly, and so before I knew it, everybody was giving me real stuff to work on, and my biggest project in my internship--when I came into my internship in '85 [1985], that was the first year that we were celebrating the birthday, national holiday of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and so L.A. was planning a big, huge celebration to celebrate the birthday of Dr. King. My internship ended at the end of--I was here from basically September of '85 to December of '85, a one semester, a full semester internship in the fall semester of '85. (Pause). In the fall semester of 1985, I did a one-semester internship from September to December, and of course, the King celebration was on the 15th, the holiday in January, and I had to be back at school right around that time, but I went back to school a little bit late, stayed here all the way through the celebration, and I--my staff assignment basically was to organize, to help organize the city's celebration of the King holiday. We had a number of events that took place. We had like a week-long celebration in conjunction with the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC] in the L.A. office. We organized with them and had a lot of things going on, but the highlight was a big black tie dinner featuring at the time - well, he still is, of course--featuring Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who had just won the Nobel Peace Prize, and so I was just in awe of having the opportunity to meet Desmond Tutu, to meet a Nobel Peace Prize winner for the first time, to have a chance to sit and talk to him about [President] Nelson Mandela who was still in prison at the time. It was amazing. It was an amazing experience, and to this day I have a picture in my house of having met Desmond Tutu when he came to L.A. Story_ID: 13125 Speaker 1: You know, what strikes me about your story is how strategic you are. It's really at a very young age. I know you said you had this experience so maybe you had--the experience in Bloomington [Indiana] had really sort of set you because you have been doing, you know, real things, but talk--this whole thing, you know, with MLK, I mean [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and [Archbishop] Desmond Tutu, that must've been really a very heady experience. Speaker 2: Oh, as a--what was I, nineteen at the time? It was a very heady experience, nineteen or twenty, whatever I was. I mean the chance to organize something that grand and that great and the first year the city of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] is doing it, and there were a number of events involved. There was a breakfast, there was a kickoff, there was a closing reception, there was the big dinner, the black tie dinner with Desmond Tutu as the keynote speaker, so there was just a lot going on. There was a great deal going on, and to be the mayor's [Mayor Tom Bradley] primary staff person in charge of that. I mean I was the staff person in charge of that entire city-wide celebration so it was, yeah, I asked for a meaty project, and I got one. Story_ID: 13126 Speaker 1: Now did he [Mayor Tom Bradley] know that he had a rising star in you? Did he recognize that at some point? Speaker 2: I think he did. He told--he was fond--again, God rest his soul. He was fond of telling the story of how I got to be an internship in his office, and I said earlier that I didn't want to belabor it, but what happened was I decided I wanted to intern with Tom Bradley, and for nine months every single day, not a day passed, every weekday I would either call his office, fax his office--there wasn't any email at the time--but calling, faxing, or writing him every day, try to get somebody in that office to pay attention to me because, again, I'm a kid from Indiana [University, Bloomington, Indiana]. They see me as a pest, not UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], not USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. What do they get out of giving me an internship and passing up somebody who is local here whose father or mother is a Tom Bradley supporter or contributor or whatever? What do they get out of giving me an opportunity, and why am I calling them from Indiana, bugging them every day, and every time I would call or write or fax, they would--my information just kept getting passed around, passed around. By the time I finally got an internship nine months later, I knew by name practically everybody on Tom Bradley's staff because at some point everybody, in bureaucratic fashion, had passed me off to somebody else, and one day somebody finally at least stopped the merry-go-round, a guy named Craig Lawson. I don't know where he is to this day, but some guy named Craig Lawson wrote me a note and said "we appreciate your applying for the internship program" nine months later. I got no reply from anybody, just passed around. Nine months later I get a letter from some guy named Craig Lawson who I'd never heard of, sending me a note saying "we thank you for applying, but the mayor's internship program is filled for the summer. There are no more internships, blah, blah, blah." I'm like "why'd it take nine months for somebody to tell me that? Why is it from somebody who I've never heard of before?" So it was kind of like they passed it off to this guy because I had become--I'd actually become rather friendly with some of these folks on the telephone. I knew who Wanda was. I knew who Connie was. I knew who Brenda was. I knew who was Kitty was. I knew who Eula was. I knew Leonard. I knew Lena. I knew Bill. I knew Olivia. All these folks by name, I knew. Maria, I never met anybody of these folks, but I had talked to them so many times, I knew them, and I know when I'd call, they'd say "it's Tavis from Indiana," and they were like "oh, my God, not Tavis from Indiana." I know they were doing that so they passed me all around the office. Finally, I get this letter from Craig Lawson that says "we regret to inform you that interns are filled for the programs, filled up for this year," and I just broke down in tears, crying, and my brothers were there that summer [1985], I told you, staying with me while I was working and taking care of them for the summer and applying for this internship which I'd hoped to get before the summer was over so I could get started and send them back home and move on with my own life because I wanted a break as well. I wanted to get away from school, and that's when I decided that I was going to quit and somebody said "no, do the internship." So I got my plan in place. I'm working it, and I'm assuming they're going to give me an internship so my brothers are going to go home. I'm going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for a semester, and I'm gonna get my life back together. When they sent me this letter, it crushed me. I was crushed because I was out washing--I'll never forget this--I was out washing my car in the parking lot of my apartment building. Now all my little brothers came outside running--"Tavis, Tavis, Tavis." The mailman had just come. They knew that I was trying for this internship, and there was a letter that said "Office of the Mayor, City of Los Angeles," official-looking document. They were like "Tavis, Tavis, it's here, it's here," and it was just--I remember like--I mean I remember this like it was yesterday, all of them, like four of five, all of my brothers--all seven of them weren't there, but maybe there were like four of them there at the time, and they all came running down the sidewalk with this letter waving in the air. "Your letter's here, your letter's here." I said "what letter?" They said "the one from the mayor's office." I said "oh, my God," so I stood there in front of them. They said "open it, open it." I stood there. It was like a movie script, you know. I'm opening the letter. I started reading it. As I'm reading it, I started crying so here I am, trying to be a big brother to them, trying to make them proud of me, and I'm reading this letter, crying my eyes out in front of my little brothers. So at that point, I couldn't take anymore so I arranged for them to get packed up, took them back to my mama's [Joyce Marie Smiley] house, back in Kokomo [Indiana], two hours away, came back to school, back to Bloomington, and just really tried to figure out what I was going to do with my life. And there are a number of things that happened after that that got me to this place, but I eventually a few days later got to a place where I decided that I should, instead of doing everything formal, and the way it should have been done by the book, typing letters, and folding them appropriately, and putting them in a nice envelope, and typing them on the outside, all of the professional stuff that I learned to do working for [Mayor] Tomilea Allison, I did what I had not thought to do prior, which was to sit down with a pen and a piece of paper and write Tom Bradley, handwrite him a personal note, and I wrote him that note, and again I remember this like it was yesterday. I'm writing him this note in blue ink, and I'm crying as I write so my tears keep hitting the page, making the ink smudge and splatter on the page, and I kept wiping it up and try to stop crying while I'm writing. I finished that letter. I put a stamp on it, put it in the mail, and a week later Tom Bradley called me personally. He actually--of all the things I sent there over nine months, he finally got that letter on his desk and read it personally, and that's how I got my internship with Tom Bradley. Speaker 1: That's an amazing story. Speaker 2: So he was fond of telling that. Whenever you mentioned my name to him, especially after I got on television and became, you know, this national personality, he'd love to tell the Tavis Smiley story. He said "did I ever tell you how Tavis got to be on my staff?" Very proud of me, he was, as I was of him so he told that story repeatedly. Story_ID: 13127 Speaker 1: So I wrote [Mayor] Tom Bradley this letter, with my little teardrops smearing the ink on it, of all the things I had done over a nine-month period, trying to do things the right way, professional. He actually got this letter and he read it. I'm at my house one day, out in the yard again, probably washing my car again as all young men do, wash their cars, and my brothers were gone at this time, but my roommate called, came outside yelling "Tavis, Tavis, the Mayor's on the phone, the Mayor's on the phone," and I assumed he was talking about Mayor [Tomilea] Allison who I had worked for in Bloomington [Indiana]. I said "Mayor Allison?" He said "no, fool, Bradley." I said "what, Tom Bradley?" He said "yeah." I ran into the house, (pantomimes running) six million dollar man. I run into the house, and I get on the phone like (breathing heavily) "hello, hello." He says "Tavis?" "Yeah?" "This is Tom Bradley." "Hey, Mr. Bradley, how are you!" So we talked, and he told me that he was so impressed by my letter and could not believe that for nine--he didn't know the story. He did not know that for nine months I had been writing and calling his office, trying to get an internship because people just kept passing me around. He knew nothing about the whole story, and when he finally got that letter, he says "you deserve an internship. You have earned an internship," he said, "and I'm going to see to it that you get one." I said "thank you." He didn't give me any details, and I was too dumbfounded and shocked to ask him him any details, but he said "I'm going to give you an internship." He said "I'm going to have a guy named Bill Elkins, is going to call you, and I'm going to work this out. Just expect a phone call from a guy named Bill Elkins." I said "all right." I was on cloud nine. I just cried and cried and cried. Sure enough, a day or so later, a guy named Bill Elkins calls me, and Elkins, who I respect, but this is a true part of the story, though. Elkins says to me, as all bureaucrats do, "Tavis, the mayor told me to talk to you, said that you want an internship, and we're going to give you one. We know it's a little late, you know, for this year, but the next time you're in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], the next time you come out to L.A., you come look us up, and we'll sit down and talk and see if we can't work something out the next time you're in L.A.." That was on a Thursday. On Monday morning when Bill Elkins got to work, I was sitting in his lobby. And he came in, and they said "there's a guy named Tavis Smiley who's in the lobby to see you," and he--I can imagine him saying "Tavis Smiley? Who is that?" And when they found out--he found out it was me, he almost had a coronary. He came out in the lobby personally and got me and took me in his office, and we talked and I spent the whole day in the Mayor's office, talking to various people about crafting and creating a quality internship, and at the end of the day they took me down to the see the Mayor, and I finally walked in this big office, and Tom Bradley was six [feet] seven [inches], a very tall man. I finally walked in his office, and out comes out Tom Bradley. I looked up, and we finally met face to face, and the whole office, all these women who I had talked to on the phone, I finally met all of them, and they said "you're Tavis Smiley," and I crafted an internship. Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] had given a bunch of papers to take out there with me to get them to fill out. They filled out all my papers. I went back to Indiana, flew back to Indiana, went to my dean, got everything worked out, and got me some money, and I didn't have any money to do the internship because it came kind of quickly and unexpectedly after nine months. When it came, it came unexpectedly and rather quick. I didn't have any money. I'd been trying to save a little money over the summer, but taking care of my brothers, I didn't have much money so I went to all those members, all those people who I had worked with on the Bloomington Community Progress Council. I went to all them, sent them a letter, and said I have the opportunity of a lifetime to go to L.A. to do an internship with Tom Bradley, but I do not have the money to make this happen. I wrote them a letter, and everybody started donating money to me, and I collected about $4,800, and with that $4,800, I bought a brand-new set of tires for my car, and I drove my car, which I still have, drove that car all the way out to California by myself, got here in about three and a half days, and started my internship with Tom Bradley. Story_ID: 13128 Speaker 1: It was an unpaid internship, by the way, so I used the money that I had saved to live off of when I was here. I stayed at a little dormitory over at U.S.C. [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] on 28th Street. Well, actually I stayed in the frat house, the Kappa Alpha Psi frat house on 28th Street on fraternity row on the campus of U.S.C., which is right off of downtown so I stayed in the frat house for a whole semester, had a roommate, paid a little rent, and lived off the money that I'd saved, that I'd raised from these people, and at the end of my internship my money was out. I was broke, out of money, and when I got here, I got active with the Big Ten Club, specifically the Indiana University Alumni Association, here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and got to meet a guy, a guy named Blake, who had won the concession contract for the Rose Bowl on New Year's Day right after the first of the year. He was a concessionaire at the Rose Bowl, and I asked him if he would donate some money to me so I could get back home, whatever. He said "you know what? I don't believe in donating." He said "I like your story. It's a great story. I'm not gonna donate to you, but if you come out on the day of the game and you sell, sell, sell, for you only, whatever you sell, I'll let you keep the money," and I went out to the Rose Bowl on game day, and I got there at three o'clock in the morning, and I sold and I sold and I sold and I sold, and that's how I made enough money in one day to get all the gas money I need and everything else I need to get me back to Bloomington [Indiana] to start back at school to finish up my degree, and that's how I got back to I.U. [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]. Story_ID: 13129 Speaker 1: So you have one year to go at that point or two? Speaker 2: I had a year to go. Speaker 1: A year to go, okay. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) A year and a half. Speaker 1: But then you were bitten. You knew you wanted to come back. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely. I was coming back to L.A.[Los Angeles, California]. I would have never gone back if [Mayor] Tom Bradley had not told me to go back. Speaker 1: And you got--was that when you got a position working for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]? Speaker 2: That's when I came back. When I came to back to L.A., I went back to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] to finish up my degree. Then I moved to L.A. because Tom Bradley had offered me a job to come work for him full time so I moved to L.A. to work for Tom Bradley. When I got here, the city had a--because of the downturn of the economy--the city had a hiring freeze, and the Mayor could not impose a hiring freeze on the city and yet keep hiring for his own personal staff so I was caught in between a rock and a hard place, and that's when I went to work for SCLC and also when I went to work for, at the time, one of Tom Bradley's colleagues on the City Council, a woman named Pat Russell who happened to be the president of the City Council, so I had two jobs when I got here, before I actually got back home, on the Mayor's staff. Speaker 1: And what shape was SCLC in at that point? Speaker 2: The L.A. branch of the SCLC has always been, quite frankly, one of the strong--probably the strongest branch of that organization in the country outside of the Atlanta [Georgia] office. The SCLC L.A. is a very strong branch, and I was pleased to work for them for the year and a half or so that I did. Story_ID: 13130 Speaker 1: What lessons are you learning in this whole experience, you know, that are different from where you worked, you know, in Bloomington [Indiana]? How is this--I mean he is a quality politician in many ways, but I mean what are you learning? Speaker 2: Everything. I'm learning--well, one, I get a chance--the Mayor [Tom Bradley] can't go to every event he gets invited to so when he found out that I was a good speaker, he would send me to these events to welcome people to the city and to pass out proclamations, and I was basically, you know, Mayor Junior so I was running around all over town welcoming people to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and giving little mini-speeches, and so one, it wasn't just being bit by the political bug. I was actually out playing mayor, you know. I was playing, I was his understudy, if you will, his stand-in, and I was loving that so I was getting a chance to do public speaking before not debate audiences where I'm being judged in competition, but these are real live people, real live organizations, and I'm learning all the lessons that one learns hanging out with the mayor, traveling with him, standing in for him, organizing events in the community, watching how he works. [Mayor] Tom Bradley was the kind of guy who wasn't into the T.V. cameras and publicity but a very hard worker behind the scenes. He liked to get things done behind the scenes. He was never one for grandstanding. He never liked the media, never liked publicity. We had to force it on him. He just wanted to get the job done, and that, I learned that just watching his humility and, again, his discipline. Tom Bradley would work eighteen hours every day, seven days a week. He'd take international trips, land at 11:30 in the morning from a twenty-hour trip to Japan somewhere or Singapore. He'd come in on a seventeen, eighteen hour flight, land at 11:30 in the morning, and be in the office by 12:15 [pm]. He'd land off the plane and come straight to the office. He didn't land, go home, take a day off, never took vacations, just loved the city, loved to serve, but his discipline was just unbelievable to me so I learned, again, another lesson from another man in my life about being disciplined, getting the job done. He kept telling me "Tavis, don't worry about the publicity. That will come. You get the job done. You do a good job. They will keep re-electing you." And they re-elected Tom Bradley in this city five times, twenty years, the longest running mayor ever in the city because--not because he was on front page of the paper every day but because he got the job done. He kept his head down and did his work, and I learned that from Tom, to be disciplined, keep your head down, do your work. The publicity stuff will take care of itself. You just get the job done. Story_ID: 13131 Speaker 1: Now then in this whole process, there was an opening on [the Los Angeles] City Council. Was that? Speaker 2: There wasn't an opening. What happened was there was an election. I ran against an incumbent. After I worked for [Mayor] Tom Bradley for a few years, I decided to run for City Council. Speaker 1: Did you consult with him on that? Speaker 2: I did. He supported me. Speaker 1: Okay. What did he think? Did he think you were sort of young and brash? Speaker 2: Oh, he did. He thought I was too young, and he initially tried to talk me out of it, but once I decided I was going to do it, he did something that he had never done for any of his other friends. His treasurer, his campaign treasurer had been with him for thirty, forty years. His campaign treasurer was also the campaign treasurer for [President] John [F. Kennedy] and [Senator Robert F.] Bobby Kennedy when they ran for President. He was their campaign treasurer here in California when they ran so this guy, Jules Glazer, who just passed recently, there was a history with Jules Glazer. I had the same--when I ran for City Council, I had the same treasurer that my mentor, Tom Bradley, had, the same campaign treasurer that Robert Kennedy had, the same campaign treasurer that John Kennedy had. I was like--this guy was--I was with the right guy, and I liked the history there, the synergy, if not symbolism, but Tom Bradley did something for me that he had never done for anybody, any of his friends. He instructed his campaign treasurer to give me all of his fund-raising lists, and all the money that I raised, I raised--I knew a lot of people, but I was only twenty-six at the time. Tom Bradley, though, the five-term mayor of this city, gave me, as he told Jules, "give Tavis all of my campaign lists, my fund-raisers." Jules said "what?" He said "give him a copy on a disk of everybody on my contribution list," and that's how I raised money to be--I lost the race, but I was only competitive because I raised enough money to stay in the race, and Tom Bradley gave me that list. Speaker 1: You didn't lose by that much. Speaker 2: No. It was a very close race. I was running against an incumbent so you're twenty-six, you're a young black kid running against a white incumbent. You know, the chances were never in my favor to begin with, but I ran because I thought I could do a better job than the councilperson. Story_ID: 13132 Speaker 1: What did you learn out--that is an amazing story. That's an amazing story because people covet those lists. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they don't--once you've developed a fund-raising list, you don't give your list to nobody. What I learned out of that, again, is [Mayor] Tom Bradley was loyal. I learned in that the lesson of loyalty. What I learned about the campaign [for Los Angeles City Council] was that, you know, life is about ups and downs. In a campaign, you can have ups and downs like this, not day to day but in a day. One minute you find out that somebody just gave you a $1,000 contribution. The next minute you find out that the paper, one local paper, endorses your opponent. The next minute, you know, you get endorsed by somebody else. The next minute, you know, they're coming to cut your phone off because you ain't paid your campaign phone bill. I mean it's just ups and downs like that all day every day. You've gotta go out and walk precincts. You knock on one door, and they say "I'm voting for you." You knock on the next door, and they say "you're too young. It ain't your time yet." So it's just up and down all day long, but I learned that I could handle it. The one thing I learned is that I could handle it, but when I lost the race but lost so narrowly, the most important lesson for me was I have got a message. I've got a message, and there are people who will listen to what I have to say--and not just listen--these fools actually voted for me so I never saw it as a loss. These people--a lot of--I'm like "wow, look at all these folks who actually voted for me." I thought it was like--I don't know what I thought, but I was like I didn't expect that many people on Election Day [1990] to give me that many votes. You know, there are fifteen candidates, and I finished right up at the top [third of fifteen]. I was like "my goodness." I was the youngest one in the race, obviously. Story_ID: 13133 Speaker 1: And that's when I made the transition. I lost that race, but I said to myself "what am I going to do? I'm going to run [for local office] again in four years. I'm going to beat this lady in four years, but what can I do in the next four years, in the ensuing four years? What can I do to keep my name out in front in the public, two, talk about issues that are relevant to the public, and three, make a little money to pay down my campaign debt?" Well, hell, the problem with that was that everybody who had lost for any [Los Angeles] City Council race or any race wanted to do those three things. Everybody wanted a high-profile position where they'd be seen for four years, talking about issues, number two, and making some money to pay down their campaign debt. In that regard, everybody wanted a job like that, and if those jobs were just like laying around, we'd all have one. I realized, to make a long story short, that job did not exist so what I did was I created that job for myself, and what I created was something called the Smiley Report which was a one-minute radio commentary that got aired here locally on black radio, and now I'm on the path to being--to establishing myself. The race got my name out there. People now know a little bit about the name. They know who Tavis Smiley is, but how do I convince them that I can do this job and they should elect me in four years? You've got to let them know that you're gonna stay on top, and you're not gonna disappear and come back in four years asking them for their vote. I started this little radio commentary called the Smiley Report, a one-minute radio commentary every day, and did all three things I wanted to do. It put my name out there. I was talking about issues, and after I was on the air for a year or so it started making me a little money from endorsements, from the sponsors, and that's what I did, and that's how I got involved in radio. Speaker 2: Were you doing that exclusively or were you doing some more political stuff? Speaker 1: Just that. Speaker 2: Just that? Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Pretty much working on the air. Speaker 2: But how did you strategically think that was going to work? I mean, how did you go after that? Was it because you had exposure? Speaker 1: No. I had never done radio or television before. I just knew that--like I said a moment ago, I knew people were listening to me, and so I said to myself "Self, (laughs) if people are going to listen to me, I need to find a vehicle where they can hear me more often." Ding, ding, ding. It wasn't really that bright--radio--and I had heard Carl Rowan with the Rowan Report on the radio. I said "I need me something like the Rowan Report." I could go on the radio every day and talk about things that are real. People could listen to me every day, same time every day, five days a week so I was on every morning at 7:20. I was on every afternoon at 5:20, and everybody started hearing me on the local black radio stations, and that's when I put my name out there, and they were like "I agree with you. I heard you talk about that issue, and I agree with you on that, young man," and that's how I got my name out there, and before I knew it, again, to make a long story short, I never made my way back into politics because the success of that Smiley Report launched me into books, into radio, syndicated radio with [radio host] Tom Joyner, into BET [Black Entertainment Television network], and everything I do now all started as a result, and now I'm at ABC [American Broadcasting Company] and CNN [Cable News Network] and NPR [National Public Radio] and a new deal with Random House Doubleday [Publishing Company], and a foundation that works with kids [Tavis Smiley Foundation], and a 6,000 square foot office building, state-of-the-art facilities, and all the stuff that I do, lectures, traveling around the world, speaking and being an advocate, all the things I do started as an outgrowth of the experience back in Bloomington [Indiana] with [Mayor] Tomilea Allison to [Mayor] Tom Bradley to local radio, and it just kind of snowballed for me. Story_ID: 13134 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this or a couple of things. One, what did he [Mayor Tom Bradley] think? Did he give you feedback on your radio show when it first started? Speaker 2: The Mayor? No, he didn't. Everybody else did. He didn't. No, he didn't--I knew he was such a working man--he heard it. He didn't hear it every day. He thought it was great. He loved the idea. I talked the idea through with him. He loved the idea. He said "I don't know how rich you are gonna get on this. You need to go get you a job, you know, in addition to this, but in terms of strategy, political strategy, about how you keep your name out front, talking about issues so you can make a comeback in four years, brilliant strategy." He loved the strategy. Speaker 1: And did you have any issues finding sponsors at the beginning? Speaker 2: Oh, initially, yes, yeah, but, again, because of the friendships I made through my [1990] campaign [for Los Angeles City Council]--the reason I got on the air, I mean I used the same lesson. I used the same strategy I used before. When I was going to come to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], as I said earlier, to do my internship and I needed money to get out here, I went to those members of the Bloomington [Indiana] Community Progress Council and raised money from them to get to L.A., as I said earlier. Well, when I got my commentary idea together for radio, I went to the black guy who owned the station. He said "Tavis, I love you, and I supported you when you ran, but this ain't no charity event. This is a business, and I can't just give you no radio time. You've got to buy some radio time. So you go out and get you an advertiser and come back and bring me the money and I will sell you--and I'll cut you a little deal--but I'll sell you some radio time." So one of my friends was vice president of a local bank at the time. I got her--she controlled a little money--white folk didn't know what was going on. So she slid me a little money sponsored by the bank. That was important, and I went back to all of those campaign contributors who I'd raised money from, thanks to Tom Bradley's list. (Pause). I went back to those campaign contributors who Tom Bradley had given me by sharing his list and wrote them a letter and said "I intend to run again in four years. Thank you for your support this year. I'm gonna win four years down the road, and here's my strategy for how I'm going to win in four years." And they were very impressed that within a matter of weeks after losing I had articulated to them on paper what my strategy was to get my name out front, to keep talking about issues and what I was going to do in the community, what my strategy was to come back and win in four years. And at the end of the letter, I concluded that "if you like the strategy and you think it works, send me some money because I need the money to buy the radio time to get on the air. I am convinced that once I get on the air, other sponsors will like the program, and they will sign up for it, but initially I have to buy the time." So with the money my friend gave me, Wendy, and the money I raised from these campaign contributors, I had enough money to buy ninety days worth of air time, so I bought me three months worth of air time, and in three months, thank God, it caught on, and other sponsors started signing up, and before I knew it, I'd even left this little small station, and I had jumped to the biggest urban station in the market. Story_ID: 13135 Speaker 1: Now, was there a difference between being a talk show commentator and being a politician? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, no question. The biggest difference was when you work for [Mayor] Tom Bradley, when you work for an elected official or you are an elected official, your job--let's face it--is to serve the needs of the constituents, but what you're really trying to do is get yourself re-elected. You want to stay in that position so you really are serving their needs, and you do your polls and your surveys and your studies because you want to respond to what your constituents want. When you're a commentator on radio or television, it's the exact opposite. You want to get people to think critically, which means sometimes you gotta push some buttons. Sometimes you offend people. Sometimes they disagree with you, and that's not the way that politicians normally think. As a matter of fact, the more buttons you're pushing, the better your commentary is. If everybody agrees with you on everything you say all the time, then your commentary stinks. You've gotta make people disagree with you sometimes, and so it was a whole different mindset. No longer was I trying to please the public. I'm now trying to intellectually challenge and stimulate the public so I had to change, and I started getting this mail that "you're wrong, you're stupid, you're an idiot, you know." That mail, I had never received that kind of mail before so it took me a minute to adjust to the strategies that are different when you are trying to get re-elected and when you're trying to get people to think critically. Speaker 1: But you found that you were like a fish in water. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I was a fish out of water actually (interviewer laughs) because I wasn't ready for the kind of critical backlash that came from certain segments of the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] community, and I was on radio and on television. I eventually jumped--my radio commentary was so successful, I started doing commentary during the 5:00 news on the ABC [American Broadcasting Company] television affiliate here, and that's when the hate mail really started rolling in, and so I just had to learn. Then I started doing talk radio, and then I got more hate mail because I was on talk radio on the ABC radio affiliate here in L.A. So as I started expanding my base and started talking to people in a more mainstream audience, I had to learn that it ain't about being liked. It's about being respected and getting people to think critically, and so it was a whole different mindset. Story_ID: 13136 Speaker 1: But you then--you met [radio host] Tom Joyner. That's an interesting story, too. You met him through [President] Bill Clinton at a private White House meeting. Speaker 2: Yeah. Bill Clinton had a private meeting at the White House. He invited a handful--just a dozen or so--a handful of people in the media in. He wanted to test out some things he was going to use on the campaign trail. Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: This is 1995. He wanted to test out some things he was going to use on the campaign trail. He got elected in '92 [1992]. He's going back out for re-election in '96 [1996]. He wanted to try out some campaign things he was going to use, and so he brought in a roomful of--just a small roomful of a dozen people to the White House, and Tom and I were among the twelve people he'd invited, and so that's how we met. I mean I knew who Tom was. Tom knew who I was. He'd heard about me here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. He was nationally syndicated already so I knew who he was, and he basically--it was like a mini-introduction. "Tom, you know Tavis, don't you? Tavis, you know Tom? Tavis, Tom. Tom, Tavis," and that's how we met, Bill Clinton. Speaker 1: Isn't that wonderful? Speaker 2: And Clinton tells that story all the time. "You know I introduced Tavis and Tom." (interviewer laughs) Speaker 1: The two Ts. Speaker 2: That's what he says. Speaker 1: So tell us about your experience with the Tom Joyner Morning Show, you know? Speaker 2: Well, after Tom and I met at the White House, Tom went back and read one of my books. The book he read was a book, my second or third book called 'A Hard Left - Straight Talk About the Wrongs of the Right.' Tom had a big national audience, but he was entertaining them. What he was not doing was empowering them. After he left the White House he wanted to do something to expand his show into the empowerment arena, and it was perfect timing because he met me. I'm an empowerment guy. I'd written a new book about how to empower people. He read the book, called me, and said "I'd like you to come on my show and do a commentary"--not a commentary. "I want to interview you about your new book." I went to Dallas [Texas] where he's based and did the interview with him. The interview went so well that he wanted me to come back and start doing regular commentary. I started doing that. We started our first project which was a voter registration drive that I suggested he should do over the radio. We got an 800 number so folks could register over the phone, and I put together a whole plan of how to involve the audience, how to get them registered to vote, and that's how Tom and I came together, and what started, we started--we picked six cities and went on the road in six major markets where we could get people registered to vote. The first time Tom had taken his radio show on the road was through this voter registration campaign, and we had bands that performed, live audience performing--I mean audience, rather, performing live, but there was one caveat. The party was free, but the only way you could get in was with your voter registration card. If you didn't have one, you could register on the spot. We joined along with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and those things--what started out as a voter registration tour has now metamorphosized in what people know today as the sky show. Now it's a big, huge sky show with thousands of folks who show up. That started with my little idea of the voter registration tour--so Tom and I have been together now for six years, and we're like best friends. Speaker 1: And you registered a quarter of a million people. Speaker 2: In that one year. That was the first time, yeah. We did more than that this last time around in 2000. Speaker 1: Okay. Talk about--how many did you do this last year? Speaker 2: I don't remember. It was more than that. I've forgotten. Story_ID: 13137 Speaker 1: You also started taking on, you know, some issues in a massive way that really had not been done. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Well, since maybe MLK [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.]. Speaker 2: Exactly. The thing is that most days that I go in the studio with [radio host] Tom [Joyner], I go in to do a commentary. I'm not going in there to shake things up, cuss nobody out, start no advocacy campaign, but there are some times that you see issues that are so egregious, when you see your community being so disrespected, that something has to be done, and there are sometimes when we've had to go after people. We went after CompUSA [computer retailer], Christie's Auction House, U.S. Congress on a couple of different issues. We've gone after some folk and made them do right, Toyota [Motor Corporation]. We've had to go after people here and there for disrespecting the black consumer, the black voter, the black woman. We've had to go after people from time to time, and when we launch into those campaigns, people get scared to death because they know they are in trouble. When you got ten million black people who listen to me on the radio, and I come on, and I say "ladies and gentlemen, I want to bring something to your attention," and I lay it out, and at the end I give out the phone number, fax number, the email address, cell phone number, pager number, whatever I have, I put it out there. And when these Negroes get on the phone, and them fax machines and those computers start lighting these people up, after awhile it gets so hot that they gotta do something, and what we've really done is--this is not revolutionary. Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] used black radio back in the day to get the message out about the marches, and, you know, it's just that radio has become so stale, and everybody's into entertainment, and nobody's trying to empower people, and enlighten them, and encourage them, and challenge them intellectually. Radio just doesn't do that anymore. I told Tom "your real power is not in the ability to make people laugh, not in your ability to entertain them, but in your ability to empower them through this massive town hall meeting that you have on the radio every day, and here's how we do this." And it works, and it works, and it just keeps on working, and now all of the publicity that Tom gets now--Tom's been profiled on 60 Minutes [television program]. He's been profiled everywhere, Time [Magazine], Newsweek [Magazine]. The two of us have been profiled together everywhere and not once because we tell jokes, not once because we're the funniest, not once because we play the best hit songs. It all happens because of the empowerment component and the difference we've attempted to make through this radio program. That's what gets Tom all the publicity that he gets for his radio show. He sees that now so now trying to convince him to do empowerment stuff is easy. As a matter of fact, he comes to me now with ideas that he wants to do in terms of empowering the community. Story_ID: 13138 Speaker 1: Well, there clearly--when you become an advocate, you know, there are always risks. [Radio host] Tom Joyner was not hired by ABC [American Broadcasting Company] Radio Network to be no advocate. He was hired to be an entertainer, and we've had long talks about whether or not, you know, he really wanted to pursue this avenue because I said "Tom, I will take most of the heat because I'm the guy who's gonna deliver the message, but it's your show. You're gonna take some heat, too," and never once has he been frightened. If he was, he never told me. He never backed down, and we've had some hairy moments, particularly when we were going after CompUSA [computer retailing company]. CompUSA, despite the fact that black folks spend a billion dollars a year, two billion dollars a year on computer and other related equipment, CompUSA was not advertising with any black media outlets, and I thought that was wrong, and they weren't the only company that was disrespecting the black consumer, but we gotta pick a company and make an example out of them for all the others to get the message, as many of them did, but we went after CompUSA [in the summer of 1999]. To make a long story short, there was some conversation between some execs at CompUSA and some execs at the ABC Radio Network, and the conversation basically was "get these Negroes off my behind," and Tom and I were told one night, in no uncertain terms, that if we went back on the radio the next day and said anything else about this CompUSA matter, if we did not drop this issue, then they were gonna pull the plug on the radio show. Imagine now, Tom is the biggest star in the urban radio division for ABC Radio Network, and they are threatening his livelihood, and they tell Tom "if you go on the radio tomorrow morning and you or Tavis say anything else about this CompUSA matter, we're gonna pull the plug on your show and maybe on your career," and Tom and I talked about it until 2:00 in the morning, and we're on the radio at five in the morning Central Time. We're up till 2:00 in the morning discussing this, and I said "Tom, I want you to be comfortable. If you--I told him "my plan is to go on the radio tomorrow morning and not only talk about it, but I'm gonna tell the story of what the ABC executives told us. That's what I intend to do. If you've got any problem with that, you tell me because I don't want you--you've been more than a friend to me. I don't want you to put your career on the line for me. What you've built up here is remarkable, this syndicated radio show with ten million listeners. This is a remarkable feat that you've accomplished. You're the only brother in the country doing it, and I don't want you to lose your livelihood over me, and I don't want you, you know, moping one day when you're unemployed and living on the street somewhere saying 'I let Tavis ruin my career' so if you don't want to do this, you speak now or forever hold your peace." Tom said "Tavis, I'm with you." I said "if you're with me, I'm with you." Story_ID: 13139 Speaker 1: We went on the radio the next morning [in October 1999], and [radio host] Tom [Joyner] said--I come on the third hour of the show. He's on for four hours, of course. For the first two hours he kept telling the audience "Tavis is coming up this morning, and it might be his last commentary on this program so you don't want to miss what Tavis has to say this morning." I mean the showman that he is, he built this thing up, just built it, built it, built it, built it, built it, as he should. That's what a good radio guy does, and I came on the radio, and I said "ladies and gentlemen, this is without question the most serious commentary I've ever offered because I was told not to do what I'm getting ready to do, and I don't know what's going to happen. I don't know if I'm gonna get through this commentary." And keep in mind now, the ABC [American Broadcasting Company] radio executives are in the hallway standing outside of our studios, ready to give the signal at any moment (draws finger across throat) to pull the plug to the engineer, who works for ABC, not for Tom, so they would do whatever they're told to do if they want their jobs. I said "I've been told not do this, but I do not believe that in good, moral conscience that I could, that Tom and I could experience what we experienced yesterday, and you not know about it. You need to know this, and I am prepared to tell you what Tom and I experienced yesterday as a result of our advocacy vis- -vis CompUSA [computer retailing company]." I paused. I said "Tom, are we still on the air? Have they pulled the plug yet?" And the engineer looked at Tom and said--not just looked at him, you could hear the engineer talking. Tom says--the engineer said --Ross said "no, the gauges indicate that we're still on the air." I said "well, ladies and gentlemen, I'm gonna start and tell you what happened yesterday, and if in the middle of my explaining this, your radio dies or they start playing a song, then you'll know what happened." And talk about a moment of high drama, one of these showdown at high noon kind of moments, that's what this was, and I went on to explain what happened, and fortunately for us, the ABC people did not pull the plug. They just--I guess they kept listening to see how far I was gonna go, and they, of course, did not know that I was gonna scream on them, and I did, and I know that--I'm sure there have been days they wished that they had pulled the plug, but they didn't, and I got through the commentary, and I told them that we have been threatened by the people at ABC. At the end of my commentary, because I was so emotional, my voice got choked up. I said "something is wrong in this country when we have lost lives of our ancestors who were trying to gain the right to vote, the right to free speech, everything else that we've had to suffer for, something is wrong when we are on the radio advocating for what is right, for what is just, for what is fair, and a network like ABC will abridge our First Amendment right. We're not maligning. We're not slandering. We're not libeling CompUSA. CompUSA does not do business with black ad agencies, black media outlets. That is a fact, and something is wrong when I cannot come on this radio and tell you the facts. I get threatened with my livelihood, and my dear friend Tom is also threatened with his livelihood because we tell the truth, and I don't think that's right. I don't think it's fair. I'm not gonna stand for it. I don't know what y'all are going to do about it, but I just thought you might wanna know." And unlike all my other commentaries when I take on somebody, I didn't give out any fax number. I didn't give out no phone number. I just left the commentary hanging just like that. "I don't know what y'all going to do about it, but this does not work for me, and I'm out." Story_ID: 13140 Speaker 1: Them Negroes [in Tom Joyner's audience] got on the phones. They shut down ABC [American Broadcasting Company], shut the whole company down. They overloaded the switchboard. They shut down ABC. They shut down CompUSA [computer retailing company]. There was pandemonium all across the country. Now with the Internet, people are on the web, telling everybody what happened. It was just like--it was unbelievable, the response that went after that commentary. To make a long story short, we got a call the next, within twelve hours, from the president of CompUSA asking [radio host] Tom [Joyner] and I to come sit down and meet with him at his headquarters in Dallas [Texas]. I flew down to Dallas. Tom and I sat down with him. We brought our lawyers in. He brought his lawyers in, and we worked this thing out, and when all was said and done, CompUSA not only hired a black ad agency, they hired a Hispanic ad agency. They hired more African American people. They gave everybody who had sent in, everybody who got a copy of any receipt for something they bought at CompUSA, they gave you 10 percent off of a brand new computer purchase and a bunch of other stuff. They hired a company to do sensitivity training and blah, blah, blah. They--everything we put on the table, we basically negotiated with them to our satisfaction, and it turned, and you look in 'Essence' magazine today or 'Ebony' [magazine] or anyplace else, you will see full-page CompUSA ads, but that happened, and they still have that black ad agency, and that was two or three years ago [October 1999], and they still have that Hispanic agency on their books as their agencies of record because of the campaign that we raised, and there were other companies like American Airlines and other companies who immediately out of the blue start announcing that they had hired black ad agencies so they knew that we were coming, that the writing was on the wall. Without ever even mentioning other companies' names, other companies started doing the same thing so we've taken on some major foes, some major multi-national corporations at times, and individuals, but it's always worked out to our satisfaction. Speaker 2: That's fabulous, that's a dynamic duo. Story_ID: 13141 Speaker 1: I can't leave this interview, Tavis, without talking about BET [Black Entertainment Television network]. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I mean I can't, and I'd like--because it was a different experience there, I mean, overall, though, I mean when you compare the two. Speaker 2: Sure. Well, I cast no aspersion on BET. I cast no aspersion on them for the five years [1996-2001] that I had to be the signature talk show [BET Tonight with Tavis Smiley] on that network, the highest paid talent they ever had in twenty years, and it was a great experience and opportunity for me because now that I'm on ABC [American Broadcasting Company] and CNN [Cable News Network] and NPR [National Public Radio] and everything else I do, I had to have a platform somewhere to convince these white folk that I could do all the stuff that I'm doing now. It was the black folk that gave me an opportunity to get the experience that I garnered with them for five years so I cast no aspersion on them for that. My problem was the way the thing ended. It was mean. It was nasty. It was wrong. It was untenable, unconscionable, unthinkable. I recognize that I do not have a First Amendment right to a talk show. All I have is a First Amendment Right to free speech but not to a talk show so nobody owes me a talk show. They can give me one. They can take it away. That's their business. What they do owe me, though, is the respect that comes along with carrying this network, in terms of its credibility, for five consecutive years, and when you send a four sentence fax to my agent saying "we no longer need your services" and then start lying about my show having low ratings and all the other lies they put out there, and then the response from Black America is so overwhelming, and I love black folk to this day and always will, from California to the Carolinas, the black love, the outpouring of love that I received, and the fact that it was surreal watching this. Never in the history of television has a television president, a network executive, the chairman and CEO [Robert Johnson], gone on a network for an hour to explain what was essentially the firing of an employee, but that alone--I can give you all kind of examples, but that one example alone underscores the gravity of what this situation was all about and the outrage that Black America experienced to force him to go one for a solid hour of live television on his network to explain the quote Tavis Smiley situation, close quote. It was surreal watching it, and that's when I knew that there was a whole lot of love in Black America that I experienced, when the love of black people forced this man onto his own network to explain what he had done. It was remarkable. In the end, though, what I realized is that everything that we go through in life is really just a situation for revelation, and if you keep the faith and if you stay focused, if you know what your passion is, if you know what your purpose is, and you believe that God put you here for a reason, He will always--God knew before the foundation of the world that I was going to come one day. He's gonna bless me with certain talents and gifts and skills, that He wanted me to use these talents, gifts, and skills to do something with it, and if He understands that and He placed me here for a purpose, He would never allow his purpose to not be fulfilled so if you understand that, then what you understand then is it might not be on BET but somewhere, somehow, some way I'm going to be allowed and permitted and placed where I need to be to fulfill my mission, to fulfill my purpose so when it happened, I was stunned and shocked at the way it went down, but not one day, not one moment, did I ever question that I would not be somewhere momentarily continuing to fill the purpose that I had been put here on the earth to do. That purpose, as I see it, is to do what I call "the three Es"--to enlighten, to encourage, and to empower people--and so in the end it's all worked out. Story_ID: 13142 Speaker 1: I could never have known--had I stayed at BET [Black Entertainment Television network] for another five years, I wouldn't have known I had something waiting for me at ABC [American Broadcasting Company], at CNN [Cable News Network], at NPR [National Public Radio], at Doubleday Random House [publishing company], at Hay House [publishing company]. All the other things that we're doing have come out of the experience of my being fired by BET, and I say this with all humility, you know, like a phoenix from the ashes, you know, we came back bigger and better and badder than ever before, and it's been so humbling to me to watch many in Black America almost celebrate vicariously through the announcement that we made, through our coming back and coming up so to speak, so it's been rewarding for me, and I am more committed now than I ever have been to continuing to raise the kinds of issues, to do the kinds of advocacy on behalf of my people and other people who are socially, politically, or economically disenfranchised. I am more committed now to that service and service to these people than I was even before I got fired so if they thought they were, you know, putting out my fire, if they thought they were dimming my light, if they thought in any way they were going to hamper my progress, all they've done is inspire me, put more fuel in my engine and I am, as we sit here today--again, God works things out in mysterious ways because I was--I had bought this building that we sit in, this brand-new corporate building. I'd bought this building last year when I was still at BET with the plans to do exactly what we've done with it, and in the middle of renovation, I was fired, but BET, because they fired me without cause, had to buy out the rest of my contract so they gave me the money to finish up this building. I mean they gave me the money to continue working on the building, even though I was unemployed, and while I was working on the building, my agents and lawyers for nine weeks were negotiating all these new deals, and my money started to run out as we got to the end of this building project. We announced all these new deals, and every deal, there was a signing bonus and advance in each one of these eight deals so then that money came to allow me to finish up the building, and now we're finished up with the building. We're going to have this big, huge, grandiose party which is costing me an arm and a leg. We're gonna celebrate everything that God has done for us, the building, the deal. We're gonna celebrate all of that, and we're gonna be broke again, but the good news is that the party is on August the second [2001], and I start work on CNN and ABC on August the sixth [2001] so the timing of it. I had all the time I needed to devote full time to the energy and the effort to get this building in the heart of South Central [Los Angeles, California], an old, dilapidated, graffittied, run-down, abandoned, burned-out building. Sybil Wilkes, who is on the Tom Joyner [radio] show, came by to see the building the other day, and she said "I've been to the Taj Mahal, and now I've been to the 'Tav Mahal.'" The 'Tav Mahal,' so I like her little depiction, her description of our building, but the timing of it, you know. I needed all that time to work with the contractors to get this building done, and now it's done. We're gonna celebrate, get our party on, and thank God for all the blessings, and then we come up, and we go to work the very next week. The party's on the second. I start work in Atlanta [Georgia] on the sixth. My first week I'll be in Atlanta though I'm based here. I go to work on the sixth, and my radio show is launching in September [2001], and ABC launches in August [2001], and so I'm--everything is now right back on track where it needs to be, and I ain't missed a beat, and so what I said earlier, "the other things that sustain us are our faith, our family, and our friends." Now you know why I said that. Story_ID: 13143 Speaker 1: I have two more questions, Tavis--one is, is there something--and you're still very, very young so this is, you know--is there something that you really want to do that you haven't done? I mean you have a lot of promise, but I mean is there? Speaker 2: Yeah. There are two things that interest me. One is the work that we're doing through our foundation [Tavis Smiley Foundation]. I really want to make the foundation the centerpiece of all that I do. Me giving speeches is cool. Doing T.V. and radio is cool, but nobody stays a T.V. or radio star forever, and I recognize, as I always have, that my days are limited. My days are numbered. I may be the flavor of this month, but I might not be the flavor next month so I've always planned my life to continue doing the kind of advocacy work that's important to me. This work through the foundation, the Tavis Smiley Foundation, we're doing these leadership summits with young people, black kids, ages thirteen to eighteen, identifying this next generation of leadership. I'm determined through this program, all across the country, that [Dr] Martin [Luther King Jr.] is going to meet Malcolm [X] at age thirteen, that Ida B. Wells is going to meet Harriet Tubman at age seventeen, that Rosa Parks is going to meet Dorothy Height at age fifteen. Roy Wilkins is going to meet [Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall at age eighteen. That's what this program is all about, bringing these kids together, identify these leaders, and letting the building, the bonding, the relationships, the associations, the dialogue begin now so that twenty, thirty, forty years from now when these black kids are running Black America and running it as the first generation to lead our community without having lived through the civil rights struggle and not having that experience, not having had that experience first-hand, not able to compare the before and the after picture, they will be prepared because these relationships will have been long-standing and long lasting. That's the mission of this program, to identify these leaders and to bring them together in harmony and in unity, to get those relationships up and running for the future of our community and for the country. I want to perfect that program. That's my number one mission, and ultimately down the road my next mission is to--I think I want to get in the classroom. After I have really lived a full life and gained some experience, I want to go teach in the classroom somewhere. Story_ID: 13144 Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: [Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall was asked, when he retired from the [U.S.] Supreme Court, how he wanted to be remembered, and he said very simply "I want to be remembered as one who did the best he could with what he had," and I think if any of us aspires to fulfill that notion, that's all that God requires of us, to do the best we can with what we had, and I don't know. My life has taken on all different kinds--I mean, I'm speaking. I'm on T.V. I'm on the radio. I'm writing books. I've got a foundation. I'm out in the community. I'm going to do more community work. We're building a tech center in this building so kids can come after school and work on computers for free so I'm doing a lot of different things, just trying to be, trying to stay busy, trying to make a contribution, but ultimately I want to do the best I can with what I have. When I die, I want to be used thoroughly up. My granddad [Emory Smiley] said to me--people complain about, you know, not getting enough sleep, not getting enough rest--and my granddad says "son, you can rest when you die." You can rest when you die, and you don't want to rest before you die because the problem with Black America is, my granddad says to me, that "the best ideas in Black America can be found in the graveyard," and for years he's told me that, and I didn't quite get it for a long time. He said "the best ideas in Black America can be found in the graveyard." What he means, obviously, is that too many of us go to our grave with good ideas, good projects, good thoughts, good plans, things that we had that were good, but we never, ever acted upon, we never did anything with so when I die, I don't want to go until I am thoroughly and completely used up, and if I have to go, if it's my time to go prior to that, I still want people to say that "he did the best he could with what he had," but when my time is up, I want to have every ounce of intellect, every ounce of energy, every good idea. I want to just be--just thoroughly sucked dry of every good thought, every good deed, every good idea that has ever passed through this thing that we call a body so I hope that means I ain't going nowhere no time soon, but that's what I want to do. Story_ID: 13145 Speaker 1: This is a picture of the mother of the civil rights movement, Mrs. Rosa Parks, and yours truly, Tavis Smiley. Rosa Parks and I have gotten to be friends over the years. I've known her for many years, a dozen or so years I've known Mrs. Parks, and I respect her as much as anybody in the world. This is at an event where she was being honored here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and she asked me to go with her as her escort, and so you see us, arm in arm, me escorting the mother of the civil rights movement, Rosa Parks. My very first book came out at the time that she had a book come out called 'Rosa Parks, My Story.' My first book came out the same time hers came out, and the day prior to this photo, I was honored to do--my very first book signing was a joint book signing here in L.A. with Rosa Parks. I sold a ton of books that day and only because Mrs. Parks insisted that people see me first before they got to her so you had to buy my book first, and then they bought her book so I sold a bunch of books that day but only because of Rosa Parks because I wasn't even, you know, I wasn't an author then, but that's Rosa Parks and me hanging out. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley and Rosa Parks, c. 1993] [Los Angeles, California] [Courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13146 Speaker 1: I've had the opportunity to meet the President [Bill Clinton] a number of times on my T.V. show [BET Tonight with Tavis Smiley]. He was a guest six times when I was hosting on BET [Black Entertainment Television]. This picture is significant because what he's signing--he's got a pen in his hand, and he's signing an issue of 'Time' magazine. Once every twenty years 'Time' magazine does a cover story about fifty people they select who are going to be the next generation of leaders in the country, not black, not white, a mixture of the top fifty people they've identified who are going to be leaders for the next generation, and a few years ago I was one of those fifty persons in this issue. At the back of the issue they do a profile on people they picked twenty years ago who were going to be world leaders and national leaders. Bill Clinton was on that list twenty years prior to my being on that list, and so I took my list with me to--I took the magazine with me, rather, to the White House and asked him to sign on the page where he appeared in the Whatever Happened To, and so that magazine has been photographed--I mean been framed with Clinton and I in the same issue, and I have his autograph on that page. Speaker 2: [President Clinton Signs a Copy of 'Time' Magazine for Tavis Smiley, c. 1994] [Washington, D.C.] [Photo courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13147 Speaker 1: This is the love of my life who is now deceased, and here I am as a sixteen year old kid sitting next to 'Big Mama' [maternal grandmother Daisy Robinson]. We were in Chicago [Illinois] for a little family reunion and a picture of me and my Big Mama, my maternal grandmother, at a family reunion in Chicago. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley Poses with His Grandmother, c. 1980] [Chicago, Illinois] [Photo courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13148 Speaker 1: This is a picture that's in a frame that says "A Star Is Born, Tavis Smiley" in a scene from 'Any Day Now.' 'Any Day Now' is a very popular show on the Lifetime Channel, television for women, and I love the show 'Any Day Now,' and I've made a number of cameo appearances on television, but this was the first time I did a role where I did not play myself. I played an etymologist, and the show was about the use of the N word and whether or not it's appropriate to use the N word, a very detailed script. It was a very moving issue. It was a two-part episode, as a matter of fact, a two-part episode of 'Any Day Now,' and I played the expert, and there I am on the stand being questioned by the actress, the fine actress, Lorraine Toussaint, being questioned on the stand about the use of N word, and again it was the first time I ever played, did a cameo where I played a character as opposed to appearing as myself. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley and Actress Lorraine Toussaint, 2001] [Los Angeles, California] [Photo courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13149 Speaker 1: Since nobody in the world wears that kind of outfit except the Pope, I assume that you know that that is the Pope, Pope John Paul the second, at the Vatican [City]. I was pleased to meet him and have a chance to dialogue with him, and we turned that dialogue into an interview for BET [Black Entertainment Television network], but of all the interviews I've had, one of the highlights is having gone to the Vatican to meet with the Pope, and there you see I'm greeting him upon my entry into the room. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley Shakes Hands with Pope John Paul II, late 1990s] [Vatican City] [Photo Courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13150 Speaker 1: This is a picture of--there he is, Fidel, El Presidente, Fidel Castro [president of Cuba]. We're in Havana [Cuba] at his residence, and I went to Cuba on a fact-finding mission with a number of people, about a dozen of folk, including Bill and Camille Cosby, Danny Glover, the actor, Walter Mosley, the writer, Norman Francis, the President of Xavier University in New Orleans [Louisiana], a number of folk on this trip. The purpose of the trip was a fact-finding mission [funded by TransAfrica] to talk about--to discover how Afro-Cubanos, black Cubans, are faring in the country of Cuba, and they told us that Fidel Castro was nocturnal. They didn't guarantee me that I'd have a chance to meet him or interview him when I was there, but they told me if he called and if he would sit down and give me an interview with him for my T.V. show [BET Tonight with Tavis Smiley], that it might come at some strange hour of the night. Indeed, it did. I was in my bed at 12:30, 12:45. The phone rings, and the voice says "El Presidente will see you now. Please come downstairs," so I got my camera up at 12:45 in the morning, and we went downstairs. I went to meet--along with my colleagues on this trip, we went to meet with Fidel Castro, and for the next four hours I had a conversation with Fidel Castro where he and I sat right across the table from each other, and at the end of the meeting, which Bill Cosby teases me about to this day, Castro had been writing and speaking from notes during the meeting, and I was the last person out of the room helping the camera crew clean up. I looked over and saw that Castro had left all of these notes on the table, and in his own building with security cameras everywhere I apparently was so caught up in the prospect of seeing his notes that, without giving any thought to what I was doing, I basically stole Fidel Castro's notes, and so at my house, under lock and key, there is a big plaque of all the notes that Fidel Castro used in that meeting that day, and so Cosby, to this day, teases me about it. He calls me 'The Thief' and tells me that--every now and then, he'll call me and say "this is the Cuban Intersection. We're outside your house. Please come out, and bring the notes with you" so he cracks jokes with me on the phone, Bill Cosby does, but that's me and Fidel Castro. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley Shakes Hands with Fidel Castro, 1999] [Havana, Cuba] [Photo courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13151 Speaker 1: This is my dear friend, [talk show host] Geraldo Rivera. The subscription on the picture reads "To Tavis, nice moustache, best wishes, Geraldo Rivera." I always tease him about his moustache, and I think that is how I want mine to be, as thick as his is, but anyway Geraldo is the primary reason why I had my own talk show on BET [BET Tonight with Tavis Smiley], primarily because during the O. J. Simpson [murder] case [1995], even prior to that quite frankly, starting with the anniversary of the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] riots in the aftermath of the Rodney King beating [1992], Geraldo started using me as a regular guest on his program then, and all throughout the O. J. trial, almost every night, I was a guest on 'Rivera Live,' on his CNBC [Cable National Broadcasting Company network] talk show. He and I had been best, had been dear friends for a number of years, seven, eight, nine, ten years, I guess. In any event, it was the exposure that he gave me on a national basis every night that got the folk at BET [Black Entertainment Television network] to know who I was and that I could do my--or at least get them to think I might potentially have the ability to host my own show, but Geraldo was the one person on network television who gave me an opportunity every night to be showcased nationally so he and I are dear friends, and I owe part of my success, in terms of the exposure, to Geraldo Rivera. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley and Geraldo Rivera, late 1990s] [Los Angeles, California] [Photo courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13152 Speaker 1: Here is the picture of [Mayor] Tom Bradley, the late great Mayor of the city of Los Angeles [California], and as you can see, I was much thinner, much younger, and I must have been about twenty-one, twenty-two in that photo, and I love the photo because while I am looking askance and askew, the Mayor's eyes are focused dead on me, listening to every word that I'm saying, and the look on his face is almost one that, you know, for me, at least, kind of beams with a certain sense of pride at my development because his eyes just tell the whole story of that picture. It's one of my favorite photos. I don't have very many photos in my office here, but that is the first photo that I moved from my house to my office when we opened the building. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley and Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley, 1985] [Los Angeles, California] [Photo Courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13153 Speaker 1: [Prime Minister] Benazir Bhutto [of Pakistan], and me to her left. She was honored here at an event in Los Angeles [California], and to my left on the far right of the picture is Tracey Brown, who is the daughter of the late, great Ron Brown, former [U.S.] Commerce Secretary, so Tracey and I are good friends. I've been friends with her family for a long time, and Tracey and I went to a reception honoring Benazir Bhutto, and so there we were. It was an all-night reception. It was like a long time. I sat and talked to her for three hours, I guess, three or four hours, just talking to the Prime Minister of Pakistan, which was quite a conversation. Nice lady. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley at a Reception, date unknown] [Los Angeles, California] [Photo courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13154 Speaker 1: In the center is yours truly [Tavis Smiley]. To my left in the glasses--to my right, rather, in the glasses is my minister, Bishop Noel Jones. I go to a church here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] called the Greater Bethany Community Church, and Bishop Jones is the most wonderful deliverer of the Word of anybody who I know, and for four years I flew back and forth to [Washington] D.C. to do my BET show [BET Tonight with Tavis Smiley] because BET [Black Entertainment Television network] is headquartered in Washington, but the truth of the matter is I came back home every week, one, because I lived here, and my friends are here, and my office is here, but quite frankly, I love going to my church. I love my minister, and I could only hear him by coming home to L.A. every weekend, and to my left and to the right of the picture is my dear friend, Randall Robinson, the founder of TransAfrica Forum, who is without question one of the courageous people I've ever met and stands by his convictions, and I love Randall Robinson, (pause) and that's Randall. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley with Bishop Noel Jones and Randall Robinson, date unknown] [Los Angeles, California] [Photo courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13155 Speaker 1: This is a picture here of yours truly [Tavis Smiley] and the Archbishop Desmond Tutu. I mentioned earlier, during my internship [with Mayor Tom Bradley], my assignment was to organize the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California]'s first celebration honoring the holiday of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr]. Archbishop Tutu was our keynote speaker for that first event, and there you see me hugging him and greeting him actually as he leaves City Hall underground. You know, he had death threats here and there from time to time so there he is leaving under heavy security standing all around us. You can't see them, but the two of us are saying goodbye to each other as he leaves a reception honoring him at City Hall in Downtown L.A. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley with Desmond Tutu, January 15, 1986] [Los Angeles, California] [Photo courtesy of Tavis Smiley] Story_ID: 13156 Speaker 1: In this photo, Tom Joyner and I were invited to have lunch one day with the founder and publisher of 'Ebony' magazine, 'Ebony,' 'Jet' [magazine], at the Johnson Publishing Building in Chicago [Illinois] down on Michigan Avenue, and from the left you see the managing editor for Ebony magazine, Lerone Bennett, Junior, and then there's me, Tavis Smiley. (Pause). We were having lunch at the Johnson Publishing Building, and to the left of the photo is Lerone Bennett, the managing editor. Then there's yours truly. In the middle, of course, the man himself, John H. Johnson, whose story of starting 'Ebony' magazine is a remarkable story. He talked his mama into mortgaging everything she had, every bit of furniture that she owned. For that furniture she got $500. With the $500 he bought nothing but paper, envelopes, and stamps, and he sent out subscription letters to black people all across the country off the insurance list of the company where he worked in Chicago and said to people I'm going to start a magazine focusing on lifestyles of black people, and I want you to subscribe. That's how he invested his mama's $500, and of all those subscription letters, he had a ton of subscriptions that came back in to him, and he took that money and started what we now know as Ebony, which was originally a magazine called 'Negro Digest' which is now known as 'Ebony' magazine, and they now celebrate almost fifty-five years of being in business, and to this day, the market, he still owns 100 percent of all the stock at Johnson Publishing, remarkable man, and to the far right of the picture, of course, is my dear friend, the fly jock, the hardest working man in radio, [radio host] Tom Joyner, and his wife, Donna, and Tom and Donna had just appeared on the cover of 'Ebony' magazine which featured their exclusive photos of their wedding so they invited Tom and Donna and I guess me, the illegitimate bastard child. I don't know. Anyway, we got to go for lunch with Mr. Johnson, but it was a great time, and it's great to have met the man and talk to him in person. Speaker 2: [Tavis Smiley and Tom Joyner at Johnson Publishing Company, 2001] [Chicago, Illinois] [Photo Courtesy of Tavis Smiley]..