 Story_ID: 75251 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Indira Hale Tucker. And, sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Marcus, M-A-R-C-U-S Othello, O-T-H-E-L-L-O Tucker, T-U-C-K-E-R, Jr. Speaker 1: All right. Can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November the 12th, 1934 in Santa Monica, California. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a judge. Speaker 1: And what's today's date? Speaker 2: November the 22nd, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the courthouse in Long Beach [California]. Story_ID: 75252 Speaker 1: Okay. Before we go into depth, there are five People Magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you, the first one being what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I think I like probably tacos more than anything else--chicken tacos, probably. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: All right. Do you, sir, have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Around football season; I, I, like football and that's my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Montreal, Canada was--is, is, is one of my favorite vacations; I think it's a--my favorite. Speaker 1: And sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, I'm--I'm influenced by football, so I, I think it's when the going gets tough, the tough get going. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 75253 Speaker 1: All right; let's--I wanna ask you about your family history. Do you know much about the history of your family? Speaker 2: I don't know a lot about it, actually. Basically, I think I can--I've seen my, my grandmother on my father's [Marcus O. Tucker, Sr.] side; her name was Elizabeth Tucker. I, I, I, I never met my grandfather on my father's side, he was dead when I was--before I was born, I believe. I have seen my grandfather on my mother's side; he was an old man when I was very young--I think I was about ten years old. I've never seen my grandmother on my mother's side. I think she was dead at the time I was--I saw him. Speaker 1: Now--so you don't--are there any stories that have passed down to you through your parents, or any of the grandparents, about what your family was doing in the nineteenth century or in the--? Story_ID: 75254 Speaker 1: I don't know too much about my father's [Marcus O. Tucker, Sr.] family; I know more about my mother's [Essie Tucker] family. My mother's family--my grandfather was a farmer and he, he had a, a large estate and--of which we still have--own some of the property; we own fifty acres. He owned apartment houses--apartment (ph.) store at one time, and it was burned down and he made money because it was over-insured, and they burned it down again. He was very shrewd from an economic standpoint; he did very well economically. I understand he was a slave as a, as--you know, at one time. My mother worked for him and so she got a lot of her sense of finances and so forth from him, and it was a large family; he had a number of children of which several of 'em went to college. They could all go to college but--I know several of them finished college. My uncle became a lawyer and my mother was a school teacher and a real estate broker, and another of his daughters was a dietician at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I believe. And they all--many of 'em at least, I won't say all of 'em, had good educations and they did very well for that time. Speaker 2: And this is your grandfather McLendon? Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: From Georgia? Speaker 1: --He's, he's from Georgia--Washington, Georgia. Speaker 2: Washington, Georgia? Speaker 1: Yes. And so I don't know too much beyond that; I mean that's my--my mother's family, and I know much more about my mother's family--relatively more than I do about my father's family, which I understand was from Kansas. And I know they had economic difficulty, and my father kind of broke out of the pack and became a medical doctor. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, in your mother's family--I know I heard a story that your grandfather was named Toombs? Speaker 1: I think his name was Toombs McLendon, yes. Speaker 2: --and that he was possibly the son of a confederate general? Speaker 1: There was a General Toombs, yes, and I'd heard that he was a son, or related to the General Toombs. Toombs is a name that--a number of the young people in the family, on that side of the family, were named Toombs. McLendon is--there's other relatives named Toombs McLendon, but he was Toombs and he was the most well-known Toombs, you know, in terms of the family history. Speaker 2: I don't know if this is related, but there's a Toombs Prison, I know, in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You think that's related to that family? Speaker 1: I, I really don't know; I'm not sure. Speaker 2: That's where Marcus Garvey actually was incarcerated before he was, you know, deported, you know, back in the '20's [1920s] (unclear). Speaker 1: The only thing I know about is--I understand that Toombs was a Confederate general, and that's the only thing I, I know about the name Toombs, and that was his last name, I think--yeah. Story_ID: 75255 Speaker 1: Okay. What about the--your father's side in Kansas? What--do you know the part of Kansas that they-- Speaker 2: Well, I think they were from Wichita and those areas and I think my father was actually born in Missouri--Dalton, Missouri, and I do know they ended up in Oklahoma. And it is my understanding from the family oral history was that they lived on a Indian reservation, and when they found oil they got kicked off the land, and I know at one time, my father did farming and he was engaged in farming, and--but that's about all I know about the Tucker family. I know they, they moved from the Midwest to, to San Diego [California] and my grandmother moved to San Diego and then my father got established in Santa Monica [California] and they--and he and the family moved--his brothers and so forth, and his mother moved to Santa Monica. Story_ID: 75256 Speaker 1: Let's identify your father. Can you give us his name, and spell his name for us and-- Speaker 2: Well, he was Marcus O. Tucker, Sr., and so it's spelled the same way, and so he's--I'm named after him. Speaker 1: And he was born approximately around (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I'm not sure. He died--Actually, I could figure it out but he died when I was tem years old, and I think he was in his-forty-nine or, or something of that nature; I know he wasn't old at the time he died--yeah. Speaker 1: So he would have been born sometime, I guess, in the 1890's? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what kind of person was your father? I know he was a doctor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. Well, he--I remember him most studying; he, he, he--I, I know we went to San Francisco [California]; at that time, the medical school and--for Stanford University [Stanford, California] was in San Francisco, and so I remember we stayed in San Francisco while he studied. And the thing I remember about him most was he would give my mother [Essie Tucker] the money and he'd count the money out and then he would study. I mean he would spend--in, in, in the den in, in, in our home; we still have the home--we still own the home. He'd, he'd be studying, and he seemed to be very studious. And he had a very broad clientele; I know a lot of different kinds of patients, Hispanic particularly, and he, he, he would play with me and--I know he built me a toy gun and so forth and--but I, I remember him being busy a lot; this was during the war, and he was air raid warden, and he went around and saw that all the lights were out and, you know, and that kinda thing, and he seemed to enjoy sports. I mean I know he had various kind of customized guns of which he passed on to me, and--but he didn't have time to go hunting. But he was devoted to medicine; I remember him as a person who was very much devoted to medicine. He, he wasn't a person that dressed well; I mean he wasn't a person who was very conscious about how his clothing was, and my mother always got after him about that (laughter)--I remember that. And I know that there was some friction between them because he was an OB-GYN [obstetrician-gynecologist] and, you know, a baby would be born and so forth, and then you'd have to cancel going to the dance of course. And I remember one time that we went to the Pacific Palisades area, it wasn't built up like it is now, and he delivered a baby and we--and he carried a gun up there because there was supposed to be a mountain lion up there and, and he did--and I was in the car while he went in and had delivered the child, I remember that. But, I mean, that's basically what I remember of my father and--seemed to be well-liked and he, he never was a disciplinarian though, for me, because I remember one time he was standing with a--talking with a friend and I took his hat off and started running with it and he, he chased me (laughter), but he didn't discipline me; he never disciplined me about anything, my mother [Essie Tucker] was the disciplinarian--yeah. Story_ID: 75257 Speaker 1: Now, what medical school did your father [Marcus O. Tucker, Sr.] attend? Speaker 2: Well, it's--he went to--he got his at Meharry Medical School [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and I still have his degree. It's my understanding--and I can't be a hundred percent, but he had gone to University of Kansas Medical School [University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, Kansas] and you couldn't--blacks couldn't go through the wards at University of Kansas at that time, which I was told. But he transferred to Meharry Medical School in Tennessee, yeah. He went to Kansas State University and got his bachelor's degree; it was Kansas State College in Manhattan [Kansas]--and got his Bachelor of Chemistry at that time. And then I understand he went to University of Kansas and then he got his degree at Meharry Medical School, and that's where he met my mother [Essie Tucker]--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so they met when he was in medical school in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And she was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Nashville. Speaker 2: Yeah, in Nashville, and she was at Fisk, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That was my understanding. Story_ID: 75258 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about why his [Marcus O. Tucker, Sr.] family moved to California? Speaker 2: No. I--if there was, I, I don't know what it is. Speaker 1: But it seems like they were on a--they were, they were Exodusters; have you ever heard that expression? Speaker 2: Yes, I have, yes. Speaker 1: Yes, black people that moved to Kansas from Oklahoma and-- Speaker 2: Yes, I do know. I heard my grandmother say they, they, they really had a rough time in Oklahoma, they really had tough times. But I don't remember her talking about--much about Kansas; I, I know one of my cousins played football for the University of Wichita Wheat Shockers--his name was Linwood Sexton and he's dead now, but I, I remember that, the name. And I understand it's broader than I thought it was but they, you know, Missouri and some other states, but I'm not just exactly certain what the history is when they were in the Midwest; I don't know that side of the family very well--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 75259 Speaker 1: Well let's--could you give us your mother's name and spell it for us, and her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't know her date of birth; her name is Essie, E-S-S-I-E Lovonia, L-O-V-O-N-I-A, I believe. Speaker 1: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: L-O-U. Speaker 2: L-O-U-V-O-N-I-A McLendon Tucker. And was it M-C-L-E-N? Speaker 1: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: Yeah, family started out as M-C-C (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah, McLendon, yeah, D-O-N, and Tucker; but--yeah, she, she's a McLendon; it's her maiden name. Speaker 1: All right. And what did your mother do for a living? Speaker 2: Well, she was a school teacher; she was really devoted to teaching. She liked to teach. And then she was in--part-time she was a real estate broker, and then real estate became very lucrative during that time and so she became a full-time real estate broker, and she was also interested in community affairs; she was very active in the community affairs. And she was very active in the medical, the medical auxiliary; she was president of the Women's Auxiliary to the National Medical Association which is a black national medical association, and she was president of the Women's Auxiliary. And she was very active in the Alpha Kappa Alpha; she was AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] and she was Regional Director of the AKA, and many people still remember her from her role as being very active in the AKA and taking me around with her to the AKA. Speaker 1: Okay. What was her personality like? Speaker 2: Well, she was very outgoing and she seemed to relate to everybody very readily; she--even people who didn't speak English, she seemed to be able to communicate. Spanish people, you know, Hispanics and so forth, Mexicans we'd call 'em at that time, and she seemed to relate to everybody. And she liked to bargain, she liked to bargain and, and, and, and she was very outgoing kind of personality that seemed to get along with everybody, and everybody seemed to like her. And she liked people and she helped people; she would go out of her way to help people. She seemed to emphathize with people a lot, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 75260 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I want you to kind of reflect back and give us some idea of what it was like to grow up in Santa Monica [California], and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up there? Speaker 2: Well, Santa Monica was--seemed to me, at the--when I was growing up--the black community, which I remember most, revolved around the churches, and I was raised in Calvary Baptist Church and both my mother [Essie Tucker] and father [Marcus O. Tucker, Sr.] were Baptist, and so as a consequence, I had to go to church every Sunday; I had to go to Sunday School and church just about every Sunday, and my mother was a member of Calvary and my father was a member of a church in Venice; he didn't go to church a lot, but I had to go. And the--and the church experience profoundly affected me, and the reason was because it seemed to me that we were very different from the--our white neighbors and so forth; I mean Santa Monica was--and where I lived, was quite integrated. We had Mexicans and we had Italians, and the (unclear) family, and we had whites and--all living in the same area, and we seemed to get along pretty--we used to fight all the time but we used to--we liked each other and we just accepted each other. And I remember that--I seemed to have unlimited freedom; the only restriction I had was I had to be in before it was dark, you know. When it got dark, I had to come in, but I'd be out playing all the time and--with my friends, and when it got dark, I had to come in, but that was the only restriction that I, I had. So I have a memory of great freedom, and where I lived on 20th Street in Santa Monica, it wasn't built up like it is now, and they had horses and so forth, and--and the--we lived up on a hill, and our house was by far the largest, most elaborate house on the, on the, on, on the--in the black community that--and we had--there was a two-story apartment house--building that was very nice across the street, a little further down the street, and most of the houses in our area were apartments but they were well-kept and nice, and my grandmother lived down the street, my mother--my father built my grandmother [Elizabeth Tucker] a house down the street and the church was down the street, Calvary Baptist Church. Down the street was the library; they had the library down the street when I was young, and they had a restaurant, and basically my world, you know, except for school, revolved around that--. Story_ID: 75261 Speaker 1: I went to school at Grant School [Grant Elementary School, Santa Monica, California], which was in a white neighborhood which we walked to--a group of us walked to. And I was one of the few blacks in the class, and I didn't find the kids unpleasant; they seemed to be very pleasant to me and, and the favorite time, I guess, of the year at that time was Halloween, and we had a quite elaborate Halloween festival and May Day and so forth, and sports was a big thing; I liked sports. I wasn't a good student at that time, and what happened was that when I got to be a little older, my mother [Essie Tucker] took me out of Grant School and put me into UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] Teacher Training School; she had done her--some of her teacher training at the UCLA Teacher Training at--which was on Warner Avenue at that time, and immediately I did much better; I did far better, and within six weeks I was doing much better than I was at Grant School which I used to day-dream quite a bit. And I had significant self-esteem problems when I was in elementary school because I wasn't a good student and I had a tendency to day-dream quite a bit and--but I can't say that racism had much do with it because I think we pretty much treated each other pretty well, and I just, I just was slow to learn, and of course that put pressure on me because my mother was a, you know... and she was highly-educated and my father [Marcus O. Tucker, Sr.] was a doctor, and so, you know, I had a very negative self-concept at that time. Story_ID: 75262 Speaker 1: And--but I really didn't form an opinion of Santa Monica [California] at that time until I got older, and that was basically in the high school time because I went from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] Teacher Training School to Emerson Junior High School [currently Ralph Waldo Emerson Middle School] in Westwood [Los Angeles, California], and I was--I guess there were only about four blacks in the school, about 1200--there was only four blacks, and at UCLA Teacher Training, there was only two of us, and both of us were in the same--we came from the Santa Monica area--a young lady and myself, and-- Speaker 2: Did you have to pass a test to get in? Speaker 1: No, I didn't. They were--what happened was, a fellow named Pete (ph.) Sander (ph.) was a good friend of mine and we went there for the, for the, for the summer school, and they had a unit on boats and everything and I became fascinated with the boats and the harbors and so forth, and so immediately they caught my attention and, and my mother [Essie Tucker] wanted me to stay there because, you know, immediately I stopped day-dreaming and started being interested in academics. And then they had a unit on Rome and they--we, we made Roman Styluses and all that kinda thing, and I was just fascinated by the whole thing, and then in order to catch up, they--when, when, when I enrolled there as a full-time student and not just summer school, they took about eight of us outta class and for two or three hours we read, and all of a sudden, my reading level became much stronger; I became much--a better student. And so I regard UCLA Teacher Training School as my turning point academically. Speaker 2: Now, how old were you at the time? Speaker 1: Well, see, I'm--I'm not sure; I was- Speaker 2: INDIRA TUCKER: Fifth grade. Speaker 1: Before your father [Marcus O. Tucker, Senior] died? Speaker 2: No, this was after my father passed, yeah, yeah. My, my mother basically raised me because my father was very busy and, and so she was basically the one that raised me, actually 'cause I seldom saw him because he's working all the time. Speaker 1: So this is like around fifth grade? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, fifth grade. Story_ID: 75263 Speaker 1: And then I went from there to Emerson Junior High School [currently Ralph Waldo Emerson Middle School, Los Angeles, California], which was a very good junior high school and--where the parents were very interested, and I was a little behind still, but I remember it as a good experience, and I had very few racial incidents even though there was only a few blacks. Then I went to University High School in West LA [Los Angeles] and the--'course that's when you start dating and so forth, so it was a little more tense, but I had a good experience because I was pretty well-accepted; I was on the football team--I was on the B football team and--my first year, and played first string B, tackle. And then I was on the varsity; I played second string on the--left tackle on the--my first year on the varsity and then I was first string left tackle my last year for the University High School Warriors (ph.) at that time. And football was a big thing in my life and it dominated my life basically. Academics were, were secondary, and yet I think I did better than I had thought I did because when I went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I--after I left University High School, I scored pretty well on the academic test they had, but I didn't think I was a strong student but I did do better on the test than I, I thought I did (ph.), so I must have gotten a better education than I had anticipated, but I was dominated by athletics. And athletics still have a residence with me in terms of what I learned as a--in playing football, so I still take--have taken those lessons with me to today, actually. I use those lessons, and a lot of the lessons I learned, I apply right now. Story_ID: 75264 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a coach or a mentor? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah--well, no, I had two coaches, Coach Hesline (ph.) and Wilcox, and they weren't--I wasn't close to either one of them. The football team was like a United Nations; I mean we had an American Indian as center--Mel Romose (ph.), and we had a Armenian as our right guard, and we had a Japanese as a left guard who was guard right next to me, and then I was a left tackle, and we have a Scotchman as a right tackle, and we had the Escobar (ph.)--Carlos Escobar as a right end and, and Jim Mora was the left--no, he was a right end who, who play--who was coaching with the Saints; he went to Occidental [College, Los Angeles, California] and he was a coach for the [New Orleans] Saints, and so forth (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Jim Mora--and he was--he was on the team. And then we had a quarterback--we had Phil Murray who was English descent and, and we had Jose Yurango (ph.), which--who was Hispanic or Mexican, and on the left tackle we had a German Mexican, Wayne Bower, and the fullback, we had a Panamanian. So we had a--like a little (laughter) United Nations as a team, and we seemed to get along fine, yeah. Speaker 1: Was the team fairly successful? Speaker 2: Well, we won four and lost two, and we were a team that didn't have tremendous personal ability, but we worked as a team well. The team that I played on as a junior had more ability 'cause we had some--when John Peterson Gooey played first string for UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and so forth, and--but they didn't work as well as a team. I mean they didn't play as well as a team; individually, they were some outstanding players, but we were much better as a team, as a group--yeah. So we were much more successful. And I guess the--we were in the Western League and we played Los Angeles High School and Fairfax and Hollywood and Venice and Hamilton and Dorsey and those schools, and the western area of Los Angeles, yeah. That was our league and I, I enjoyed it immensely and that--yeah. Story_ID: 75265 Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any other teachers or any other adults in the community that made a big impact on you when you were a youth? Speaker 2: Well, I guess some of the doctors made an influence on me; not from a personal standpoint, but because they seemed to be successful and, you know, I was influenced by people that I felt were successful. And, you know, they had nice homes and things like that, and I mean they didn't mentor me or anything like that, but I could relate to that because that was something that I wanted to emulate. But--so they had an influence on me. But I, I don't have a positive attitude about Santa Monica [California] growing up because it seems like the black kids were defeated by-and-large by the experience, and I know when I've gone back, a lot of the young people that stayed there, it seems like they're much older than I am, you know; it seems like they haven't experienced much, and they--they generally--they got married early and had children, and it seems like there's a tremendous gulf between their experience and mine, and we don't have a lot to talk about. There are exceptions--Nat Travis, who I grew up with, and he was, he, he was on the Santa Monica Police Department and he was a professor at the Los Angeles State University--the California State University of Los Angeles of Criminal Justice, and he was mayor of Santa Monica and the City Council, and he's still active in the community and--yeah. Speaker 1: Pause and change tape. Speaker 2: All right. Story_ID: 75314 Speaker 1: Yes, okay. Picking up where we left off, you were talking about some of the people that were left back in Santa Monica [California], you know, they seemed kind of depressed back there. Speaker 2: Well, my--my impression was that they seemed to be defeated; now, when you get in--when I got into high school, there was some incidents of racism--not so much at University High School [Los Angeles, California], but in the Santa Monica High School [Santa Monica, California] and so forth, and there was one--I, I, I know when I was in geometry class at University High School, I had a incident where the teacher, just out of the blue and, you know, where people could hear, said I wasn't college material; there was no--there wasn't any warning that she was gonna say that or any reason and, you know, and I felt humiliated. And so, and so I kind of have had--that kind of trauma has lasted over the years, you know, I mean she--and so it's been kind of a effort to prove that she was wrong kinda thing and--but it, it, it left a scar on me. But by-and-large we got along pretty well; I mean I--you know, I went to the dances and I seemed to be pretty well-accepted, and the other blacks who were athletes, basically, basketball players and track and so forth, they seemed to be pretty well-accepted at the school and so it was a positive experience to a great degree and--. Story_ID: 75315 Speaker 1: But Santa Monica [California], I have very mixed feelings about it, you know. I was born there and raised there and my home was there, but it, it, it, it seems to me like we were limited, you know; it seems like there was a atmosphere of limitation because by-and-large, at that time, very few of the young people went on to college, and even though there was a--you know, it was articulated that you should go to college and do things, very few seemed to do that. And some did, like R.C. Owens, who played for the San Francisco 49ers. Speaker 2: He was in high school, with you? Speaker 1: Yeah--no, he was at Santa Monica High School [Santa Monica, California]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and he played for College of Idaho [Caldwell, Idaho] and went on to alley oop (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, he was famous for the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--alley oop play. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You just throw the ball up and he would out-jump everybody and get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, and get it. Speaker 2: --the ball. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, he was on Santa Monica High School when I was in University [University High School, Los Angeles, California], so he was famous; and, and he went into business in San Francisco and--a few others. But by-and-large, it, it seems like to me it's very difficult for black kids to achieve and, you know, be on the high school level. And some of the athletes became--they got into alcohol and drugs and they, they seemed to go downhill. I know one of 'em I saw in the, in the car wash and he seemed to--he seemed to me he had some drugs, you know; he had some drugs and he seemed to be defeated and--and another one who was a outstanding linebacker became a drug addict and, and a lotta problems, so it seems to me that there was a lot of problems. Story_ID: 75316 Speaker 1: And I, I remember having some negative incidents; I, I know my cousin and I went to the El Miro Theater when I was a young kid and, and they would always, the El Miro's in Downtown Santa Monica [California], they would always have the blacks go to the back of the theater, which was--there wasn't two stories, it was a slope--sloping kind of thing, and she refused to go and they arrested her; they didn't arrest me but they arrested her, and I remember that, and-- Speaker 2: You were there? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was there; yeah, I, I was there. And I remember going to the Wilshire Theater and they would always tell me to go to one side of the theater and I refused to do that and they didn't do anything. I, I, I remember that, and I remember that on the side of Pico Boulevard, the south side of Pico Boulevard, that blacks by-and-large couldn't buy property, and I know one did buy, our next door neighbor, and they wanted to buy him out and all that kinda thing, and so--and we bought an apartment house when we--when I got married, we bought an apartment house over on Ocean--Ocean Avenue--Ocean Park Boulevard, and I had some problems there; I just--I was in the City Attorney's office and, and they slit my tires twice. And then I, I took my car and put it in the back, and in the alley, and somebody threw--I just got a new car, and they threw acid all over it, so--and it never was the same in terms of the paint job. And somebody stole my television and so--and I do know there was a--we rented to a Puerto Rican couple, an older couple, and they threw garbage from the apartment house next to us down into their back yard area and I used some choice words and so forth, without going into great detail, and it stopped. But I do know we had--there were some problems. There weren't blacks living over there; I had a friend living over there who was black, but he--he was (unclear) in passing for Hispanic or something like that--in that nature, you know (laughter). So I, I, I remember that in Santa Monica. And I remember also that the vast majority of the blacks were--that I knew were domestic servants and maids and things like that, and the, the big shots were postal workers and people who were--who had a job in the post office, and they were superintendent of the Reese Brothers or superintendent of the Sunday School and so forth, and they had steady jobs and so forth and, and so it, it was tough, I mean it was tough; Santa Monica was a tough place. Story_ID: 75317 Speaker 1: Now, where is Santa Monica [California] in relationship to, I guess the Los Angeles [California] area (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's on the beach, it's on the beach; it's to the north and-- Speaker 1: It's not as far north as San Francisco [California]-- Speaker 2: No, no, it's, it's, it's in Los Angeles County-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and it's south of Malibu [California] and north of Venice [California] and the--it's on the coast; it's eight square miles. It's affluent area by-and-large it's an affluent area and it's very, very--it costs a lotta money to live the, in many of the areas right now in Santa Monica, and I would say it's an upscale city with--and historically, it's been very conservative; it's been a very conservative place historically. And then when Tom Hayden and Henry Fo--his wife (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Jane Fonda? Speaker 2: Jane Fonda--they had a, a, a campaign of--economic campaign dealing with the renters and so forth in Santa Monica, and they changed the politics of Santa Monica to the point where it went from very conservative to very liberal in terms of rent controls and so forth, and so it was--the conservatives, by keeping the prices up and so forth and making it very difficult for ordinary people to live, particularly renters, it caused, caused the backlash and, and they controlled politics in the city for, for many years--yeah. Story_ID: 75318 Speaker 1: So when you were a senior in high school [University High School, Los Angeles, California], what were your plans? Speaker 2: Well, I was thinking about going into medicine because my father [Marcus O. Tucker, Sr.] had been a doctor and my mother [Essie Tucker] pushed me along those lines. I didn't think I could be a doctor because I wasn't good in science; I mean I wasn't a strong student and I wasn't good in science, and so--but I would parrot the, you know, that program until I went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and when I went to Fisk after I left high school, I, I played on the football team there, but it gave me a chance to get away from Santa Monica [California] and think on my own and, and, and take courses, and at that point, I knew I didn't wanna go--I knew I didn't wanna go into medicine; I didn't know what I wanted to do. I knew I was strong in social sciences, and I made a decision there that I wasn't gonna go into medicine. I didn't make a decision what I was gonna do, but I made a decision what I wasn't gonna do, and so I, I, I transferred after the first semester to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]; I got my degree at University of Southern California. And so I changed my major to international relations by just taking courses. I took a wide variety of courses--sociology, anthropology and psychology and so forth. Took a course in international relations; it was so interesting that I majored in it. And my mother was always, you know, more practical than I; she wanted to know what I could do with that and so I said, "Well, basically, it's a liberal arts major and I've enjoyed"--and I think it was a great choice of university and a great choice of a major. Story_ID: 75319 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: Now, when you went from Santa Monica [California] to Nashville [Tennessee] to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I mean what was the differences that you could see right away? Speaker 2: Well, the first thing it was very segregated, and I wasn't too much bothered by the segregation in the sense that--because you lived basically on the school grounds and you had your life there on the--you know, in close proximity to the university. My mother [Essie Tucker] went to Fisk and she knew a number of the Fiskites (ph.) there; she knew the person who owned the pharmacy and the theater and all that, and I played on the football team there and she was--she knew Tubby Johnson and, and people--and Scott Beasley and all those that--who were--who ran the football team so--and, and her sister was there. And so I just confined myself after--I went downtown to go to the movie and I bought the ticket, and then they directed me to the back of the theater and then I walked up this steep flight of stairs and it smelled up there, so I just left and I never went back. I did go to the draft board down there, and they treated me very well; they--there were some white kids and they treated terribly, just before I, I went up to the, the draft board--they treated 'em terribly, talked to 'em terribly. And so I told 'em I was at Fisk and they treated me very well. And so that basically is the, the two experiences that I can remember, you know, with having to do with segregation and so forth. Story_ID: 75320 Speaker 1: When you were there, were there--were the--I guess you were there too early for the Freedom Riders (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah, yeah--later (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--started at Fisk (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--yeah, that's right, yeah; I did know one of them--Diane Nash I do know 'cause she was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] when I was there. Speaker 1: She's in Chicago [Illinois] now. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was at--she went to Chicago; she's from Chicago. Speaker 1: And James Lawson? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I knew--I didn't know Lawson but I knew him as minister here-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but when I was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], it was very interesting because they had a lot of valedictorians from all over the country and I felt the teachers cared about the students and we went on, on, on--I was on the football team and we went to various places; we went to Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural & Mechanical University, Huntsville, Alabama] and we saw their farm and so forth, and I went to some of their classes and we went to Atlanta and played Clark [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and we played Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and, and, and we--in, in Atlanta and I have relatives in Atlanta, and we went through Mississippi to New Orleans [Louisiana] and we played Dillard [University] in New Orleans. And I remember a group of us wanted to go to the show so we went to the show right next to Dillard and they wouldn't let us in (laughter), so I remember that. And we went to the French Quarter, and that's basically what I, I, I remember; I, I remember going to Mississippi on the bus and the people looked at us like, you know, very hard; it seems like they were looking at us very hard--when we went through, we didn't have any difficulty. We did stop at one place and it was awful; it was a kind of a greasy spoon kinda place to have a--some breakfast or lunch or whatever, but we carried our lunch with us, you know, from place to place, by-and-large. And that's what I, I, I remember; I, I remember the people in Nashville being very warm--a very friendly and warm kinda people, though, and it wasn't a traumatic experience at all. Story_ID: 75321 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was UCLA like? Speaker 2: You mean USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--USC, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I'm (unclear) mixed up, especially on this weekend. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you're right--yeah 'cause we have our big game tomorrow. Well, I thought the kids were pretty friendly; I thought they were very friendly and I didn't have a, a lot of problems at USC; I have a very good memory of USC. We did have some incidents, but it--but--we volunteered to--I, I was a member, I joined the Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, and we had--we volunteered to be kind of escorts, or whatever it is, at one of the graduations, and so we were put in the--someplace where you could barely see the university; I mean, you know, we--and so we complained about it, and I understand it was one of the, the--I don't know what he was, but he was responsible for that, and, and, and I don't the university really knew what was going on, but--and we protested by sending a letter to the administration. The only negative experience I had was--would have been negative--I, I tried to join a Foreign Service fraternity, and they--and the chapter voted me in overwhelmingly, unanimously. But when it went to the--up from the chapter, somebody who didn't want blacks to join vetoed me and I couldn't--I didn't join, so--and that was the only thing I remember. There was an incident--I, I represented the Kappas on the--in the fraternity council one time and there were some--it seems to me, some negative vibrations dealing with the Inter-Fraternity Council and blacks weren't basically on--part of that scene. The only fraternity on campus was the Kappa Alpha Psi, and we weren't part of the social scene as far as the fraternities are concerned; we had our own Kappa house which was away from the campus, but it wasn't the house that was--excuse me--it wasn't the Kappa house that was the relevant thing, it was-the fraternity scene was very restrictive as far as minorities were concerned. There was a Jewish fraternity that did let blacks in and--but basically, we were restricted to the black fraternities and I chose the Kappa's. But the problem with that is that we didn't have a lot in common, other than the fact we were all black, but our personalities were quite different. As my understanding on the row, they had people who were interested in sports and they would be in one fraternity say, and you, you had much more variety of interests so that you had some commonality, you know, whereas this was basically on a (unclear) commonality of race, and we really didn't have much in common except that, you know. When you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--You know, I never thought about that before (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah. I mean that was the only thing we had in common; I mean our interests were quite different, and that was one of the, you know, the problems I saw, you know, about that experience. I, I'm still a Kappa; I've been--I'm not act--active life member, but I'm not active; but that's what I remember in the--at, at USC. Story_ID: 75322 Speaker 1: And I thought I got a very good education at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles] for, you know, for my level of achievement. I thought they, they brought a lot out. Speaker 2: Now, did you play football there? Speaker 1: No, I didn't; no; I, I talked to the football coach at the time, and it seemed like, you know, it seemed too demanding for someone who needed to put--his name was Jess Hill--and it seemed too demanding in terms of the rigor for a person who needed to, to get through the university in terms of their academics, so I decided not to go out. Speaker 2: But were there any black stars on the team? Speaker 1: There was, and they had just started having blacks back in the team. They had blacks at one time who--and they had one that was an all-American there at USC. Then, for a number of years, they didn't have any blacks on the team. And just before I got there, they had Addison Hawthorne, who was a big star at Pasadena City College [Pasadena, California], on the team. And C.R. Roberts, who I knew and I still know, and they had just began to have blacks on the football team, and that was after a hiatus of many years when they didn't have any blacks on any teams at USC--yeah. Story_ID: 75323 Speaker 1: Okay, now, were there any teachers or professors, you know, that stood out there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, Dr. Ross Burkees (ph.) was head of the International Relations School (unclear), and he stood out because he would take you seriously. I mean I'd go up and talk with him after class and he seemed to be very interested in what you had to say, and he, he, he, he would think out loud, and you could see his mental processes and that fascinated me. And also, the ideas fascinated me because I would go into Dr. Hadley's course, who was a, a great liberal, I mean, and who--everything was rosy and everything, and then I'd go into his course, and it was--he was a realist in the Hans Morganthau kind of school in University of Chicago, and it seems like the world was going downhill, and emotionally it affected me. I mean I never knew that ideas could affect you emotionally, and going from one class to another, the ideas affected me emotionally. I mean I couldn't handle it, you know, sometimes going into one class where, you know, he'd talk--it was international organization, he'd talk about the League of Nations and the United Nations, and so forth, and then all the good stuff, and then you'd go into Dr. Burkees' course and everything was realism, and it, it, it, it affected me. But then I knew the power of ideas. And so I thought they were both very good in terms of my intellectual development. And the reason I went into international relations because of Dr. Fertig (ph.) because he was good at conveying information; he wasn't a profound thinker but he made it very interesting. And I did a paper on Vietnam and I, I came up pretty much with, with what they, they, they, they chose to compromise on in, in a paper; I did a--extra-credit paper and, and, and he, he thought it was very good and well thought out and so forth, and so--I mean he--that gave me confidence. Story_ID: 75324 Speaker 1: And so I think those were three of the--and Dr. Chin--I, I'm--my area of study was the Far East, and so I learned a whole new civilization--Asian culture, Japanese civilization and Chinese civilization, and it was fascinating. They didn't have anything on Africa at that time, but learning about the Asian philosophy and so forth, and music and all that was fascinating to me and so it really opened up a whole new world. International relations was a great major for me, yeah. So, I mean those were some of the--and I was interested in philosophy also; I became interested in philosophy and so I thought it was--and art history--art history was very important to me 'cause I went to Europe, and taking those courses in art his--that course in art history and then going to Europe was, was very--because I--was very good because I knew what I was seeing, you know, the flying buttresses and all that; I, I knew what I was seeing and it meant a lot to me. So, I, I mean, that was my--so I enjoyed USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] very much. Speaker 2: You seemed to have a real rich variety of interests at UC-USC. Speaker 1: Yes, I did, and I believe very strongly in liberal arts education as a result; I think it's--to me, it's a very rich background for anything you do, and you learn the power of ideas and interconnectedness of ideas and things, and so I'm really quite impressed with liberal arts education--yeah. Speaker 2: There seemed to be a movement--well, there was a movement there to cut down on--I mean to just focus people on vocational skills and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --skip the liberal arts. Speaker 1: Well, vocational--information and skills get outdated and--because the things I learned in law school are no longer the law; I mean and--and the thing is that it's the idea--and, and I think the best lawyers are the ones that can think, and they have--they can see the interconnectedness of ideas, and they don't--they can take the law beyond what it is. Because even in the trial court, we argue, you know, when (ph.) the law is not clear we argue social policy. I mean it's--and so forth, and so obviously, in the Court of Appeals, you know, many times that can carry the day, particularly in areas where the law is not clear. And so I just think it's a much broader, better education to have a liberal arts background, and then that technical background on the--on, on top of that. Story_ID: 75325 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you finished USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], did you have an idea what you wanted to do next? Speaker 2: Yes, I did because I, I decided I want (ph.) to try law, and the reason I did is because I, I'd gone to Chicago [Illinois] and my uncle was a lawyer and he, he had a great influence on me; he was--he appeared to be very successful, and he took me around to the courts and the Industrial Commission, as they call it down there, and he took me to steak houses and all that, and they had a nice place in the Hyde Park area, and so I thought that I would like law because it was social science based and I thought that would be much more consistent with my abilities as I saw them. And then, of course, I was interested in the civil rights and Thurgood Marshall and so forth, and the Civil Rights Movement was, was in full force at that time, so that's one of the reasons why I thought law would be a good profession for me--. Story_ID: 75326 Speaker 1: Now, your uncle was a--became a state legislator? Speaker 2: He was a state--he was a le--state legislature and a state senator; he was state senator and then the--he was in the, the, the, I guess, House of Representatives or Assembly, whatever they call it there in Chicago. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: James McLendon--James A. McLendon. And then he was a state senator representing the Hyde Park area and around that area, yeah. He was an attorney and that's--at the time that's how I knew him, as an attorney, and he represented--part of his--some of his clientele was the Chicago Transit Authority and so forth. He was in a nice suite of offices on LaSalle Street with (unclear) Nicholson and Sidney Jones and Green, and Partee and--Cecil Partee and (unclear). Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: --yeah, that, that, that was a group of lawyers that, that he was with and I, I, I enjoyed meeting him and the ambiance of the law office and so forth. Story_ID: 75327 Speaker 1: Okay, so inspired by that, you decided to go to law school? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Why did you choose Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't choose Howard at first; I went to Loyola University Law School [Loyola Law School, Los Angeles, California]. I wanted to go to Howard because two of my friends went to Howard--Hal Miller and Al Ryan--but, but, but my mother [Essie Tucker] discouraged me from going, so I went to Loyola University Law School my first year. Speaker 1: In Chicago? Speaker 2: No, here in Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Oh, here in Los Angeles. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And I--it was a very restrictive experience; it was very difficult experience. There was nothing to do, basically, except study. I mean, you know, they didn't--at that time, they had no campus, and the--it was a building--a building downtown, a commercial building downtown--a Spanish stucco building, and we just had one class, I mean you know, one class room; and I just didn't--it wasn't what I expected for a law school; it was very demanding and it just wasn't a broad experience and so I didn't do that well, and so I transferred to Howard my second year; and I would have gone to Howard my first year but I was talked out of it. Story_ID: 75328 Speaker 1: And I had some adjustment problems at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]; I mean it was, it was difficult socially adjusting to Howard, but the law school was much broader; it was a much broader experience and there were people there that influenced me greatly at Howard Law School. I, I, I went back to Loyola; after I, I went to Howard, I went back to Loyola [Loyola Law School, Los Angeles, California] and I took juris prudence and community property which we didn't have at Howard because community property is not a common law concept, it's a civil law concept coming from Mexico, so I did come back and take some courses at Loyola after I, I transferred. But at Howard, I think there--it was a number of very profound experiences; one was--okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: Before you go any further, we have to change tape. Speaker 1: Okay--. Story_ID: 74854 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were talking about Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Well, at Howard, I was influenced a lot by the fact that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] would argue some of their cases at Howard in their law school and--before the law students and professors. The professors would act like Supreme Court justices, they were--and they would ask questions and so forth, and at the end we could ask questions--the students could ask questions. Speaker 2: Let me just interject this-- I think that--isn't it true that Howard was sort of the training ground for NAACP lawyers and the ones that tackled the big civil rights cases? Speaker 1: That's true; and many of the faculty were, were involved in the Brown cases and, and other cases that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Charles Houston (ph.) is dead by (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, he was dead by then, but Thurgood Marshall came down; he wasn't the one arguing the cases 'cause he was on the Court of Appeals at that time, but he would come down to the law school occasionally. And the law school had many other professors who would argue the cases like--one of the professors, James Nabrit, argued the Bolling v. Sharpe, which was desegregated the District of Columbia, which was one of the five Brown cases, and they had the-Herb [Herbert] Reid (ph.) and so forth, and George E.C. Hayes, and people who, who were very active in the Brown cases and in the discriminatory arguments--the arguments dealing with discrimination in the south. And so civil rights was--dominated the law school, I mean, 'cause I, I don't care what you started out with, pretty soon, if you talk long enough, we'd get back to civil rights; I mean whether you're in corporations or--you know, and it, it was--it was the centerpiece of the law school. And we had top people there; we had George Johnson who was the Dean who was from California, who knew my, my uncle [Senator James A. McLendon], and he was a brilliant guy in taxation; he was on the Civil Rights Commission there, and Jim Nabrit, who became president of the university, and he was--and dean of the law school my senior year, and he had argued a number of the cases--a brilliant, brilliant guy. And a number of the professors were actively involved in the civil rights in terms of the briefs and so forth, and as a consequence, a number of the students have gone throughout the south and so forth and have done big things. Story_ID: 74855 Speaker 1: Like one of my class mates was Vernon Jordan [HM] who, who went back to Atlanta [Georgia] and, and one of the classes before mine was Doug [Douglas] Wilder [HM] who became Governor of Louisiana. The, the students have done very well; I mean the students of Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] have done very well, and in a number of different fields, and some of 'em in civil rights. Like [J.L.] Chestnut went back to Selma, Alabama and he's--he, he, he wrote a book and he talked about Wallace and the fight for seg--you know, desegregation and everything in the south, and I knew him. When he came out here I, I went to his book signing and I know him. And so it was a rich experience in the sense that it was on the cutting edge of the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 74856 Speaker 1: Being in Washington, D.C. also--you, you got some of the top people; a lot of the top people come to the, the chapel there; we had Vernon Johns who was Martin Luther King's predecessor in, in, in Montgomery, and Martin Luther King [Jr.] came many times. Speaker 2: (Unclear) stop here and talk about Vernon Johns a minute 'cause he was--what do you remember about him because he was really a--you know, the history has, I guess kinda revealed him as an interesting figure that's often on the lips, right? Speaker 1: Well, you know, I, I never heard of Vernon Johns until he spoke, and, and he was such a brilliant and provocative speaker I just wondered who this was, and I was told that had preceded Martin Luther King [Jr.] at, at, at the church [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church] there in, in Montgomery [Alabama] and--but I'd never heard of him before, and so the only thing I knew about him was I was very impressed by his, his, his talk. And subsequently, I've learned about him, you know, through television documentaries and so forth. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They did a teleplay-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --starring James Earl Jones about the life of Vernon Johns. Speaker 1: That's right, and I've seen that, so subsequently I did learn about him. Story_ID: 74857 Speaker 1: Mordecai Johnson was the president, and he was a magnificent speaker; he could speak for hours and cry and, and just--you know, he was just a spellbinding speaker. Benjamin Mays was a guy who--from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]; he was president of Morehouse at the time and he was a marvelous speaker, and he would come and we had--from Africa we had Tom Mboya who was a big labor leader and he got assassinated subsequently, and he spoke at the chapel. And William Holmes Borders and, from Atlanta [Georgia] and--we, we just had the cream of the crop, and they would come to the chapel at Howard [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Howard University, Washington, D.C.], small chapel, and they had a marvelous choir; they had a--you know, would sing the spirituals and so forth. So it was very rich in terms of the black culture--intellectual culture. Speaker 2: Did you know of a William Leo Hansberry ? Speaker 1: Yes. As a matter of fact, I knew his daughter--yeah, his, his daughter was a friend of mine, and he was the--one of the foremost experts on African, and I got some of his essays and so forth. Well, he was there living at the time, and he was a professor of history at Howard at the time; but I, I knew him through his, his daughter Gail Hansberry [HM], yeah. And so--and Sterling Brown was there, who is--and, and he, he talked about--I went to one of his lectures and he'd talk about Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey and all that; it was marvelous. And Bernard Fall, who was one of the top people on the--Vietnam, who was there, and [E.] Franklin Frazier was there but he died when I was there; he died of a heart attack when I was there, but I saw him walking on the campus and he spoke and so forth, and I read his book, Black Bourgeoisie, and so forth; he was there. Story_ID: 74858 Speaker 1: But, you know, the--and I had a number of friends from Los Angeles [California] who went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and the thing is they didn't seem to take advantage of the opportunities that Howard offered; I mean you had this unlimited treasures--treasury, and it was--it seems to me that it was like a gold mine untapped, you know, and people would go there and they'd know where all the parties were and all that kinda thing but they didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--they didn't who the (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (laughter). So that's the thing that bothered me, and you couldn't--you know. But the school had tremendous amount to offer, yeah. And so I had difficulty adjusting to it but I, I, I, I do feel it--there was probably no greater educational environment for black students, certainly in the, in the law school and undergraduate school than Howard at the time; maybe Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], maybe at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Morehouse or-Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] was quite good, too. But I can see why those universities, you know, have the reputation they have in terms of the black community 'cause a lot of them produce quite outstanding people--yeah. And some of them I knew would do well because they, you know--they were in very difficult circumstances and they were able to, through their motivation, push themselves through law school and, and pass the bar, and they've done very well because they're very highly motivated to make somethin' outta themselves--yeah. Story_ID: 74859 Speaker 1: Well, what--are there any other highlights of that experience you wanna share with us, sir? Speaker 2: Well, no--I think those are the--probably the highlights. I did know Diane Nash when I was at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. As a matter of fact, she asked me about Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and--I'd see her in the, in the, in the dining hall and so I told her about Fisk and the next thing I knew, she was at Fisk, but I really couldn't picture her as a civil rights crusader because she seemed like just a nice middle-class young lady, you know, and, and relatively quiet. And so the next thing I know and hear about her, she's leading demonstrations at--in Nashville [Tennessee], you know. I've seen her since, but I mean I could not picture her in that role. Speaker 1: And risking her life in ways that, you know, you read about it now, but to think that she would, you know--she would (unclear) the Freedom Rides and sit-ins and--she married James Bevel [HM]. Speaker 2: That's right, she married Bevel and, and they didn't--that didn't work out; she told me that didn't work out at all and she's quite bitter about that, actually. But the thing is that I just was astonished because it seemed like she was so--she had so much more toughness and everything than I had, you know, imagined 'cause she just seemed like this quiet, very nice, middle-class girl from Chicago [Illinois], actually. And that--and she was talking about her grandmother or somebody and so forth, and then next thing I hear, she's in Fisk and leading demonstrations and all that stuff (laughter). So you never know. Speaker 1: Yeah, she's writing a book now. We've been trying to interview her, but she's writing a book she says. Speaker 2: Oh, is that right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Is that right? That should be interesting, yeah. So that's one of the people I met that's very memorable. And at the time it wasn't, but what she did was, was quite memorable that--yeah. But I think that's basically the highlight of my Howard experience, I think-- Story_ID: 74860 Speaker 1: --What aspect of the law and--I mean your course of study--did you like the best? Speaker 2: Constitutional law. I like constitutional law. The guy that--the teacher challenged me; his name was Dorothy Lo--Dorsey Lane and, and he would ask me questions and act like he was cross-examining me and, and then, you know, he seemed like he was tryin' to make a fool outta me. So I would put three or four hours a night on the cases, you know, on that one course (laughter). And so by the--and so I learned a lotta constitutional law (laughter) as a conse--he gave me an A in the class; I mean he gave me a very good grade but he, he really challenged me and I, I, I felt I needed to protect myself (laughter) so--but he's one of the best professors that I've, I've, I've had, and I didn't like him at the time, but when I graduated I really appreciated his contribution to my education, and how much he really liked the students; he really cared for the students-yeah. Story_ID: 74861 Speaker 1: Okay. So, after graduation from law school, what was next? Speaker 2: Well, I went into the Army for six months, and I went to the Presidio of San Francisco [California]. I went to basic training at Fort Ord, and then I, I, I was in a signal corps group and instead of being sent to Fort Gordon, Georgia, they sent me to San Francisco. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: Let's see, this is--'60' [1960]; this is '60' [1960], I think, or '61' [1961] or somewhere in that vicinity (ph.)--'60' [1960]. And so I was in the, in the reserve for--the active reserve for six months and I was--spent basic training at Fort Ord in, in Monterey [California] and then I went to the Presidio of San Francisco. And then I came back and took the bar and I passed the bar, and I started practicing on my own in Santa Monica [California]; I, I, I'd practice in my mother's [Essie Tucker] office in Santa Monica on a--as a sole practitioner. Speaker 1: Okay; and no partners or anything? Speaker 2: No. There wasn't any black lawyers there, and I just opened up my office, and the people--you know--I had contacts because I was born and raised in Santa Monica, and the first person I got into the office was one of my friends, and--his son had gotten picked up for possession of marijuana, and that was my first case, and it went from there. Story_ID: 74862 Speaker 1: I--I, I left private practice and was hired by the city attorney of Santa Monica [California]. I had a case against the--with the city attorney's office. They fired a bus driver for hitting a guy who called him nigger, so I represented the bus driver and we got--you know, they were gonna terminate him without--so he couldn't get a job, and so they--we worked out a deal so that it wouldn't--any negative inference wouldn't show up on his record, and so after I handled that case, the city attorney indicated he liked the way I handled the case, and he said, "I wanna hire you." And he said, "Keep it quiet because they haven't voted out the money, and so if they know you're gonna get it, they may not vote the money out." So I didn't say anything, and he called me and I was hired as a city attorney. I was the first black executive in the Santa Monica--for the City of Santa Monica--first city attorney and with the first black executive for the City of Santa Monica. Story_ID: 74863 Speaker 1: A pointed atmosphere of racial, I guess, tension on some level (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, there was tension, but not a great deal--I didn't find that. There were some people who--I'd go into the, the lounge and one lady, one girl who--she'd walk out, you know, she wouldn't stay there long; she'd just walk on out. But most of the people were friendly and the staff of--his staff was quite friendly. I've, you know, been friends with him for years, and most of the people in Santa Monica [California] were friendly. The two judges in the Municipal Court were, were fine, I mean I didn't have any difficulty with the judges; they became--particularly (unclear) Bater (ph.) became a friend of mine and (unclear) Gibbons (ph.), and so I didn't have any problems. And then I was attorney for the Planning Commission and--but I thought it was a very positive experience. And then I went to the U.S. Attorney's Office in downtown Los Angeles, and the thing I like about the U.S. Attorney's Office was it didn't pay well; I mean it paid less than the City Attorney's Office, so I took a pay cut. But I like it because all--the lawyers were young lawyers but--basically in the criminal section, and there was all--and they were interested in the law and we socialized together and it was a very positive experience in, in, in many ways. And it's great contact; you make good--very good contacts because some of the lawyers have done very well; I mean they've, they've become the city attorney of the City of Los Angeles, and the present governor's appointment secretary was in the office with me, Burt Pines, and--and I have a number of friends who are still friends of mine out of the, out of the U.S. Attorney's Office. Story_ID: 74864 Speaker 1: Then I went into private practice in Santa Monica [California] again, and I was on the federal panel, also; and since I'd been in the Attorney's Office, they knew me in the--Santa Monica so I got appointed on a number of Municipal and Superior Court cases. And I was in private practice for about eight or nine years all together, and then I became a commissioner in the Superior Court. I was an as-needed referee for about three years, when I was in private practice, and they'd call me and I would act as an as-needed juvenile court referee. And then I became a Superior Court Commissioner chosen by the Superior Court judges to be a judge, you know, by stipulation. So for 22 months, I was a Superior Court commissioner, signed to juvenile, and so I opened the court in Compton; they, they open in--juvenile court in Compton; I opened the court in Compton [Los Angeles, California] and I was here in Long Beach. I started out in--my first major assignment was in Long Beach [California] here, so I got to know the lawyers, and so I was a commissioner for 22 months and then I was appointed by Jerry Brown to the Municipal Court here in Long Beach even though I lived in Santa Monica. And I was a municipal court judge for nine years; I was very active--I was active in the community and the Boy Scouts and the, and I was in the--various community organizations--Long Beach Community Hospital Foundation and so forth. Story_ID: 74865 Speaker 1: Now, you got--you were married by this time, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I was; yes, I was. Speaker 1: Can you tell us how you met your wife [Indira Tucker]? Speaker 2: Well, I, I met my wife through my mother [Essie Tucker] and her aunt, and her aunt called my mother and said that my wife was--my future wife was there, and so I went up to, to meet her, and then that's how we, we, we met was through, through our--through, through, through my mother and her Aunt Bailey. And so she was at Reed at the time, Reed College in [Portland] Oregon, and so I didn't get to see her that much except when she came down here for Christmas and so forth, and that's how we, we got to know each other, actually. But it's through our, our families, basically. Speaker 1: Just like in the old country (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah; yeah, that's right, yeah, yeah. And so that's pretty much it--yeah. And I don't think we knew each other that long either; I mean it wasn't a long time, but--because she wasn't down here that much, but--and then we corresponded; when she went back home we corresponded, you know. And so that's basically it. Speaker 1: So when did you get married? Speaker 2: Let me see, we've been married thirty-seven years, so-- Speaker 1: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: May 29, 1965 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, May 29th, '65' [1965], yeah. It's been thirty-seven years ago, yeah; so it's been a while. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's see--so, do you have children? Speaker 2: Yes, we have a daughter, Angelique (ph.), who's twenty-five and she's married now; she just married this year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Story_ID: 74866 Speaker 1: So you were active in civic activities? Speaker 2: Yes, I was; I was very active in civic activities--in Long Beach Chamber of Commerce and all that kinda thing. And I was presiding judge of the municipal court here four different times (unclear) nine years, and so I was very active in, in, in the, in the municipal court. Speaker 1: Yeah, well were you able to use your position to help the civil rights activists here? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't really come in contact with the civil rights activists here in that sense. Basically, the municipal court is a court where you have a lotta drunk driving cases, and it's misdemeanors except for the felony prelims; and they did have--and I don't remember any real civil rights incidences here at Long Beach [California] that came to the court when I was on the court. At one time, we had three black judges out of seven just here in Long Beach--yeah. And there was some racism here, I mean the--some of the older judges weren't ready for black judges and all that, so I got challenged when I was here by two prosecutors--one that didn't practice in my court, and the other one who was a city prosecutor; and I won the election, obviously, else I wouldn't be here. And the bar supported me very strongly and--the paper and the bar and so forth supported me very strongly and it was a racist campaign and so forth 'cause they wouldn't put anything in writing but they would say, "Let's get the nigger off the bench," and all that stuff. And the police supported him, although the police chief supported me, and so it was, it was a dirty campaign; it was a rough campaign--yeah. But I think that law--I think it embarrassed Long Beach [California]; I think the campaign embarrassed Long Beach because we, we were known as an international city and we didn't want the image of somebody who's a, a racist being a judge here, you know, who has racist kind of a, you know, tendencies, you know, where it splits the community--as a judge in the city, so I got a lot of support of the, the people who run the city, yeah. Story_ID: 74867 Speaker 1: Tell me about some your experiences in the juvenile court. Speaker 2: Well, a juvenile court is, is my passion; I mean this is what I like better than anything, and I started out in--as a matter of fact, one of the most interesting experiences I had was when I was in municipal court, which is not where the juvenile court is; it's in superior court. It's been forever almost in superior court. I had all the, the parents' cases brought to my court; there's a--education code violation against the parents who don't send their kids to, to school, or don't send 'em enough, and so I--the, the cases were falling through the cracks so I asked for all the cases in the Long Beach Unified School District to be brought to my court and I handle 'em on Friday. And after three and a-half years, we had about eighty percent success rate. So I just had the people come back and come back until they got tired of coming back to court. I only fined about one or two people when--the remedy for not going to school is a fine; I only fined about two people--one or two people out of the whole three and a-half years; but just by the hassle of having to come to court, they would rather send their kids to school at all cost rather than keep coming back to court. And then if they didn't come and they forgot, then their warrant would issue for their arrest and all that, so as a consequence, we had about eighty percent success rate. The thing is most of those kids were younger kids, and the parents have more control over the younger kids. Now, when the kids get juvenile court age--we're talking about basically thirteen, fourteen, fifteen and over, up to seventeen, they're much more independent and the parents don't have the control over 'em. As a consequence, it's much more difficult to be successful with these, these, these young people when they reach juvenile court age. Story_ID: 74868 Speaker 1: I've had all kinds of cases in juvenile--I've had murder cases. Last year, I had a solicitation for murder over the Internet for a young girl. I've had rapes and, and it's, it's--and we have all kinds of cases--a surprising number of sex cases, and the biggest problem is the resources because we're getting more and more mentally ill kids. This crack, and all that kinda thing, has created a lot of problems. When I was in dependency court, where you're dealing with neglected and abused kids, eighty percent of the cases are related to drug abuse, and a lotta the kids, when they reach the school age, they, they have a lot of problems in terms of attention deficit disorder and so forth, and nervous conditions and so forth. And many times, they graduate from the dependency court which is against the--focus against the parents' neglect and abuse--to the delinquency court where we pros--where they're prosecuted as minors who commit crimes, and then the judges who go the adult court from juvenile they said they see the same kids going to the adult court. So, you know, it's a gradual--it's a graduation process from the neglected and abused kids to delinquent kids to, to adults who commit these crimes. But, you know, it's pretty easy to gage when the kids are getting into trouble because they stop going to school or they, they're tardy. Going to school and school achievement is a, is a major factor in, in, in criminality because you can tell--when they don't--when they stop going to school and so forth, and--there's gonna be a problem. Story_ID: 74869 Speaker 1: The gangs are a problem here in Long Beach [California] and the south district where I am now is--includes Wilmington and goes on, San Pedro Wilmington, and they have major gang problems here and so--I know last year and this year, we had--I had eight children killed by drive-by shootings--seven or eight killed by drive-by shootings. And one, one of the last young ladies I had killed, she was killed running away from the police officer; she was trying to escape from the police officers and--she had an accident and she was killed, and this was a girl I tried to work with for, for, you know, a long time 'cause she a lot of problems. We have a lot of gang-related problems here in this area; Long Beach is known as a Crip area. And then we have Hispanic gangs, the Longos, and, and we have Asian gangs because we have a lot of Cambodians and so forth here in Long Beach, the largest Cambodian community outside of Cambodia, so we have the Asian gangs and the black gangs and the Hispanic gangs. And so it, it can be pretty tough for young people. And there's tension in the schools; some of the schools have quite a bit of tension and the--yeah. Speaker 2: Is most of the conflict over territory, or is it over drug deals? Speaker 1: You know, I'm not sure; I, I'm not sure because I've heard some of the killings are, are out of the county jail (unclear) and that is they--there's, there's a connection between the gang people in the county jails and the young people outside. But most of the shootings I've had weren't--they didn't appear to involve drugs or anything; I mean I'm not actually certain what the killings were, but they--they'd have, you know, the gang talk and the--"Where you from?" and all that kinda stuff, and then the next thing you know, there'd be some shootings. And I'm not exactly certain what the motivation for the shooting was and, and some of them have been quite--and they've been very young kids; I mean some of them have been very young--fourteen and fifteen year-old involved in the gang-related shootings. And so I'm not sure what the motivation was. Speaker 2: We're gonna stop here and change the tape. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 74870 Speaker 1: What are some of the ways that you deal with--you've dealt with problems in juvenile court? Speaker 2: Well, my philosophy is education is critical. And I tell the juveniles that education is their job and it's a priority and, and the reason I tell 'em that is because sometime the parents don't make it a priority; I mean they want them to work or whatever--bring some money in, and I fell that I need to protect the minors against the parents sometimes so that they'll focus on what's important to keep them outta juvenile hall. So I tell the parents they won't be able to work if they're in juvenile hall, and they'll be in juvenile hall unless they go to school. I tell the juveniles when they--when they plead in my court, and I--and they're--and they're gonna be placed on probation, "There's a zero tolerance for not going to school in this court," and that, "If you don't go to school, you'll be locked up in juvenile hall;" I mean, and so I just tell 'em that at the, at the outset. I have a lotta progress reports, and I have a progress report--six weeks, two months or three months, depending on how shaky I think the kid is. The probation officer is directed to give me the grades of the--to, to send in for the progress report--the grades of the minor. I tell the minor he needs to--in order to get off probation, he needs a C in every class because some of these young people are getting F's and D's, and so it sounds like a major hurdle for them to get C's. I tell 'em if they need some help, we have--in--Long Beach Unified School District has a tutoring service, so that can get individual tutors. And I tell--I get the parents involved and they have to--and I tell the parents I want them to study at least two hours a day and I want them to turn the television off and study two hours a day. So when they come back to court in three months or two months, or whatever, I have their grades in front of me and so we have a little discussion about what their grades and should get anything less than a C, I mean they, they hear about it. And, and, and in large measure, a lotta the minors do improve; now, they may not make all C's but--or better, but they do improve their academic performance--a significant percentage of 'em. What I wanna convey is I'm expecting a lot of 'em because some of the teachers, I don't think, expect much of 'em, and there's a tendency to put a lot of these young people in special education and, and, and they don't expect much in terms of their, their grades-- Story_ID: 74871 Speaker 1: Now, I have a few minors in independent study, but when I first got here five years ago, just about five years ago, a lotta the minors in--before the--my court were in independent study, and I banned that; I just told 'em they have to get outta the independent study, and I, I had the superintendent of schools and so forth come over here, who was a friend of mine, and I told him that we can't have all these kids dropping out of independent study because some of them couldn't barely read and write; the second thing is they weren't staying in school, and I told 'em if they didn't stay--I told the superintendent and his people that if they don't stay in school in this court, they get locked up. So, as a consequence, they started putting 'em in other programs other than independent study; now, I don't how good they are, but at least they're going to school every day. And I have a selected number of 'em on independent study where they need to catch up but it's, but it's of limited duration. I don't want them being in independent study for a number of years. One of the problems was it was only two hours a week, so they could take their little books and so forth and get their lessons and go two hours a week and talk to somebody, and they could be outta school and so forth, you know, after that, and they're supposed to bring their lessons--plans back, you know, the--the next week, and they got certain--you know, you got certain credits. And there was a lot of grade inflation, and, and, and, and they--they hadn't been tested for whether they were competitive students, and so what my focus is on education, almost in--totally. Now, I will send 'em to camp or some youth authority or suitable placement; I'll remove 'em from the community or put 'em on probation on condition they do 45 days in juvenile hall or whatever, but the--but what I'm interested in is their education. Now, once I punish them, I focus on, on their achievement--see, because you can't punish everybody, you know; you can't somebody forever. And so I focus on what they achieve and as a consequence, a number of them will go to college, and they go get their GED's or high school diploma and they'll go to college. And one of the ways I keep them--I, I push them to go to college or go to--to get their GED's is that they don't get off probation when they're eighteen. I've got--in extreme, I've got some almost twenty-one on probation; I had one today that's twenty. And so I'll keep 'em on probation 'til they get their high school diploma or GED unless they--unless it's not reasonable; I mean they're, they're homeless or they, you know, they're not capable of doing it, I mean, but--and--but for the vast majority, it's motivation; they, they, they need to be motivated to, to get off probation, which is their motivation, and study. But once they achieve something, many of 'em on their own will, will tell me they're, they're gonna enroll in city college, and we have--I have a number of 'em enrolled in city college and that's--once they see they can, they can achieve, they're interested in going to city college and getting their, their, you know, higher education. Story_ID: 74872 Speaker 1: Do you keep statistics on the-- Speaker 2: No, I don't. No, I don't; but at certain times, I have a significant number of 'em bring in their, their, their high school diplomas on a--and I wanna see them, you know. Sometime I'll put 'em on non-appearance, but a lotta times I wanna--did they bring in their high school diploma and they're very proud to, you know, to show me their high school diploma and I look at it and congratulate 'em and all that. I ask 'em--I take time to talk to 'em and what they're gonna do, and then some of 'em wanna go in the military and a lot of 'em wanna go to college and by that--most of 'em mean Long Beach City College [Long Beach, California] or, or Compton, or one of the local city colleges. Some of 'em go to four-year colleges, but I think they would have gone to four-year colleges anyway 'cause some--you know, some of them are--I've had going to California State University at Santa Barbara [Santa Barbara, California], and San Diego State [University, San Diego, California], and California State Dominguez Hills [Carson, California]. But, looking at their background, I think they would have gone anyway. But a lotta the kids that go to city college, I don't think some of them would have gone if they weren't given, you know, a motivation of not getting off probation. And I mean the probation department doesn't really care for that too much because it's a lotta work to, to monitor the kids after they reach--I, I don't require intensive moti--monitoring, but I, I wanna know why--they have to come in and show me that--what they're doing and, and they, they tell me they're taking the GED test and studying for it and so forth and I, I wanna know what they're doing. And so education has been the engine that drives the--my court, far as juveniles are concerned. Story_ID: 74873 Speaker 1: What's the case you're most proudest--I mean that you're most proud of having been a part of, and what was the toughest one? Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't know if there's one, but when they go to college I'm, I'm proud of that; I'm really proud of them going to college. And the, the toughest ones have to do with their mental problems and lack of resources to deal with their mental problems, and that's the toughest because we have no place to, to put them that's satisfactory, and we only have one close placement--the placement is where they get, you know, therapy and so forth; there's only one close in the county, at Dorothy Kirby [Center]. They only have a hundred beds, and they don't like me to order kids in there but I do 'cause I can; and so I'll order them in there and it's a lock placement. Most of the placements are open and they can take off if they want to. And we have narcotic placements like Phoenix House and so forth. We have a camp program--it's a good program, but they don't really--they're not equipped to deal with drug problems which is a major part of their problem; they, they do something but not enough for people who have significant drug problems. And one of the problems is we send people to camp and there's a tremendous recidivism because they go to camp, and many of 'em do quite well and they're quite intelligent, and they come back to the same community where they're having all the problems and so as a consequence, when they get all that freedom again, and they do very well in structure, when they get back in the community with the gangs and their friends and their negative peers, I mean they're back in court, you know, again, I mean, violating their probation. And so it's somewhat of a revolving door, you know, and so that's--it seems to be one of the weaknesses in the system and, and, and the probation supervision is not so intensive as to keep these kids in line. They have a lot of talk--programs, but when it comes to reality, they don't really monitor these kids enough to keep them out if they can. Story_ID: 74874 Speaker 1: And particularly problematic kids--the ones that are gang members; I mean they are really a problem, but you know, you try to, you know, get them outta the gang. The main--the best way is for them to move--to get their parents to move, and the parents, to me, are the key to a lot of the problems because it seems to me, if the parents are on the case, that there's a much greater chance of the young person doing well, and eventually--they may have some problems to go through, but eventually they seem to do better if the parents are on top of the situation and show interest. So, as a consequence, I have the parents going to school and talking with the teachers and seeing how their kids are doing. If it's a young person who's really behind academically, I'll order community service, and I'll order that the community service be done by the parents keeping a log, and if the young person studies one hour, they'll put that hour down and they'll bring the log to me back in court. So If I order 125 of community service and--then they'll bring back a log showing me that they've done 125 hours of studying, you know, and so I'll accept that log as a community service. And sometime that brings the grades up dramatically because the--but I think the most important thing is it involves the parent in the child's education, and so I think that's the big thing. And so parents, I think, are critical in the whole process of getting the child in difficulty 'cause many of the parents are not on top of the situation; they have to work, and basically, the kids are not being monitored because both parents have to work to make ends meet, and the kids are basically on their own. Story_ID: 74875 Speaker 1: And so that's why I think these after-school programs are so important. But I think most of the young people wanna do well; they, they, they wanna do well. And the peer group is the major deterrent for some of the kids; I mean they call 'em nerds and all that kinda stuff and try to keep them from achieving. If you get them away from the peer group or--I can keep them in school because the peer group can't--has difficulty if the kid is gonna go into custody when they come into court. So, even though they wanna ditch school, if they know what (ph.) they're gonna come into court and be locked up, that's pretty much a counter to the peer group as far as keeping 'em in school. Now, I mean getting them to study and, and so forth it could still be a problem. Story_ID: 74876 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about the John Langston Bar--is this the John Mercer Langston Bar Association? Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, it was named after John Langston, who was a former dean of the Howard Law School [Washington, D.C.], and Congressman from Ohio, and so forth, and it's a, it's a bar association--used to be the Blackstone Bar Association before it was the Langston and it's, it's the, it's the, it's the black law--bar association in Los Angeles County, and it's--became--it was basically a social club for many years; I mean that is--the lawyers would get together, and it was a good way to socialize; I mean, you know, they would be--most of the lawyers, when I started, were sole practitioners. And, you know, they needed socialization, so they would go to the Langston and they'd drink and talk and, and, and--it was a social club because they didn't want too much business because they'd been doing business and, and being--you know, and having difficulty with the judges and so forth; they wanted a way of kind of un--you know, unwind. And so the younger members, later on, wanted a more formal bar association, so we affiliated with the LA [Los Angeles] County Bar--became a part of the LA County Bar, an--you know--affiliate organization. We, we became much more organized with the incorporation papers, and the meetings became much more of the bar--business bar association. So when I--I was president of the Langston for two different years, and I was program chairman for five years. And so what I would try to do is get--the top people would come in and talk to the Langston--what I wanted was basically them to have a broad education by just going to the Langston because many of 'em didn't go to other bar associations, and everybody knew each other because we--you know, we socialized together. And economically, it became advantageous because some of the judges would come and talk to us and then they would point some of the lawyers to cases, you know, who were members of the bar association; they'd get to know them, and so it was--became economically advantageous to be a member of the, the, the, the, of the bar association. It's a pretty good sized organization now, and it's much more formal now, particularly when you're dealing with their--the installation dinner and some of the meetings. When I was president of the Langston, we had a major program in criminal law and in entertainment law, and we had meetings with the Mexican-Americ--we had a picnic with the Mexican-American lawyers, and we had monthly meetings, and some of them were in restaurants and others were in homes and so forth. But it was a means of communicating with other black lawyers and getting support, and when the riots came, well they--we organized--you know--organized lawyers to defend people in court and so forth, and it has a social--a social edge, you know. It deals with social problems and takes position on social problems, and it also recommends people for appointment to various judgeships and so forth. And I was recommended by Langston, among others, for appointment to the bench and as--the LA County Bar recommended me in the Santa Monica Bar. So I was very active in the Bar, so that was one of my strengths in terms of getting appointed to the bench was--because I was president of the Langston Bar Association when I was appointed a commissioner in superior court and subsequently, I'm sure it played a role in my being appointed to the Long Beach Municipal Court. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the bar basically is, is camaraderie and, and professional enhancement, and it's changed over the years to be much more of a professional organization. Story_ID: 74877 Speaker 1: Now, you initiated the History of the Black Lawyers of Los Angeles? Speaker 2: Yes, that's through the [John Mercer] Langston Bar Association. What that basically was was getting somebody to interview various legal personalities and--just like you're doing here. And--but it wasn't videoed; it was just, you know, interviewing 'em and keeping the, the record of their, their interview; and some of the personalities like Earl Brody, and so forth, we, we interviewed. And so what I tried to do was get volunteers to do it; it didn't work, so I, I, I got somebody who was, who was executive director of the Legal Aid Foundation of Los Angeles who--I was very active in the Legal Aid Foundation, and she interviewed a number of personalities and, and we recorded that and, and basically, that's what that was. Yeah, it was what you're doing right here; it was interviewing and recording, you know, for, for history, yeah. Story_ID: 74878 Speaker 1: Now, one of the--was Johnnie Cochran a part of this when he was in Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: No, he wasn't; no, he wasn't. I know Johnnie Cochran but, but he wasn't a part of that, yeah. He was active in the--he was a part of the [John Mercer] Langston Bar Association but he wasn't real active in the, in the bar association, yeah--yeah. He came to some of the meetings, but he wasn't one--yeah. Speaker 1: Was there much discussion--well, I guess there had to be in the black bar asso--in the Langston Bar Association about the OJ Simpson case. Speaker 2: I'm sure there was, but I didn't go to the meetings at that time. I was an active member of the Inns of Court here in Long Beach [California], and we had a discussion of it and, and the reason we did was--the Inns of Court are basically concerned with ethics of lawyers, and they were concerned about the ethics of some of the things that went on in the OJ Simpson case, and so the question is what we were gonna do about it, you know; not about that particular case, but about legal ethics because some of the things that went on, and it was felt, were not consistent with legal ethics--yeah. Speaker 1: Is there anything in particular you could cite right now? Speaker 2: Well, I, I can't remember the details now and I, I don't remember; the discussion was quite extensive, I remember, but I can't remember anything specific at this time; I mean it's hard for me to jut recall if off the top of my head, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but it was a number of things, not just one. Speaker 2: But you estab--helped establish a black lawyers' reference service, too. Speaker 1: Yes. Well, my wife [Indira Tucker] was active--actually, the one that really established it. I--yeah, I was president at Langston, but she's the one that did all the work--yeah. And that was done with a, a, a person (ph.) who became a judge--Boges (ph.)--Charles Boges was active in that, and--for Langston, and--but I, I was just president but she did all the work on that. Story_ID: 74879 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: Well, it seems to me that we need to become mentally tough in terms of being competitive. I, I think--I'm for affirmative action and all that, but I do think that the dialogue has to be more focused on being competitive because I think that eventually, people are gonna have to be judged on what they can do, and it seems to me that the leadership in the black community has to, to make it clear that you need all the education and skills you can get to be competitive with other people, and that if, if you're not competitive, you're not gonna be in the game; and it, it's, it's, it's getting pretty much that way now because affirmative action is in disfavor to some extent but, you know, I think we're still caught by that concept. I think it's been a useful concept in terms of getting some of the injustices and deficits in balance, but I, I think for a young person to get too caught up into that, I think, is a disservice to them because I think they're gonna have to compete with other people in the community on an--on a individual basis according to what they can do and--because people pay people basically for what they can do, and I think it's a disservice to the young person to think that there's gonna be some kind of special consideration because they're, they're handicapped. And so I tell the young people they, they need to be competitive and, and I think that's the major weakness, I think, in a lot of the dialogue; the leadership is, is not emphasizing that the young people need to be competitive with other people on the basis of what they can do and not what--who they are. And so I think that's one of the, the weak points. Story_ID: 74880 Speaker 1: I do think that a lot of the black males seem to be lost; it seems to me they're lost in the criminal justice system, and it seems to me there's gonna have to be some emphasis on discipline in terms of not exactly how to--I'm not exactly sure how to approach it, but, you know, I think there's gonna have to be some restraint in terms of having young children, not being able to support them, and I think there's gonna have to be some discipline in terms of getting jobs and, and not being--there has to be some way of getting jobs and skills, and I'm not sure exactly; maybe we, we need some kind of manpower--broad manpower program. The Army, it seems to me, would be a good vehicle, but it takes more education skills to get in the Army. And it seems to me a lotta these young people are lost in the high school system which is not educating them to, to do anything; and they can't read and write, and they don't have any skills to make a living. And they, they drop out, they have negative self-concept, and I think they, they're, they're creating a major problem; it's not just black kids, it's just Hispanics and the poor whites, and so forth. And they in here without a clue of, you know, what is required of 'em to make things (unclear) economically. They're--basically, I think they know they're economically irrelevant; they know that, and as a consequence, many of 'em will act out and get into criminality, and so I think that's one of the major areas, is to be able to, to increase the discipline necessary for these kids to, to get into the job market and to--and not take a laissez faire attitude concerning, you know, creating families of which they can't support; I mean that's a--those are two major things that I think is, is necessary. Story_ID: 74881 Speaker 1: I think we have a major gap between the educated and uneducated, and I think the gap is basically in the, in the areas of economic deprivation where there's poor schools, and drugs and gangs, and then on the other hand, I think we have a, a, a large number of blacks who are--have more opportunity, more education, and more skills than ever, and they're fitting into the society and they're competitive. And, and then we have people who are not fitting in the society who are uncompetitive who are on drugs or in gangs, and they're being very adversely affected by the criminal justice system. I mean they're getting put in custody and locked up in great numbers in the--in California, and so there's that gap; and so we need to be able to bridge that gap. And it seems to me, historically, when I was a young person, we had more black role models that they, they knew because the black community was basically in a few parts of town, and so all the blacks lived pretty much in the same areas in Santa Monica [California], and so I think there was more role modeling, and not necessary conscious, but just by being in close proximity; whereas now, I think more affluent blacks live all over the--Long Beach [California] and all over the county, and they live in Beverly Hills [California], and so forth, and they're not known by the people who are disadvantaged; I mean they don't have a chance to see them and relate to them--maybe in magazines and so forth, but I think most of the people in the magazines are either athletes or are entertainers. Story_ID: 74882 Speaker 1: And I think there's a false sense of opportunity in terms of sports because very few people can be professional sports--make their living that way, and I think there's tremendous energy and effort geared toward relatively few opportunities; I mean I don't know how many professional athletes there are, but when you consider there's over 30 million blacks and, and there's not--there's insignificant number of opportunities in sports. Story_ID: 74397 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: We were talking about athletes and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --giving me an example of--at Long Beach City College [Long Beach, California] (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Well, this young person graduated from high school; he committed a crime, so I gave him a break and I let him go back to Arkansas, Pine Buff, well, he didn't like it back there. He came back to Long Beach; he enrolled in Long Beach City College and he, he, he, he, he brought his curriculum to me, and it was all these nonsense courses. I mean the whole curriculum he was taking at Long Beach was, you know, sports stuff that didn't seem to, to have any substantive value, so I told him that he couldn't do that, he couldn't--and I, I guess the only reason he got all that was to make him eligible for, for football and--but it couldn't lead to any kinda degree or anything. And so I think there's many athletes--they put everything on sports; they don't get an education, they don't graduate from college, and they don't make it in the pros for one reason or another; they get injured or they're not good enough, or whatever, and, and then they've got all this expectation with, with, with no reality of making a decent living, and I think it, it has to have a tremendously negative psychological impact on these, these young people because the best of their lives is behind them, and so I think it's really a disservice. So I think--I, I know Long Beach State [Long Beach, California], for--I don't know, it's been quite a while ago, I saw some survey of ten years, they only had four basketball players, out of all the basketball players they had, to get their college degree, you know. And, and so there has to be a better way of treating these young people and, and, and lecturing 'em, and guiding 'em to--in terms of motivating them to get some education so that if they get injured or they don't make it in the pros, they have something to fall back on. And so, you know, I don't think you can curtail their dreams because they have these dreams and, and, you know, it's marvelous to be an outstanding basketball player or football player or whatever, but I do think there needs to be some perspective at some--people who have their best interests at heart that will give them some sense of, of having some economic base to fall back on. Story_ID: 74398 Speaker 1: Sir, you're approaching retirement age, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's basically in the, the young people's lives that I've motivated, and I think I'm gonna be defined by what I do in juvenile court. I've done civil and criminal, and other things while I've been a judge, but I think it's gonna be defined basically by what I've done in juvenile court. I think the young people I've motivated to change their lives, to get high school diplomas and GED's, to stay in school, and to turn their lives around, I think that's basically gonna be my, my legacy--yeah--overall. Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Essie Tucker] had a chance to see you become successful-- Speaker 2: (NODDING HIS HEAD, YES). I was Superior Court Judge when she died. Speaker 1: Okay. I suppose she was very proud. Speaker 2: Yes, she seemed to be very--very proud of me, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 74399 Speaker 1: And this question is a little different from the legacy one, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I think as somebody who cared about young people and who cares about people and tries to do the best they can, and is passionate about education and try to improve themselves and try to guide other people to make the most outta their lives. And that's basically what I wanna be remembered as--yeah. Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much; it's been a pleasure to talk with you. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, thank you; I've enjoyed it. Okay. Story_ID: 74400 Speaker 1: So now we do the photos, and you just-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: --yourself as Judge Marcus O. Tucker (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Okay, sure. Speaker 1: --and we use what you say as a caption for the photo. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead; we're ready to start--we're rolling. Speaker 2: All right. This photograph is when I was in high school; it's out of my high school annual. I graduated from University High School [Los Angeles, California] in 1952--the summer class, the Parisians (ph.), and that's the photograph that is in the, in my high school graduation annual. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's excellent; next photo, Larry? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. This is when I was playing football for the University High School Warriors. I was a left tackle, and this was before the season; shows me crouching down to defend myself against other opposing linemen, and I think this was my first year in the--no, this was my last year in varsity in 1952. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Very good; next? Speaker 1: This photograph was when I was on the Long Beach Municipal Court; I was on the municipal court nine years, and this was taken toward the end of my stay on the municipal court because we have three black judges--Judge Bill Beverly and Judge William Dunn, and we have a woman, Judge Elvira Austin; and so I can tell that this is toward the end of my stay; I'd say the last three years of my stay on the municipal court in Long Beach. And we had seven judges and three black judges, and we had--it also includes municipal court commissioners--two municipal court commissioners. Okay? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Perfect; next? Speaker 1: This was when I was sworn in as commissioner of the Superior Court in April of 19--April the 15th of 1974, and I'm being sworn in by Presiding Judge of the Superior Court, Judge Alfred McCourtney. I'm taking the oath, and my wife and my mother and daughter were there, also; and I'm being sworn in in his chambers. Speaker 2: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: Not in 1974; you didn't have a daughter. Speaker 1: No, that's right (unclear); yeah, okay, that's true--okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Very good; next? Speaker 1: This is in my chambers, and I'm not certain what chambers these are, but it looks like probably municipal court chambers. I was probably on the Municipal Court in Long Beach at that time, and--in the Long Beach Courthouse, and looking at a legal text--1978. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself in my little navy suit, and my mother, Mrs. Essie Tucker, and my father Marcus Tucker [Sr.], Dr. Tucker, and I guess I was around 8 to 10 years old at that time, and I remember wearing that navy suit, and I think I was about 8 years old--yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and my wife [Indira Tucker]; this was taken at our--my mother's home at our wedding, April the 29th of 19--May the 29th of 1965, and we're taking a photograph in the dining room of, of my mother's house. And this is just after we've gotten married. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: I wasn't so beaten down then (laughter). This is a photograph of my grandfather; and I only saw my, my grandfather [Toombs McLendon] once, and I was about ten years old and I saw him down in Georgia, and this is my grandfather as a younger man. And he was a very formidable figure; he wasn't well-educated but he was a very smart, shrewd individual. And that's him, I believe, in his home in Washington, Georgia. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Thank you; next? Speaker 1: This is a photo of my mother, Essie L. Tucker, and she looks like she was posing for a picture; she may have been posing for a picture in terms of her duties as President of National Auxiliary to the Medical Association, or a picture of her being Ambassador (ph.) to the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] or some official position that she's--she was--participated in. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next? Good photos. Speaker 1: This is a photograph at the Children's Court, and in the picture are Marian Wright Edelman who was--who's head of the Children's Defense Fund. Edelman [HM], who's--who is a supervisor of the LA [Los Angeles] County Supervisor who was--who's building the Children's Court is named after--it's Edelman's Children's Court. This is the--Emily Stevens, who was a Supervising Judge of the Dependency Court, myself as Presiding Judge of the Juvenile Court. Bob Milano is Presiding Judge of the Superior Court, and Edelman's chief of--Justice Deputy, and I, I forget her name but she was very active in the children's court and she was his deputy, justice deputy, who interacted with us at the children's court. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And do we know a year for this? Speaker 1: This was-- Speaker 2: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: Has to be 1993. Speaker 1: Ninety-Three [1993], yeah; yeah, this was in 1993. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a photograph with President Bill Clinton and my daughter. My daughter went back to the, the celebration, or the, the--where General Benjamin Davis got his fourth star, and she represented the family where President Clinton was there to give Benjamin Davis his fourth star, and she got a picture with the president. And what year was that, Indira? Speaker 2: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: December 9th, 1998. Speaker 1: December 9th, 1998? Yeah, 1998. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 1: This is a picture with my wife and my daughter, and my daughter is, is being part of a--this picture is part of a, a cotillion that is--the Links (ph.) Cotillion, and she was a cotillionette (ph.), and--what year was that? Speaker 2: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: November 27th, 1993. Speaker 1: November the 27th, 1993, and that's a picture showing her in her, her gown and me in my tux, and my wife in her formal attire for, for the celebration of the Cotillion. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 1: Are you in this? Speaker 2: Yes, I am. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Can't tell (laughter)? Speaker 1: I didn't see you. Speaker 2: You can't see the black guy, yeah? Okay, I'm, I'm, I'm here--yeah, yeah. This is a--I don't know the date, but this is a picture of former United States attorneys, and we--that were in the office at a certain time; it was in 1963 to 1965. Speaker 1: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: No, '65' [1965] to '67' [1967]. Speaker 2: Sixty-Five [1965] to '67' [1967], and this is a picture of those assistant United States attorneys who were in the office at that time, and this was taking at that--taken at the LA Athletic Club in, in--yeah, that's fine--in Los Angeles, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Good, next? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is me as a, as a young child, a very young--an infant, and that's all I can tell you about the photograph. I don't remember when it was taken, and--but I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: (Simultaneous)--About 1936, '37' [1937]. Speaker 1: Yeah, and-- Speaker 2: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: (Unclear) about 2 and 3. Speaker 1: Yeah, I wasn't aware of myself at that time. Speaker 2: About 2 years? I wonder, now you're (unclear). Speaker 1: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: I would say between 2 and 3 years-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: Nineteen Thirty-Six [1936], 1937, something like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: INDIRA HALE TUCKER: Probably '36' [1936]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Good, next? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's it, I believe; I don't think there's any more. Speaker 1: Okay, okay...