 Story_ID: 564415 Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones, I'm the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea is the videographer and Leslie Brown is the observer. Today is October 25th, 2007. Would you please state and spell your name? Speaker 2: My name is Dennis Leon Terry [HistoryMaker Dennis Terry], D-E-N-N-I-S, L-E-O-N, T-R- T-E-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: Will you tell me your date of birth and location of your birth? Speaker 2: October the 26th, 1944 and I was born in Spring- Smithfield, North Carolina. Speaker 1: And where are we located today during this interview? Speaker 2: We're located at 1125 Grand Concourse in the borough of the Bronx in the City of New York [New York]. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm retired now and I consult on a part-time basis. Story_ID: 564416 Speaker 1: So I'm going to start off by asking you five People magazine-ish type questions. I'll just ask the question and you just answer with whatever comes to mind. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I like pork chops, (laughter) baked pork chops. Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I prefer the spring. Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: And what's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like the seaside; I think it would be the Caribbean preferably because the water is so blue and pristine. Northeast water, ocean water is rather gray and I can't see my feet so I'd like to listen to that not get in it. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you'd be willing to share with us? Speaker 2: I--not offhand, I guess it's a situational thing, I have many of them. It's just sayings of my mother [Daisy Smith Williams], my [maternal] grandmother [Julia Smith Jones], elders in the family, and I will reflect them and spout them out depending on the circumstance. So I, I can't say I have a favorite one. Story_ID: 564417 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother. What's your mother's name and where was she born? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Daisy [Daisy Smith Williams], her maiden name is Smith and she was born in Smithfield, North Carolina also. Speaker 1: Do you know any information about her background and how she grew up? Did she ever tell you any stories? Speaker 2: Well she did. She grew up with her sister, her cousin. Her sister, Polly [Polly Smith Parker], her cousin, Dorothy Jean [Dorothy Corbin], her mother, Julia [Julia Smith Jones], and her grandfather, Jacob [Jacob Smith], lived together in Smithfield and at times there was a--her Aunt Roscie [Roscie Smith] was there from time to time. She had a normal childhood that was in the Depression [Great Depression], but the family was close, very close and from all accounts she had a lot of fun. My grandmother worked away from home during the week, live in and my grandfather apparently raised or spent a lot of time with the children and they were--they spoke so lovingly of him, Papa Jake. He died the day I was born by the way so the family always would count his absence with my birthday. Speaker 1: Do you know--can we talk a little bit about Papa Jacob? Do you know where he was from and do you have any anecdotes or a sense what he did for a living or how he was raised? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I did look up some information in the census. He was born in Johnston County [North Carolina], but we don't have a lot of information about him. Otherwise, apparently pictures were not something people took a lot of in my family and my mother didn't have a lot of the information because she was sixteen or so when, when he died. So that's not something we've been able to record. Speaker 1: And what about your great-grandmother [Polly Raynor Smith]? Do you know her name or--? Speaker 2: I, not on my--no I don't, not offhand. I'm trying to think, I know I'd done some research on my family but it's rather broad on both sides of them, so the ones that stick to mind just go back maybe one generation. Doesn't ho- I'd have to look at the paper and recant that for you which I don't have at the moment. Story_ID: 564418 Speaker 1: So what about your [maternal] grandmother, Julia [Julia Smith Jones]? Speaker 2: Well, a very special lady, very special lady. She was a stalwart in the family's history. She worked and apparently was the sole supporter of the household during the '30s [1930s] and Papa Jake [Terry's maternal great-grandfather, Jacob Smith] attended to the children and she did housework and she was a cook. She was in my life pretty much most of it, most of it. So I loved her, she was a Smith but she was related to the Raynors, and that we know much about that family because we have Raynor family reunions every two years. There's a town called Raynor Town [North Carolina] named after members of the family, and there's a church, and the family burial plot, which is now a part of the North Carolina historical registry. So we've done some--others in the family have done some research on the Raynors. But my Grandmother Julia was just a loving and wonderful woman along with her daughter, my mother [Daisy Smith Williams]. Just, just great people (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said your grandmother was a Smith, that's her married name? So her maiden name was Raynor? Speaker 2: Her, her--she's related to the Raynors because of her--but that was--her maiden name was Smith because Papa Jacob Smith had married a Raynor [Polly Raynor Smith]. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: So the family reunions around Melissie Raynor [Terry's maternal great-great-grandmother] as opposed to having found the members in Grandpa Jake's lineage so the work remains to be done there. Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of how many people are there in that burial plot? Speaker 2: Well, I walked through a part of it, it may be--it's over a hundred, it's over a hundred there so, the last burial that I recall was in 1956, and I was at that. I don't know if there are others subsequent to that but that was pretty much near the end of its use. Speaker 1: If you had to describe your grandmother to someone how would you describe her? Speaker 2: Oh, a short, short woman, very, very congenial, very congenial and loving, very welcoming and--but stoic. I mean she was--I guess she got that from the Native American side of the family. She could be stoic and very strong, very determined, but very sweet. I used to sit and watch her cook in the afternoon when I was in high school [Technical High School, Springfield, Massachusetts]--junior high school and high school I would sit there and we'd have conversations and she would cook. Of course it was self-serving for me because I got to eat the first helping of the food so (laughter). When you're young you like that a lot so. Speaker 1: What kind of things did she cook? Speaker 2: Oh she would cook biscuits, homemade biscuits and she would cook cornbread all kinds of things. She--as I said had been a cook at one time so she and the women in her family all pride themselves on cooking well. That's the first thing she would say to anyone who came to visit her house was, "Are you hungry?" And she would feed anyone that showed up. She was a very caring and compassionate woman. Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your grandfather [Elbert Williams] on your mother's side? Speaker 2: No other than that he too apparently was a very gentle man and I think the word gentle was what they all described him as being, as gentle and compassionate and caring. Speaker 1: Was he from the Johnston County [North Carolina] area? Speaker 2: Yes, he was. Story_ID: 564419 Speaker 1: So your mother [Daisy Smith Williams] how would you describe your mother if you needed to describe her to someone else? Speaker 2: Well mom was, my mom had a wonderful sense of humor. She loved to laugh and loved to read and to--and she too was very warm and caring and friendly and close to her family. They all loved family and very protective of course. I guess that's okay if you want to be protected (laughter), but it was--in retrospect it was a good feeling to know someone was always there for you and encouraging you. So I think that's, that's how I would describe her as loving and quick and witty and just a good mother, good sister. Speaker 1: Did you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I didn't no. My mother--I was my mother's only child. My father [Kelly Terry, Jr.] had other siblings [sic. children] once they separated. Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met? Speaker 2: No I, no I don't, I know it was during high school. My father was older than my mother so I guess he lived outside of Smithfield [North Carolina] in a town called Clayton [North Carolina] and I guess he was--would come to town and he must have seen her. Story_ID: 564420 Speaker 1: What was her father's name? Speaker 2: His name Kelly [Kelly Terry, Jr.]. Speaker 1: And you said--was he actually from Clayton [North Carolina], you said he lived in Clayton was he from there? Speaker 2: Well, there was a farm outside of Clayton, within the city limits of Clayton I guess, and so he was--he resided on that farm. Speaker 1: And do you have any sense of his upbringing or know any stories about his background? Speaker 2: A little bit of it. It was very tough for him, I know he cited that. He didn't have much schooling and he pretty much had been on his own. He left home at fourteen and he had been working since that age. Speaker 1: What kind of work did he do? Speaker 2: Well, my father has been a butcher, but he spent most of his time being a mechanic, and in his later years when he moved to Baltimore [Maryland], he became a construction worker, and he also was a dynamiter, you know he would drill a hole, pack the dynamite and then detonate the dynamite. He wouldn't work with anyone else. That's normally a job of three people but his boss got three in him because he did all those things himself, because he didn't trust anybody else with his life he said, so. I would describe him as a workaholic; he got pleasure out of working all the time. Speaker 1: Did he get paid three times the pay? Speaker 2: Well, no I think his independence was more important to him than the money sometimes, so in that instance or security (laughter). They didn't have unions in that time, so if it had been unionized he wouldn't have been able to do that. But he took great pride in his work and the ability and his capacity for work. I think both sides of the family believed in that. Speaker 1: Did you have an opportunity to meet or do you know the names of or anything about your father's parents? Speaker 2: I didn't meet my father's father [Kelly Terry, Sr.] but I did meet his mother, Grandma Hattie [Hattie Terry]. I recall spending--going to the farm and spending some time on the farm in the summer. One of the things you did if you had relatives on the farm, in the summertime you generally got shipped down to experience some of the things that country people did, and that's what happened to me. So I got to go spend about two weeks with Grandma Hattie and be on a farm and see the chickens and the pigs and the cows and the cantaloupe patches and the watermelon patches and the pecan fields and all the things until I got enough and then I would call--I would insist they take me home and they would (laughter), but I recall that. Being an only child, I didn't have a lot of children at home so there were a lot of like cousins were there and we would all have a lot of fun. There were two times I remember going there. Grandma Hattie though was a no nonsense lady, so I really toed the line, I couldn't be spoiled as an only child would be, not around her because she took, she addressed the issue in other ways (laughter). She knew how to get my attention, but she had a lot of children herself, a lot of grandchildren and she worked the farm too, so she wasn't one to-- Speaker 1: Give us just an example of Grandma Hattie getting your attention. Speaker 2: Well, I mean if I--I was peculiar about how I would eat and she said, "No, if you don't eat what's on the table, you won't eat at all," so it took me about two days before I sat at the table and ate what she prepared. Speaker 1: What kind of things did she prepare? Speaker 2: Oh, she prepared biscuits, cornbread and you'd have fatback meat, you'd have black eyed peas, you'd have fish, whatever you know. It's basically a North Carolina southern cuisine of fried--high in carbohydrates as they say today. They were delicious but that was different for me. This was a farmhouse, it was--they had--they didn't have running water inside so there was an outhouse and there was a well that you had to pump water. I was getting acclimated to this stuff, it was different for me and--but I adjusted, it didn't kill me. Story_ID: 564421 Speaker 1: Do you know where your Grandmother Hattie [Terry's paternal grandmother, Hattie Terry] was from? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I--from what I--I'm not sure if it's--I think it was in Johnston County [North Carolina], but I don't know where. I've talked to my aunts and they don't have that information either. Apparently they use to say that children should be seen and not heard, so you--they didn't take too kindly to you interrogating them or asking them a lot of questions. I think that's one trait I wish they had not had because a lot of people--a lot of my friends too say that they would have liked to have had more information about their, their family's history. Speaker 1: Do you have any theories about why that's the case? Speaker 2: No, no I don't just know that they were very closed mouthed. There are some things my grandmother and her sisters refused to talk about, not interested in telling. They wouldn't speak about those issues and matters with my mother [Daisy Smith Williams] and her sister [Polly Smith Parker] and cousins and I would hear them talking sometimes the sisters and cousins, "Well you know I asked grandma about this and she just wouldn't say anything." Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of what those issues were (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well no you would--yeah, you may want to know who is So and So's father? (Laughter) And if there is a question if it was a mixed birth, the parents were mixed white/black, which was taboo, then you would--they certainly wouldn't talk about that and there were a couple of those issues and--so they were very discreet about those matters. Story_ID: 564422 Speaker 1: If you had to describe your father [Kelly Terry, Jr.], how would you describe him? Speaker 2: Well, I'd describe dad as, as a proud man, a good man, you know an educat- not a formal education but a very intelligent man to become a master mechanic and have limited capacity to read and write was--to become a butcher and do the things that he did was just an extraordinary feat on his part, his ability to adapt to his circumstance and survive and support himself just amazing. He too was very congenial and outgoing, you know he, but he was a tough guy. He had a reputation of being able to handle himself and those he thought needed to be handled. But for me and his family he was a good man. I know during the Depression [Great Depression], I think he was a butcher--or during the war [World War II, WWII] rather he was a butcher and he provided the family with meat, I mean meat was always available in the household regardless of the rationing situation. I know this, he must have been a pretty good guy because after my grandmother [Julia Smith Jones] and her sisters--they all considered him part of the family even after he and my mother [Daisy Smith Williams] separated they would always ask about him and whenever he would visit they were always glad to see him. It was if they were just old friends meeting up again so that was--I would say he was a pretty good guy. Story_ID: 564423 Speaker 1: And you indicated that your [paternal] grandmother, Hattie [Hattie Terry], lived on a farm that was not too far away, so would you describe where you lived in Smithfield [North Carolina] as a more urban area? Speaker 2: Smithfield was a small town, but I was born in Smithfield. I guess we relocated to Raleigh [North Carolina]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when I was about four, so I spent my years of four to maybe twelve in Raleigh, and Raleigh is about sixteen miles from Clayton [North Carolina] and Smithfield is about twelve miles from Clayton. So it's sort of like in the center. Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of what your earliest memory is? Speaker 2: Being in Raleigh primarily, I don't remember my early years in Smithfield. Speaker 1: Can you give me a little bit of a sense of what you felt like Raleigh was like? Speaker 2: Oh Raleigh was to me a great--a lot of fun as a kid. I mean I--it was a capital city. Our first residence was behind a church on Harrington Street, it was an African American--African Methodist church [St. Paul African Methodist Episcopal Church, Raleigh, North Carolina]. And it was a few blocks from the capitol [North Carolina State Capitol, Raleigh, North Carolina], which was Main Street [sic. Edenton Street]--they were on Main Street. And I remember part of the excitement was to go to a movie on Sunday and to walk through the museum, which was in the rotunda of the capitol. There was a Confederate museum, so I got to walk through that quite often and there was also a little natural history museum that had a few snakes and other creatures there. But I always remembered that Confederate museum and have--had parts of that Confederate submarine [C.S.S. Neuse] they had that sank, I believe but it was there, and we'd go to the Ambassador Theatre [Raleigh, North Carolina] which was--and sit in the balcony, which is where we got to sit then. Speaker 1: What kind of movies did you see there? Do you remember any of them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember one movie here, 'The Lady in the Red Velvet Swing' [sic. 'The Girl in the Red Velvet Swing'] I think. Tony Curtis was in that [sic.]. I remember seeing that movie there and there were other movie--there was a black theater, or a colored theater as they were called, where you saw all kinds of things and spend the day there for a dime. Speaker 1: And would all the films in the black theater be black movies? Speaker 2: No, they were basically cartoons, newsreels and the cowboys and Westerns, or Superman, or Flash Gordon, or the old (laughter), those type, the Three Stooges and The Little Rascals and those sorts of things. I guess the--reflecting the genre of the times of the early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: And at the Confederate museum you spoke a little bit about the ship exhibit. Do you remember any of the other exhibits (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they would have the flags on display, there are about five Confederate flags, I found out (laughter), and they would have pictures of soldiers. They didn't have many pictures of slaves and that sort. I didn't see anybody black in these museums, but it didn't bother me at the time, I was just interested in museums and things. So it was a place to see, 'cause everything looked big and new at that time, different. Story_ID: 564424 Speaker 1: Our second place of residence in Raleigh [North Carolina] was--we moved to a development called Washington Terrace which was--it had been financed, I guess the North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina]. It was their first residential projects for blacks and that was adjacent to shore--not Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] but Saint Augustine's University [Saint Augustine's College; Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], pretty much on the edge of a little forest or country area. It was sort of considered the edge of the city limits a little bit at that time. So you had a lot of families who were--it was a mixed community, new facilities, playgrounds for children, parking lots and a little attached one, one bedroom to three bedroom apartments for people starting their families. It was a wonderful place to grow up, just a wonderful place. Your teachers were there, your librarians were there, and a few black attorneys were there. So it was just a great place to be. It was family, it was segregated of course but it was rather holistic. It was an urban ghetto if you will where everybody was there so you saw the maid, you saw the lawyer, you saw everybody. All possibilities of I guess achievement in one place. Story_ID: 564425 Speaker 1: Washington Terrace [Raleigh, North Carolina] was a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so (simultaneous)00 Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a, a colorful and-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes very, very memorable period in my life. I began school there and my childhood friends, many of them were there and we--since we were close to the woods, as we'd like to call them, which was really undeveloped farmland. We would pack lunches and go to our playground, if you will. We built lean tos and we stored our sodas in running brooks and we observed snake pits and picked wild fruit, and did all the things that young boys do and we took our BB guns and--our air rifles as they called them or BB guns along, and just had great fun. Of course, our mothers would worry where we were but we had been there and we lived adjacent to a white development and prior to going to school, first grade, we would meet at the corner stores, some of the kids from our development, some of the black kids and some of the white kids would meet and we would play together in the woods. But when we started school we no longer could stay over each other's house or visit each other and the segregation was formalized or institutionalized. But it was a rather interesting thing that that only occurred generally when you began to go to school. Speaker 1: And prior to your going to school the parents on neither side had a problem with everybody convening and having a good time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not all of them. Not the ones that we played with didn't, but--and as I said it wasn't often but we did visit each other's homes and we played together in the woods. Speaker 1: And were the developments similar? Speaker 2: No, the white development was individual homes, the black development was attached apartments. Speaker 1: You say attached apartments, would you mind describing what your home was like? Speaker 2: Well it was a--they had structures that basically had about five apartments together. One story and they would have, I think we had two bedrooms, living room and a kitchen and a bathroom and a small front porch, small back porch. Normally there was a playground, swings and a sliding board in the backyards of these apartments--these clusters if you will. So that it would accommodate the children in that cluster, so it covered maybe fifteen acres, twenty acres or so. So it was a good size. We had our own library there--a branch library and of course I spent a lot of time in that library with Ms. Taylor [ph.]. She was the wife of a lawyer who resided out there. She was a librarian, so we did have that, and there was a bus that serviced the development and there were some stores not within the development but on the edges of the development. So it was a rather special place, Washington Terrace was. The other development was a public housing called Chavis Heights [Raleigh, North Carolina] and that was built around the only swimming area within probably a fifty mile radius of Raleigh [North Carolina], and so on the weekends in the summers busloads of people would come there for the swimming pool and the softball games. It was ironic that that would happen. We never went to the beach as children; Myrtle Beach is where most--that was in South Carolina where I used to hear my parents [Daisy Smith Williams and Kelly Terry, Jr.] and them speak of that, but beaches in North Carolina were not particularly welcoming (laughter) for them. I guess you could go before seven in the morning and after six [o'clock] at night you could have some use of some beaches but it was risky business to be doing that. But I never saw the ocean until I got to Springfield, Massachusetts and I went to Misquamicut Beach [Misquamicut State Beach, Westerly, Rhode Island] and so just tells you it took me thirteen years to see the ocean. Speaker 1: And now the oceanside is your favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: Well yeah, I guess if I had heard the sound of the sea crashing on the shore who knows (laughter) what might have happened. Story_ID: 564426 Speaker 1: When you were growing up at Washington Terrace [Raleigh, North Carolina] who did you live with? Speaker 2: Oh, I lived with my mother [Daisy Smith Williams] and father [Kelly Terry, Jr.]. And-- Speaker 1: And how did you spend holidays? What were your, what were the major holidays that, that you all celebrated (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, of course we celebrated Thanksgiving and Christmas, were very special holidays and that was like a big family reunion. I remember for us, my parents, my mother of course would cook and she had lots of friends because there were lots of families their age. These were young women and I think sometimes I'd watch my mother--I did watch my mother and my aunts grow up because when we were in the terrace she was like in her twenties--twenty or twenty-one, twenty-two and they were just young women and my dad was young too. My aunt [Polly Smith Parker] lived there, so her sister was in one of the apartments and there were just a host of people that lived around us. The James family [ph.], Richard [ph.] and Mary [ph.] just--as I try and recall them all there were just so many, many people, young and old. Next door to me was Ms. Haywood [ph.], Frances [ph.] and Lewis [ph.] and these people I followed all of my life, and there's Mr. Joe [ph.] who was a storyteller who used to captivate us every evening, we'd sit on his stoop and he'd tell us stories of his life and then he'd throw in stories about Revelations and he'd wait until it was a little dark and we would be somewhat frightened to leave the stoop (laughter). I remember that of being in a village of people who affirmed your existence and encouraged you, loved you, looked after you and that's what I remember at Washington Terrace. It was hard to find that again, I'm sure I've done a lot of reading over the years and I've heard of people--read where people remembered the experience, those moments of being in that kind of engulfing environment. Totally--it was a bubble away from whatever you might have found in the rest of the segregated environment in the South. I mean it was--the reality of it was segregation, was ever present 'cause the bus came through. At least on the Washington Terrace bus you didn't have to sit in the back 'cause it was all-black. So a distortionist would say, "Well, what was the reality going to other destinations?" Well I never experienced that one because except when we got on the Greyhound to go to Smithfield [North Carolina] to visit, then we would find those things or if you got on a train you'd find--you'd experience that. Of course the adults would tell you what not to do and what not to say in the presence of whites and so forth, but on that Washington Terrace was a little bubble, your special bus, you walk to school through black neighborhoods and you went to a black school and of course you were not--you were in a bubble. Speaker 1: Today do any sights and sounds or smells remind you of Washington Terrace? Is there anything that you've come across that sends you back home (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not much. Not much because there we had--we could, we would skate in the streets here in an urban environment it's totally different than there. There was no such thing as kids skating in the streets here and so I haven't found much in the North that triggered what I would call similarity to the South--southern experience. I've had experiences which made me long for it but (laughter). Story_ID: 564427 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: I went to a school called the Lucille Hunter Elementary School [Lucille Hunter GT/AIG Magnet Elementary School, Raleigh, North Carolina]. It was off of Rock Quarry Road, I remember that on the way to Connor [North Carolina] and Clayton [North Carolina] and Smithfield [North Carolina]. You took that road to go that way, opposite a military cemetery [Raleigh National Cemetery, Raleigh, North Carolina], and every day we would hear 'Taps' my first six years as they would--love 'Taps' out there. Speaker 1: Did you have any teachers in elementary school who were particularly memorable for you? Speaker 2: Well, I remember Ms. Hunter [ph.]; I think she was my second grade teacher. I remember my fourth grade teacher, but I can't recall her name now but she was a very firm lady, who--but I must confess she was never firm--she wasn't firm if you didn't require her to be in all fairness to her. She had to maintain order and discipline and she did. Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you? Speaker 2: Well, I loved school. I was not--I probably--I spoke too much maybe. I was bored easy if I had the read the book and had to wait for others and I think that probably got me in a lot of trouble, but I didn't get in trouble often. So I consider myself an A student at that level. I loved it, I participated in the school patrol and the glee club and we had plays that we participated in--an annual play of course on a stage with a full production. You could work on--you could be an actor or you could work on the scenery or other aspects of the production. So it was an all encompassing kind of environment that you got at an early age in that school. Speaker 1: What did you choose did you choose to be an actor (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I got to be--I had an acting role. So I guess I was a little of a ham--a bit of a ham at that time. Speaker 1: And do you have any memory of what you might want to do as an elementary school student? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I wanted to be a builder. I wanted to build things preferably at that time an architect, I think because I was always drawing cities or whatever or outlines of cities. I remember that, that I was aspiring to be that in elementary school. I never got a chance to continue school in Raleigh because in my sixth grade year my parents [Daisy Smith Williams and Kelly Terry, Jr.] separated and subsequently divorced, but that was the year my mother and I relocated to Raleigh, North Carolina--not to Raleigh, I'm sorry but to Springfield, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of why you chose Springfield; did your mother know someone there? Had work there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the family was there. My mother's family was there, my grandmother [Julia Smith Jones] had migrated there and she followed her sister, Roscie [Roscie Smith], and Roscie followed, the first member to migrate was Vara [Vara Smith]. So the Smith sisters found their way to Massachusetts and that's how we got there-- Speaker 1: So, wh- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in 1956, I believe it was. Story_ID: 564428 Speaker 1: So in 1956 can you describe to us what your new environment was like [in Springfield, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Well (laughter), it was quite different for me of course. I mean it was not segregated in the institutional way but I think that was the greatest impact on me to be in school with whites, and of course everything was different. I mean it just was different. There was an openness that had not existed in term- from my perspective--from a kid's perspective. You could go to all the movies and you could sit anywhere. I did have family there so it made it somewhat easy to be acclimated. We made friends. Of course if you go north and you have a southern accent, you have a difficult time being accepted. Southern accents were rather rare there, and I guess they normally thought that a southern accent denoted a lower intelligence of some sort. But that had gotten--that got dispelled because I was able to--I wasn't put back as they normally did kids who came from the South to the North. They would oftentimes they literally just placed them in the lower grade. But I guess because I'd been there one year--sometime in the fourth grade I went for a visit I recall and I got--I broke my wrist and I had to stay for about a month and a half into the school year and I was enrolled there [Elias Brookings Elementary School; Elias Brookings School, Springfield, Massachusetts] and I took a battery test and whatever and I ended up in some advanced placement in the fourth grade, my French class and what not. So I guess they had a history on me, they knew that--when I showed up again that, okay we'll put him in a normal grade where he belongs. Story_ID: 564429 Speaker 1: Now you described the Raleigh [North Carolina] environment as being a segregated and really insulated one for you. Did you have any sense of perhaps your parents' interaction with the outside world? Was there a lot of Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] activity, like how, how high was the tension in Raleigh (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, for my father [Kelly Terry, Jr.]--I know they would all make reference to comments that had been made to them, but my father was not a man to back down so he held his own. I think his family, as a matter of fact, held their own in Clayton [North Carolina]. They were kind of left alone because they would-- Speaker 1: You said he handled some people does that mean that he might--he could defend himself. Speaker 2: Yes, he would defend himself with whatever means he had and oftentimes he had several means (laughter). So that was not a problem for him, but the Klan was active in those areas. I think there was a sign on the side of the courthouse in Johnston County [North Carolina] in Clayton, that said, "Home of the KKK, Johnston County." It was a welcoming sign too. That sign was there until maybe the late '70s [1970s], right across the bridge over Neuse River as you went into Smithfield [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Neuse River? Speaker 2: The Neuse River, N-E-U-S-E, it's a major little-- Speaker 1: And is Jesse Helms from Johnston County? From that area (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Jesse Helms is also from Johnston County down that way. Johnston and Wake County [North Carolina], which are adjacent so that was his--part of his bailiwick was around there. But it was a difficult place for folk, Smithfield and Clayton was. Raleigh being the capital might have been a little more urbane but it was still--and you had two universities, Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] and Saint Augustine [Saint Augustine's College; Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] were two black institutions [HBCUs] there. So you probably had some mitigation of the sharp edges in Raleigh particularly, but once you got into the smaller towns it was just very evident. Of course the women did domestic work, they weren't teachers, they weren't professionals, and you were going to do domestic work. There weren't a lot of opportunities for entrepreneurship there so, and people--and the women would comment on their treatments in their employers' houses and they wished (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember any of those anecdotes? Speaker 2: Well, not the anecdotes but I do remember my mother [Daisy Smith Williams] lamenting how she wished she never had to do housework again or clean someone else's house rather than her own, and those were her aspirations to find a job where she didn't do that, she found that in Springfield [Massachusetts], but I want to say to you it wasn't right away because Springfield in itself too was another challenge. You face different kinds of racism so I think the two systems were similar in many ways. Ceilings, glass ceilings, cement ceilings or steel ceilings were very evident in the, in the community of Springfield when we got there. Story_ID: 564430 Speaker 1: So were there fewer black professionals perhaps in Springfield [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Well, you saw less diversity within the career field, the--but yes, I mean all my instructors had been black up 'til then, and only had one black teacher in the whole school and she was my teacher. She was a different kind of black teacher than the ones I had experienced though (laughter), I will say that. Speaker 1: How was she different? Speaker 2: In deference to that, I won't name her because she was not as loving and encouraging as the ones I had grown up to be-- Speaker 1: Was she discouraging? Speaker 2: She was very cold even if she lived in the community around the corner, she was just not warm. I think she expected us to--she had great expectations of me, and I guess I had some of her but they were different. So we disappointed each other as to how I could meet her expectations. Speaker 1: Did you meet her at Buckingham Junior High School [Springfield, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I met her--no I met her at Elias Brookings [Elias Brookings Elementary School; Elias Brookings School] she was the only elementary teacher I had in Springfield, 'cause I came there in the sixth grade. Speaker 1: At the very end. Speaker 2: At the very end. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: So I remembered her. As to--I would--what she did that I recall that I always was disappointed was when I would have difficulty adjusting with the children and they would challenge me and we would get into a fight, she would be disappointed that I would fight and then I think she didn't recommend me--as a result of that she wouldn't recommend me to an advanced course at Springfield College [Springfield, Massachusetts] that I wanted to participate in. So I think the use of--and there's still a tactic probably used today where you give students who are problems less challenging work than more challenging work I think. I'd opt for more challenging work than less; you'd probably get a better return. So I remember that, but by and large I adjusted, I made great friends there in sixth grade. I still had somewhere in my archives the class picture of the sixth grade and I'm still friends with a member of that class. Yeah, yeah. So it--Elias Brookings was a special little place, very good school, though. Story_ID: 564431 Speaker 1: Springfield [Massachusetts] at the time we moved there was--had an Afro American population of maybe about 8 percent. So it, you know, that was not an issue in Springfield, it's almost invisible as far as the majority population was concerned. So those who lived there thought it was a great place, you know, it was there. Even I thought it was a great place relative to where I had come from, but when you go into junior high school, the junior high school years were also great years. Springfield was a nice little community. We lived in a community we called it the, the Hill [Old Hill, Springfield, Massachusetts], and we were in an integrated community there were Italian and Irish and black were in this community, and I didn't realize at the time but it was evolving into a black community. I didn't understand those issues but it eventually became a black and Latino community as to what it is, but during those years that was the beginning of the suburban growth within the American society. Suburbia was just beginning to take off, and in the mid-'50s [1950s] there was a downtown--a main street so everything went downtown and all the businesses and all the stores and that was a social point of urban life. So that's what Springfield was like and it was full of opportunities and jobs for people. There was an Air Force base [Westover Air Force Base; Westover Air Reserve Base, Massachusetts], there were rubber plants and gun factories and foundries and all kinds of industrial work. Very little office and retail work for people of color though. They got to do the jobs that the times governed, the menial work and very few professional jobs were available. Speaker 2: So you said your mother [Daisy Smith Williams] started out with domestic work in Springfield? Speaker 1: Yes, she did and eventually mom got a job in a factory. Speaker 2: What kind? Speaker 1: It was a paper factory, I guess they did paper goods and things of that sort but there was--on the floor not in the office. Mom didn't get into office until in the '70s [1970s]. I mean it was-- Speaker 2: What were those hours like? Speaker 1: Oh, she had normal hours maybe from seven to three [o'clock] or something like that. So she was able to see me off to school and be there, well not be there but by the time she got home she knew that I needed to be nearby. So she was never you know, not, not around during those years. Story_ID: 564432 Speaker 1: So tell us about junior high. Speaker 2: Well, I went to two junior high schools. The first junior high school was Classical Junior High School [Springfield, Massachusetts]. That was on State Street and that was considered maybe the best junior high school because it was adjacent to the academic high school that shared space with it, so normally it would be a feeder to academic high school, Classical High School [Springfield, Massachusetts], and I went there for a year and a half. I had--oh just a very challenging time adjusting to that environment. I was not challenged enough and I was bored, so I would just draw and I loved to read and I would read my textbooks way ahead of the instructor so that it was hard to stay occupied while others were struggling to be where I'd been. I think I did encounter some difficulty with the instructors and consequently I got to know the principal very well. Story_ID: 564433 Speaker 1: Mr. Williams [ph.]. Speaker 2: Yes, he was a short guy, bushy white hair and he would always have something for me to write when I--and a bench for me to sit upon when one of my instructors would direct me there. Didn't get there a lot but from every instructor there was just one instructor I had some difficulty with, my science instructor and we just couldn't seem to make a go of it, and after about a year and a half there [Classical Junior High School, Springfield, Massachusetts] I decided it might be better if I transferred to another school and start over again. My grades were not an issue, but I was just having difficulty getting along with that instructor, and by that time Mr. Williams was not too pleased to see me there. So I had an option of transferring which I did. I went to Buckingham Junior High School [Springfield, Massachusetts] and there I met some wonderful friends. There weren't that many black students in the system, so you tended to know all of them, a large number of them. So I knew a lot of the people at Buckingham and they had one or two black teachers there. It had some wonderful teachers there. I had a principal by the name of, oh I just had his name and it skipped me, I'm sorry, I can't recall that name right now but I know he had a talk with me when I showed up to let me know that he had spoken with Mr. Williams so that I was going to be in as much--I would be under his eye and I took that into mind and acted accordingly--adjusted accordingly. But it was difficult because I found at times that I still got placed in a less challenging class. I would have preferred to have been in what they called track one instead of track four but-- Speaker 1: What were tracks? Speaker 2: Well four tracks, well they had about--during that time I guess it was their--they would group the kids according to what they thought was their potential, and if you had scored well then you're in track one and if you--whatever were less than well and they didn't have enough room you got track two. So you would consider it now the high--what are some of the--I'm trying to think of some of the terms--the gifted if you will (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I experienced tracks but they were only three it seems. Speaker 2: They had about seven. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: I recall about seven tracks. Speaker 1: And did you have a large school population also? Speaker 2: I think it was probably about eight hundred kids in that school. It was a pretty big school. So, but there--I managed to graduate from Buckingham without fanfare and selected a high school, a technical high school, even though all the counselors suggested all of the kids, black kids go to trade high school. But some of us had--knew about colleges and aspired to go to college, so we knew that it was necessary to go to Technical [Technical High School, Springfield, Massachusetts] or Classical High School [Springfield, Massachusetts] to do that even though we didn't know any blacks who were going to Springfield College [Springfield, Massachusetts], AIC college [American International College, Springfield, Massachusetts] or Holyoke College [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] or any of those schools in western Massachusetts. The University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] did not accept many, many blacks. Story_ID: 564434 Speaker 1: Did you still have a sense that you wanted to be an architect or had you updated that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By then I was hoping that I could, I chose a technical high school to see if I could deal with the math. I think during that, my tenure in Tech [Technical High School, Springfield, Massachusetts] I came to find--to realize that maybe I should find another vocation because my math was not good enough to get me through calculus. It was good enough to get me through trigonometry, but calculus was something that I didn't quite have an aptitude for or a liking for. So I developed an affinity for history, political science and economics during those high school years and Tech High School was a wonderful experience too, it was--of course (unclear) were there, I think we had fourteen graduating blacks out of a class of about seven hundred. So it was--you know we got along with our classmates, we didn't have any fights or anything of the two groups, but it was just enough so that you could--at the lunchroom you'd sit at your tables with your friends. Sometimes the tables were integrated sometimes they were not, but it depends on who was at school that day as to who would be at your table. But I participated on the track team during that time and the basketball team and that was about it. We didn't have a lot of clubs, I mean we--to join in those times. The school papers and things of that sort were not quite open so to speak you could--but it wasn't, it wasn't a bad thing. Story_ID: 564435 Speaker 1: Springfield [Massachusetts] for us and our community we could give parties then, you could give--so there were social events, there was a club called the Dunbar club [Dunbar Community Center, Springfield, Massachusetts], which was a center, community center, it's still open and serving the community of Springfield in that way. There were camps that some of us went to. The Atwater camp [Camp Atwater, North Brookfield, Massachusetts], which is a renowned camp, that's run by the Springfield Urban League [Urban League Of Springfield, Inc., Springfield, Massachusetts] now I think was a place where many black middle class families sent their children to summer camp. Speaker 2: Was that out by a lake? Speaker 1: It was by a lake, it was maybe north, maybe northwest of Springfield going near the Berkshires. But I didn't go to Atwater, I did a summer at the boys club camp, thank god. Some of those experiences you got. Speaker 2: What kind of activities did the boys club serve up? Speaker 1: Well they would serve up their, your basketball, your sports things. Speaker 2: How long would you stay? Speaker 1: Two weeks, you'd do two weeks at a time and I got there just before I hit thirteen thereafter I didn't want to leave for the summer. You would find very few kids who were fourteen wanting to go to summer camp anymore. Story_ID: 564436 Speaker 1: My mother [Daisy Smith Williams] found a way that kept me out of the city [Springfield, Massachusetts], get me away from my singing group probably (laughter). Speaker 2: You were in a singing group? Speaker 1: I was in a singing group, during the '50s [1950s] I think everybody was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were a doo-wop group? Did you sing on the corner? Speaker 1: It was a doo-wop group, sure we sang on the corner. Speaker 2: How many people did you have? Speaker 1: We sang more than on the corner, we formed a group and we sang in clubs for dances and we sang on the radio, so we did a little bit of that. Speaker 2: Were you all in high school? Did you all go to Technical [Technical High School, Springfield, Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: I started this when I was in junior high, I was doing these things. I had a first tenor voice, so I got to be the lead singer and for a few years until my voice changed and then when I got to high school I was singing back up in the group. Those were good times. Speaker 2: Tell us a little bit about your selection. Speaker 1: My selection of songs you mean? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, at first I did the Frankie Lymon songs because those were the first tenor and I could do that, and the school boy songs and all of the boy tenors lead songs I did, and sometimes I would rotate and we would do some Flamingo [The Flamingos] songs and some Spaniels [The Spaniels] songs for some of the other leads in the groups. Speaker 2: And how did you get your gigs? Speaker 1: Well, we were--there was a promoter--a local promoter who used to give dances for the teenagers, so we would get them through him and oftentimes he didn't have to pay--he didn't pay us, we'd just sing. He got paid but we didn't understand that stuff. He got paid at least I didn't get paid. We sang and it was something to do, you had a routine to practice and you looked forward to it. But I think when I got to high school I had to find friends who were my age. The group members when I was in junior high school were generally about three to four years older than me, so it was something my mother was very concerned about. So found some friends who were-- Speaker 2: A little bit younger? Speaker 1: Who were younger, who were my age and they became my cohort of how I spent my time, which was a good thing to have done because it would have been unwise for me to be in high school trying to maintain close friends with folk who had gone on. I'm not sure I would have been encouraged to, to finish. Story_ID: 564437 Speaker 1: How did you choose a college then recognizing that you weren't going to go in the area where you lived, did you have a sense of the H- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I had a good friend, Frederick Hurst, and Fred and I were very good friends during high, high school [Technical High School, Springfield, Massachusetts]. I had befriended his family--his mother, Mrs. Hurst, and he had a sister, Carolyn [ph.], and five brothers. So they became my very close friends, like my second family there. He and I used to talk about going to college and we would be reading about things going on and his sister, Carolyn, went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and she wrote back and said, "It's a wonderful thing, you should do this, you should do that." There were some other children too who were planning to go to college and had gone. Fred was a year ahead of me, so he went to Howard and he wrote back and said, "Well you've got to come down and if you come down," they shared an apartment, "you can share an apartment with us." I said, "Well, this is great." And another thing too, the only recruiter that came to our high school was from Howard and if others came looking for black students, we weren't invited to any of the interview sessions even when the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] recruiter came. We use to speak of that amongst the high schoolers in the city. There were like four high schools that you could go to and we would all speak about, "Were you invited to this?" And then we never got invited to any of the other sessions. But the Howard recruiter came and made applications and they accepted me. So it was a struggle. I worked an extra semester, I didn't go in September I went in January because I needed to work to get together the funds and off to Howard I went (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you work? Speaker 2: Well, I worked in a hospital as a janitor. I think I also worked at a department store as a stock boy because somehow or another I think in '63 [1963] they began to hire stock boys in the department stores in Springfield [Massachusetts]. These were firsts (laughter) to be--I think when I was growing up they had two black people that worked in retail in Springfield. Story_ID: 564438 Speaker 1: Did you have an idea about what you wanted to major in when you arrived at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Well, when I--economics had fascinated me through--I think we had a minor course in it in Tech [Technical High School, Springfield, Massachusetts], that I knew that I wanted to do more about that and business and so those were my areas of interests then. I figured I would eventually be in business, I didn't know what kind but I figured I'd be in it. So that's what I did when I left Springfield [Massachusetts] in the winter of '64 [1964], January and it was a very special time, very special time. Speaker 1: Did you join the track team? Speaker 2: I did, I sure did and I stayed in the dormitory for the first semester, I think they required it unless you had family there, so I did stay at the dormitory the first semester and I didn't join the track team until the follow- my second semester. Speaker 1: And that second semester did you move to the apartment with Frederick Hurst? Speaker 2: I moved to the apartment and I stayed in Northeast, Washington [D.C.] on Benning Road near north Capitol Drive [sic. Capitol Street] or something of that sort way in the boonies. It was a big ride to get to school. Speaker 1: How did you travel by bus? Speaker 2: By bus, yes, and we pinched our pennies during that time and we needed to. It was a wonderful experience, but we didn't know hungry--but we didn't know full stomachs all the time. We had to budget very closely and take our lunch, learn to cook and study and just be supportive. It wasn't easy, it just wasn't easy. We didn't have a lot of money. Rick's family wasn't wealthy, wasn't rich nor was mine and if you had to write home, it hurt us more to ask for money than it did for them to send it (laughter). But-- Speaker 1: Did you work at all while you were at Howard? Speaker 2: I did, I got a work study scholarship, so I could work fifteen hours. That paid tuition and then if I needed money I would have to get another job to augment what my mother [Daisy Smith Williams] was able to give. Speaker 1: And I haven't asked you, which events did you run on the track team? Speaker 2: Well, I ran the hurdles; I tried out for the high and low hurdles and the long jump. But coming from a small town in western Massachusetts, I didn't have that much competition while I was in high school doing those events, but when I got to Howard I found that now I'm facing national and sometimes international competitors and I decided that I'd just stick to the long jump after watching the speed of the--my other teammates. But it was a wonderful experience because we would go on trips down to Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and Bowie State [Bowie State College; Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland] and Morgan [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and around the D.C. area for some of the--running against the other black schools [HBCUs]. Story_ID: 564439 Speaker 1: And who were some of your other classmates, maybe you could talk a little bit about [HistoryMaker] Ewart Brown? Speaker 2: Well, Ewart was a member of the track team and I was very pleased to know or to read I think, that this past year that Ewart had been elected the prime minister of Bermuda [premier of Bermuda]. Speaker 1: Indeed. Speaker 2: They call him Doc Holiday [ph.], but it took Ewart a time to get, to get home to do his mission because he was a student leader when I met him and he remained active throughout his life. He eventually--he became a medical doctor, moved out to California I understand, established a clinic and then I guess he could--then he could go home. I think Bermuda is a very conservative place and Ewart had rather radical ideas when he was a young man, so his family encouraged him probably to stay away until it's time to come home. So I was very pleased and one day I may get to see him again and congratulate him but I did share the news release with my friend Frederick [Frederick Hurst]. We got a chuckle out of seeing that. There were many other folk. Speaker 1: And what about the Reverend Jerry Guess? Speaker 2: Well, Reverend Jerry Guess was a very, very interesting fellow, he was my roommate. And I recall walking into the room, seeing a picture of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] on one wall and one of Douglas MacArthur on the other. I said, gee this is an interesting guy and he proved to be just that. Jerry was very active in campus politics and was associated with the newspaper [The Hilltop] there and I think he was a--he may have been Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity]. Speaker 1: A cabbie? Speaker 2: A Kappa, he was a--fraternity--one of the fraternities here. But, but a very, very prolific mind. He was interested in just about all the social issues, but he kept a detailed diary of everything he did. All the people he spoke to and about what (laughter), and it was amazing to watch someone with that kind of discipline and thoroughness. Eventually he got ill and he had to leave school for a while, but he came back and--but I'll never forget him because he went on to work with Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. He was active then in student activities. When he came back to school he stayed active in the student environment. He went through the elective student council and so did Ewart, but they were still reflective I think of the times, 1963 through '68 [1968] this whole country was undergoing tremendous social and political change and so was Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. That was the birth of, I think black power, the birth of black pride, the first homecoming queen who was Afro-centric with a Afro--a big Afro. She made the cover of Jet magazine and I remember the effort to organize and to vote that into being. So the campus was really simmering in transformation to the hope of what the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] would bring and what freedom or independence would bring. You had your Panthers [Black Panther Party], you had just everybody there and Jerry was aware of that. Jerry was a pragmatic guy and Ewart was a more radical pragmatist. But he must have been a lot--really a pragmatist because he went into law school--I mean, he went to med school rather. Story_ID: 564440 Speaker 1: But it was wonderful knowing these guys [HistoryMaker Ewart Brown and Jerry Guess]. I didn't get the chance to spend as much time with them because I was--I needed to work, so, but I stayed in touch with them. I roomed with them and I knew them and we were friendly so that when D.C. [Washington, D.C.] erupted in civil disorder during the--after the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination then the campus was--administration building was taken over. The students organized a takeover of one of the buildings--the student center and converted it into a relief station to receive goods from donors in the region to provide pampers and milk and food for families who couldn't get them for their children and families as a result of these stores being burned and the curfew being imposed. So those of us who were working in that effort got an opportunity to deliver these things to these families and we had special permits in the windows of the cars and were driving through the capital city witnessing soldiers on every corner, and driving pass the Capitol building [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] and seeing sandbags and .50 caliber machine guns surround the steps there, very surreal experience. Not many people got a chance to see that aspect of D.C., to see it under martial law, the nation's capital. School resumed, these things happened in my senior year and we graduated and went our way. I, by the way, would sit-in at the administration building at night and go to work at PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company] during the--in the morning 'cause I was going to school and working. Speaker 2: How long did you sit-in? Speaker 1: Oh I would spend the night there and I had an apartment and-- Speaker 2: No, I just meant during the course of the-- Speaker 1: During the course of the sit-in? Probably about a week or two. It lasted until they negotiated some concessions from the administration, and paying the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and a host of things that the students had not wanted to be concerned about. I think the Vietnam War was just beginning so mandatory ROTC was required. So they made it an elective and so those schools at that time were pretty much autocratic and I think that was the beginning of where the universities gave up their responsibility of being the parents in absentia. They pretty much assumed your role as a parent and I guess they began to think that these are young people and the notion of coed dorms and things like this began to emerge even on Howard's campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Those are very radical notions when I got there. There were curfews, no coed visitations beyond the lobbies of the respective dormitories and the threat of expulsion had you, if you violated those sorts of things. So they used that moment to negotiate some of those concessions from the administration. I think Dr. James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] had been the president of Howard at that time. Story_ID: 564441 Speaker 1: Did you say you worked at PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company]? Were you working off campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: No I worked on campus. In my junior year I got a position with Potomac electric and power. They had been ordered by President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] to hire people of color. So we all went down and applied and they offered me a position. I was able to arrange my schedule in such a way that I could work full time, and, and take--they let me go a couple of times during the week in midday to catch a class and I would take the rest of my classes in the evening. So that was one semester in the junior year that worked and then I--in my senior year I had--when I reached my senior year I had basically amassed about all of the credits I needed to graduate by then, 'cause we wouldn't double up, but we would take eighteen to twenty hours of courses so that the object was to get out in four years. So I had a lot of latitude in my schedule to accommodate working with them and they were flexible enough to give me an hour or two three times a week. So I was an engineer's assistant for PEPCO. Prior to us getting those positions a high school degree was sufficient to get it. Upon hiring us they upgraded and made it an associate's [degree], two year to four year degree. So I guess we did lift the standards. On our arrival there, that too was a very interesting experience--learning experience. I found one black engineer, a female, we called her Al [ph.], and she was very, very supportive and helpful to Walter [ph.], John [ph.] and myself, the three tech assistants who were hired in that department. They kept us all together, and I guess Mr. Templeton [Jack R. Templeton] must have been considered progressive within PEPCO because we all were in his department. Speaker 1: What were your responsibilities? Speaker 2: We were to assist the engineer with his drawings and maintain the, what they called the load maps, mapping out the power sources of different portions of Washington, D.C. They had to plan for improving the system to accommodate the energy use of its customers, so we would track and plot demand or usage and make some projections about its impact on the distribution system, whether you needed to upgrade it to reflect that. So that's what we did during that time and the engineers--Al was very helpful. We met other engineer assistants who refused to share information with us. So we got around that by simply going elsewhere, but we met that kind of resistance. But as I said Mr. Templeton considered himself a progressive guy and I guess very retrospectively he was. Though the company would not consider anyone for a management position at that time, that came later when they got another (unclear) from somebody to look at their promotional policies, but I was out of D.C. when that occurred. That did give me exposure to the utility field, I might add and that segued into perhaps why Long Island Lighting Company found me to be of interest when I applied to them. Story_ID: 564442 Speaker 1: So PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company] was, I guess a segue into my professional field, because when I graduated from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in June '68 [1968] and moved to New York [New York]--Long Island [New York] really is where I moved because my mother [Daisy Smith Williams] during the course of years had remarried and relocated here to Long Island, and I had spent a couple of summers on Long Island and working for Long Island Lighting Company as one of their meter readers, which was a first for them. So I spent a summer reading meters in black neighborhoods talking about everybody that saw me wanting to know how I got the job and (laughter), and so forth. That was quite an eye opener. Speaker 2: And was it like it is today, would you go in the morning and knock at doors and-- Speaker 1: It would be the same as today. They had your meter recorders, some of them were a magnetic tape reader to record your readings, others were a paper book, but you had your ID, your uniform and you knocked at doors and you just presented yourself and if the meter was downstairs, if not you went by the side of the house, but I made sure that I always called out that the meter was present when I moving by the side of the house. I didn't want to shock or alarm anyone unnecessarily. I was somewhat apprehensive about that part of the job being in particularly all-white neighborhoods because I didn't want to startle them and cause any harm to myself unnecessarily. But they got over it, they would call back--they would call the office if they were alarmed and be reassured that I was okay. So I guess I led the way for others to do that job (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would imagine. Speaker 1: But it was fun. Story_ID: 564443 Speaker 1: So after, or prior to graduating perhaps, you applied to the Long Island Lighting Company for a different type of position? Speaker 2: Well, I did. Upon graduation we had--we all went home and many of us attended college under a college exemption. The Vietnam War was just cranking up and those of us who were not in favor of the war were confronted with a decision. What are you going to do if you were drafted, were you going to go? Well I wasn't going to volunteer for the [U.S.] Army; that was out of sight for me. I wanted to work in business, I wanted to get a management training job and find my way through some--through the ranks of some corporation. I discovered during the recruiting sessions, during the interview sessions at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], that the firms they sent there never came to look for management talent there, they came to look for sales talent. So I didn't go to many interviews at Howard. I then came home and tried my hand here with some corporations, Long Island Lighting being one of them 'cause I'd worked there for the summer. The Doubleday corporation [Doubleday and Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] being another and a Long Island Trust Company [Garden City, New York] being one. It some while for them to get my draft status information, but eventually I took the Long Island Lighting Company offer because it did offer me a management training position right off. The others needed to verify something, but they too eventually offered management training positions but I didn't take them. The employment director at Long Island Lighting Company had been a Howard graduate. He was the second black manager in LILCO, so it worked out that Guy Garrett [Guy T. Garrett, Jr.] was there. So they sent me over to be interviewed by this psychologist and they took the psychological profiles and all of the things that were necessary I guess to determine that I would be an appropriate management employment. Speaker 1: Did all mana- did all potential managers go through the psychological evaluation or perhaps just some (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think (laughter), I think they all did, maybe some. I went and apparently he rendered a good, a good profile so. Speaker 1: Had you decided what you would do had you come up for the draft? Speaker 2: Well, there was some talk that maybe I might visit Canada, but I couldn't--I didn't see myself going there so glad that I didn't get drafted. An opportunity came for me to, I think the New York State National Guard [New York Army National Guard] was ordered to integrate so to speak, so that there would be opportunities for men of color to participate in their local guards and therefore not go to Vietnam and I made an application to the New York State and they in turn notified my local draft board that I was interested, so that gave me another suspended status and I subsequently never joined the New York National Guard because they were happy not to have me and I was happy not to go. So everybody got--it worked out okay for me. Story_ID: 564444 Speaker 1: So when you started at LOCO. Is it LILCO or LOCO? Speaker 2: It's LILCO, which is short for the Long Island Lighting Company (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Long Island Lighting Company. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And when you started there, tell us about how you started and what you did from there? Speaker 2: Well, I was assigned to a corporate--the (unclear) department--staff department that was located in corporate headquarters. You may not know but Long--the company serviced a service area that embraced Suffolk County [New York], and all of Nassau County [New York] and the Far Rockaway of Queens [New York]. So it's a pretty large territory and they had offices all over. The corporate headquarters were in Mineola [New York] and they had a huge administrative facility in Hicksville [New York], but I got assigned to headquarters because it was more of the progressive types were over there. So I was assigned to the marketing department. I wanted to see what that was like. Since I wasn't an engineer there was no need for me to be going to an engineering department. So they had their accounting departments and their sales and marketing departments were there as well as their regulatory and rate banking departments, their economic analysis department. So I signed up for a rotation in the sales department and I did a year there and the way the program worked was you would work your way into a job and it was a, I think I remember being told that it was sink or swim by Guy [Guy T. Garrett, Jr.]. So I said I understand what that means. If I don't make it don't call you, you can't help. So I was assigned to this sales department, embraced it with great vigor and one of the attributes of the management training program was that they gave you free access to the officers and you could call them and they would talk to you, 'cause it was quite an honor to be a trainee as they call it, 'cause you would be fast tracked so to speak. So I used that opportunity to ask a lot of questions and to--because I was inquisitive, I wanted to know how it worked, how it was structured. I also received an opportunity to attend the stockholders meeting. Guy was happy to see me go because he didn't have to go anymore. So I could go and be the one (laughter) when you would have the annual stockholders meeting. So I attended about three of those things in the course of my career there and that gives you good insight into how corporations are governed--at least the process of governance. After my first year in the program, I was offered a position in the sales department but I declined because I wanted to be exposed to the economic analysis department and they said okay. But that again was with no assurance that you would have a job at the end of it. But I went there, had an opportunity to do what they call cost of service studies and to look at how rates are determined and established for the various types of customers in the utility and all the elements of doing that kind of analysis, as well as preparing testimony for what they called rate proceedings, when the company requests an increase or a change in their tariff for their rates for customers. So I spent time doing that and also time--and along the way met the company historian who gave me--who was at my disposal, and we talked and shared many stories about how the company was put together and its philosophy of rate design and rate making and I got to know the general counsel, David Kadane [David K. Kadane], who had assisted Julius Nyerere in setting and preparing a marketing plan for his diamonds when he did a stint with the Peace Corps, and this gentleman later left the general counselship of the company to establish a law school at Hofstra University [Hempstead, New York]. So he was one of our only Jewish--he was the only Jewish officer at the time and one of the few Jewish professionals in the company 'cause the company was primarily Irish and Italian Catholics and I think that was the ethnic composition for most of the Northeast utilities were, at that time. But Dave Kadane was a wonderful man and very, very open to explaining policies and very pragmatic too. Story_ID: 564445 Speaker 1: So I gained perspectives of--about the company [Long Island Lighting Company] and about the officers that ran the company that however, didn't ev- that never translated into a big job for me (laughter), because I guess I also had a lot of questions and even some answers to some of the questions. But I met good people, learned a lot about the industry, and got an awful lot--an opportunity to do a lot of interesting and good things. I eventually was offered a job back in the sales department, which I took and it started that I was an analyst and that eventually as the analyst of the jobs of assisting either doing budgetary work, working with preparing indices for the salesmen to use when they went on their routes selling our products of gas and electric. They would have to make estimates of customer usage for heating, for their appliances and things of that sort. So I got a chance to do a lot of work in that area pulling together these estimates of appliance usage and comparability, I guess, between oil, heat--electric heat and gas heat for comparison for selling purposes. If you're going to sell you want to demonstrate that your product is either more efficient or cheaper, which ever works. So they had a lot of challenge in doing that. I was also responsible for doing a lot of work on demographic analysis in putting together sales territories for our salesmen so that meant we had to use the census information to age, to get some idea of the age of the home and make determinations about the age of the heating equipment and then to determine what was potential within a given area so that we did give them a territory that would have to convince them that look you can make a living here. They never enjoyed any of that stuff, we call that the egghead work (laughter). Those guys, they in many occasions I think their gut instincts were right about what management was attempting to do to them. But I was the young management trainee that had to go find the empirical evidence to support and implement some of these initiatives and beliefs that our management felt in those areas. I was young so I--it was something that I was learning and I loved it. I eventually got to be in charge of the budgeting for the sales department and the preparation of their budgets and also to oversee the technical supports to our salesforce and we had three or four sales offices at one time, so they would come in and bring the work back to our sales assistants and they would prepare the comparative heating analysis and these guys would then take back to the customer and things of this sort. So we got to do that. I got to also computerize a lot of that stuff, and use portable computers at a time when they were just starting. But I never go to be a department manager or division manager for a host of reasons but I was able to learn a lot about my industry and to--I had a lot of leeway, I had a budget, I prepared the budgets for the department and I had a lot of, since I processed all of the budgets, my signatory authority was probably comparable to that of departments and some assistant VPs. So it was, I guess it was a taxonomy or contradiction that I would have such financial prerogatives and not have an organizational status. Speaker 2: Will you tell us any of the reasons that you think you did not become a department manager? Speaker 1: Oh, sure. Speaker 2: Or were not named as such at any rate? Speaker 1: Well, I think you don't have in any corporate environment like that, in any corporate environment I believe, I think you need a mentor, you need to be connected to some political system. Ability alone will not do it. I remember one department manager telling me that if he needed brains he could always buy those and I said to him, "That's why I didn't work for you" (laughter). But that's how they sort of treated intellectual ability, so if you were thinking you were going to think your way in a job they didn't necessarily think that way. Also it was--they told me that I didn't live on the island [Long Island, New York], but I didn't think that was the case. Story_ID: 564446 Speaker 1: Where did you live at that time? Speaker 2: I lived in the Bronx [New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the Bronx? Speaker 2: Yes I-- Speaker 1: And did you live in the--did you move physically to the Bronx and work in Long Island [New York] from your graduation? Speaker 2: I did, when I first joined the company I resided on Long Island. I think that's probably why they hired me. After a year I got married [to Sandra Terry] and I moved to the Bronx and I reversed commuted, which was very easy at that time and very few people did that so it was a breeze. It didn't get difficult until the mid-'80s [1980s] then a lot of people were going both ways so to speak. Speaker 1: And you were with Long Island Lighting Company for--until 1993? Speaker 2: Yeah, approximately twenty-six years, that's right, and I got to see a lot of things. I think when I joined the company they were just beginning to plan for Shoreham Nuclear- Electric Power Plant [sic.] if you will and by the time I left Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant [East Shoreham, New York] had been halted and in the process of being dismantled. Speaker 1: Did that have a big impact on the company? I know that residents were not pleased with the plant itself. But what about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It had a big impact on the company and a big impact on the island as well. I think the embedded costs of that plant had a lot to do with the economic aspect of that island. It became a high cost place of doing business because of the rates and so forth. For the company it led to its eventual absorption or breakup into--with components of it being sold to KeySpan [KeySpan Corporation] and components being absorbed by what they called a Long Island Power Authority. So it had that impact on Long Island Lighting Company. Story_ID: 564447 Speaker 1: How long after you moved to the Bronx [New York] did you become sensitive to and active in the Bronx community? Speaker 2: Well, it took about two years, two and a half years, I think '69 [1969], '70 [1970], into '71 [1971] or so, middle '71 [1971]. I had seen New York [New York], I mean my wife [Sandra Terry] and I use to go all over the city. I was just exploring and learning this environment. So I would take--just drive around the city, take subway rides, walk across the bridges, GW [George Washington Bridge], Brooklyn [Brooklyn Bridge], Manhattan [Manhattan Bridge]-- Speaker 1: And what did you find? Speaker 2: Well, I was amazed by it and always loved cities and skylines and to me--I still do and I still take a trip around or drive around Manhattan [New York] to witness the change in the skyline 'cause that's what I--to me a city is like a book, a living art or again it's never the same, it's dynamic, it's just inspiring. So I had done that, so after the end of it I had always wanted to do things. I came out of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with that. I followed civil rights, I followed economic development, and I followed the hope, if you will, the possibilities, or the dream. I didn't know how to do it but I started out by reaching out to the two organizations, CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and the New York Urban League as--to volunteer, 'cause I didn't know people here other than my wife's family. I didn't know people here, I certainly wasn't familiar with the politics or anything of that sort, and then I also connected with a group of people doing volunteer work in Highbridge [Bronx, New York], in my community, and they would be about painting the basement of a local church and things of that sort. There was a local newspaper, but I hooked up with--I met a fellow by the name of Lawrence McFarland [ph.], Larry as I like to call him, and Larry was a young college graduate who worked for the department of social service, but he viewed himself as a community organizer and activist. He'd come out of--he'd been born in Cambridge, so there was an activist movement up there and Larry brought that with him. So he was organizing with people on welfare rights and setting up daycare centers and things of that sort and working with the Panthers [Black Panther Party] who set up people's free health clinic. So that intrigued me, so I would--when I'd come home from work, I'd get involved with them too. So that gave me a connection to my community where I lived. Story_ID: 564448 Speaker 1: So you got involved in the evenings-- Speaker 2: Yes, and that led me to paint the church basements and to help establish free childcare and to also create a community free health clinic that included working with the Panthers [Black Panther Party]--local chapter of the Panthers, as well as doctors from the local hospital who volunteered their time and we've operated out of a church basement until the insurance committee of the church reminded the pastor that (laughter) such activity wasn't covered. But nevertheless it was an enriching experience and it gave me a renewed commitment to that kind of work. I eventually got invited to the board of the New York Urban League's branch auxiliary in the Bronx [New York] through my inquiry efforts and I served that institution for over twenty years in many capacities on a volunteer basis. So I was able to be inside, I guess a civil rights institution from the inside while, of course, working--well I'm still working by the way and raising a family and I'm getting involved in my local community in the civic life of my local community. Politics of course was something I had thought about, but I--the more I worked in my civic activities the more it became evident that I didn't have a connected base that would do me--that would serve me well in elected politics. I made one run--one attempt to do that and-- Speaker 1: What did you run for? Speaker 2: I ran for school board and that didn't pan out so is was--so I just decided I'd just continue to do this work. Speaker 1: And did you choose your work based upon what you saw in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] in terms of need? Did you choose your projects? Speaker 2: Well, I think I did. I thought maybe that I could bring some of the skillsets that I was acquiring in my work in some of the analysis, analytical work associated with doing graphic analysis and things like this and apply that to making a case for more services. I thought that would be an interesting approach to what were some of the conditions there. Of course in the '70s [1970s] you had the community control issue, school decentralization was, powerful issues here in this city, (unclear) with the Ocean Hill-Brownsville experiment [Ocean Hill-Brownsville Experimental School District], powerful things. Al Shanker [Albert Shanker] drove many of the attitudes about education, or education reform was driven by Shanker and his point of view. It was not a conciliatory time, it was very strained the relationships between the communities and you of course had riots. Story_ID: 564449 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's the demographic makeup of the Bronx [New York] when you, when you came here (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um, when I moved to Highbridge [Bronx, New York] the demographic makeup of the West Bronx [Bronx, New York] over there was probably about 15 percent black and Hispanic. The Bronx still was a predominantly--a majority borough. It was in transition, but this part of the Bronx around the Yankee Stadium [New York, New York] area was Jewish and Irish, middle working class community. Along the Concourse [Grand Concourse] was considered upper middle--the upper Jewish and middle class communities and off the Concourse would be the working parts of the community. In the late '60s [1960s] that began to change, and you saw with the opening of Co-op City [Cooperative City, Bronx, New York], which is a large residential development at the northern part of the borough financed with union funds. It sort of--gave opportunity for a new middle income community and they left this area. So it became--apartments became available for a lower economic demographic and a different demographic and it did. So you saw a lot of Hispanics move in, Puerto Ricans at that time, and some blacks though the black population I think in the Bronx was beginning to diminish in the latter '60s [1960s], 'cause there had been a large black community, and viable one, over in the Morrisania section of the Bronx. This isn't Morrisania; it's only a few blocks east of us. Those were some of the demographic indicators or profiles of the borough when I first moved here. So I've seen it evolve into the Bronx is burning, which is what Howard Cosell and folks were saying in 1978, prior to--just before Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] found his way to the borough to visit Charlotte Street. Story_ID: 564450 Speaker 1: So you said that education was really driven by Shanker [Albert Shanker], like the changes in education. What kind of choices was he making-- Speaker 2: Well, I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in terms of his impact on education? Speaker 2: The communities pushed their demands for inclusion in the governance of schools or--and the curriculum of the schools, were all offshoots of the community, particularly black communities' demand that these institutions be responsive to them and their aspirations. These were huge bureaucracies and they were hard and very resistant to change. So it became a political struggle to insist and demand that students, that teachers began to reflect, look like their students in that the curricular began to put the contained materials that were reflective of the cultures of the students there. That was a very politically hot political issue then, it remains an issue that has not yet been universally dealt with, so you--and of course the issue of--and Shanker viewed this as any threat of affirmative action and things of that--as a threat to the security of his union and the members and it was perceived as such and he was able to act accordingly, so it polarized a lot of things. I thought I could participate in that arena and bring some conciliatory elements there, but I didn't get elected so I couldn't do it, so I went on to do some other things. Story_ID: 564451 Speaker 1: In 1971 [sic. 1975] I think, there was a passage of the Title XX act [Social Security Act of 1975, Title XX], which made funding available for senior citizens and expanded childcare and a group of us began to look around, looked at the demographics of the area and said well why don't we start working around this issue and see if we can get senior centers, and I think Larry McFarland [Lawrence McFarland (ph.)] had something to do with reintroducing me to some people who were interested in doing that. So we all met and decided well okay why don't we organize around this and see what we can do, and there were a few of the clergy members, Monsignor Lenahan [Henry J. Lenahan] and some of the rabbis responded to this effort and we began to hold community hearings working with the mayor's task force on bringing information about Title XX and what its promise could be for the seniors. So we did these hearings for about a year, through all--and making sure (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is Mayor Lindsay [John Lindsay]? Speaker 1: Mayor Lindsay was the--was in office at that time and he had this network that he called neighborhood action--neighborhood advisory council, and he would have his commissioners assigned to it, one of his commissioners to chair these committees and to listen to the complaints of the residents and that's how he would determine some of his city policies, because he was a Republican and everybody else was Democrat here. So he needed to get his information directly from the people, 'cause political machinery certainly wasn't going to give him any useful information. So we found access to city hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York] that way and we eventually founded a group people who wanted to apply for senior citizen centers in the area and we had determined that we would do it collectively, and this means the black institutions, the Jewish institutions, the Catholic institutions whatever that was in the community who wanted to do this. It was without question--no one questioned the people who were interested because it had taken a year or so to organize and so it was well known by everybody. We decided that we would also write a master application and then we would negotiate with those who would be interested and then we did something else, we decided that we would select those organizations where we would want these centers to be located and presented that to the city, and thank god they accepted that. We had word that on some occasions some of the local officials initially didn't want that to happen, (background noise) (pause) so we had, as I said we'd gotten word that some of the local elected officials didn't want that to happen but because we had the ear of city hall they assessed it and determined that this plan was reflective of the will of the community. It did happen and we--as a result we got five senior centers in this community, which was more than any other community in the city got. Story_ID: 564452 Speaker 1: Out of that led the--we decided to formalize Mid Bronx Senior Citizens Council [Mid Bronx Senior Citizens Council, Inc., Bronx, New York]. So we organized, we got a 501(3)(c) and a local city council person, then Councilman Barry Salman, who is now chief administrative judge, I think for the Bronx administrative court [Bronx County Supreme Court]--civil court anyway, Judge Salman right now, was the--our incorporator along the way and Mid Bronx got a grant from Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation], a twenty-five thousand dollar leadership grant and we were able to hire our first executive director who was Larry McFarland [Lawrence McFarland (ph.)], and that led to where we are now. We got a small contract to provide homecare services for the department of aging. So began our entry into the human service business through that way. We as an organization did get an opportunity to see the establishment of the Department for the Aging [New York City Department for the Aging], and have seen that grow into a rather significant bureaucracy in my years of doing this work and we saw another agency with the HRA [New York City Human Resources Administration], that serviced the needs of senior citizens, also grow from one or two people into a rather large bureaucracy. But we were as a council able to continue to grow because we had decided that we would not operate a senior center. What we do would focus on larger regional issues such as transportation systems or meals on wheels programs and homecare programs and eventually housing and to coordinate services within this area. So over the years we've done--we once had a home attendant program where we--which had the capacity of about a thousand clients and a couple of hundred homecare workers, which was really not--it stretched our capacity, it's something that, we relinquished that contract and decided to focus on--stay closer to the senior services. Along the way we got a meals on wheels program that started out small but now we serve over 170,000 meals annually and we still have some homemaker programs and we've gotten into housing. Story_ID: 564453 Speaker 1: And you have some major housing arrangements (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Concourse Plaza [Bronx, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes, we do, that was the former Concourse Plaza Hotel where the Yankees [New York Yankees] used to stay, and there used to be host to a lot of the major civic social and political events through the borough. So it was during this transition period of the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] it became a--they closed it down as a hotel and the community did not want it to be a welfare hotel. So the next option was to convert it into a senior residence and that's where we stepped in because we had coalesced around the issue of senior citizen interests. It was a logical extension that we would be the ones to be developers or co-developers of that project. Speaker 1: And Fannie Lou Hammer [Bronx, New York] and Eugene Smil- Smilovic (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They came later. Yes, Eugene Smilovic was one of the founding members of the council [Mid Bronx Senior Citizens Council, Inc., Bronx, New York]. He was my Jewish counterpart, colleague, compadre, a very dear friend, along with Larry [Lawrence McFarland (ph.)] and Ti- Reverend Timothy Gallons [ph.], a Catholic priest. These were folk who saw beyond their particular communities and saw the need to collaborate. So they understood that language and I had somehow found my way with and amongst them. The Eugene Smilovic [Bronx, New York] is a senior citizen housing built with HUD funds [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], and the Fannie Lou Hammer project is right behind the Andrew Freedman project [Andrew Freedman Home, Bronx, New York], which is where we're sited today and that was named after the head of the--former head of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party. So I got a chance to name two (laughter). Speaker 1: But Andrew Freedman is actually named after its original builder? Speaker 2: The original builder and founder. Story_ID: 564454 Speaker 1: Andrew Freedman was a prominent lawyer and civic entrepreneur in his day and during the '20s [1920s], and also one of the financiers of the independent subway line called the D line, along with the Belmonts and the Vanderbilts and so forth. Speaker 2: The D line was an independent subway line? Speaker 1: Yes, that's what they called the IND [Independent Subway System] and I think that's where they got the D train from. Speaker 2: And that would take you from the Bronx [New York] perhaps into (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To--out to Brooklyn [New York], it goes through Manhattan [New York] and terminates out at Coney Island [New York, New York] that way. There was an IRT [Interborough Rapid Transit Company] and the IND, those were the two competing subway systems that, I guess emerged from the genesis of ground transportation in the city. Mr. Freedman built this home [Andrew Freedman Home, Bronx, New York] for gentle folk who had--who were once rich but had fallen upon hard times. So he built a facility on land I guess he acquired through his friends or what not to accommodate these people who would live their lives out in the means they had become accustomed to, which in his mind was to have formal dinners every night and libraries and verandas upon which to sit on and secure grounds with large lawns and infirmaries and beauty parlors and things of those sort. And he did not connect to and the residents of the community were not connected to the community around it. It has a wall, gates and-- Speaker 2: And you said earlier that the Eastern European Jews who lived just across the street really did not contact with the people (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. No, there was no contact, none; these were aristocratic--it was a matter of class clearly. It certainly wasn't culture that kept them apart but I had colleagues who were at the Bronx [New York]--the Hebrew boys and girls club across the street and they had never had any contact, and spoke of the fact that there was no contact between the two communities, and when I got to know some of the fellow members of the board, it was reinforced as we were negotiating a purchase from them. We [Mid Bronx Senior Citizens Council, Inc., Bronx, New York] were able to purchase this home because they were--their constituency had basically died out and the board was no longer interested in serving another constituency. Even though they could have if they'd wanted to but their interest was not as such. So we were fortunate enough to meet their broker and their broker interviewed us and he was impressed with our mission and we were able to work with him to give us a--they forgave part of the mortgage and then they gave us the mortgage, which they gave to another not for profit but we accepted that and we secured funding from the State of New York to open this facility as an adult care facility to house folks who were SSI [supplemental security income] eligible and that's how we were able to purchase this, through that combination of-- Speaker 2: And is that still the service that you provide here? Speaker 1: No, it isn't, we could not make an economic go of running the home at a SSI rate, 'cause the rates--we never got an increase in the rates. So we petitioned the state after about twelve years or so of running it as a home like that--more than twelve, maybe fourteen years of doing that and spending more than a million dollars of our own money that we were not a business of funding a state programs, so we had to terminate that for that purpose, and now we use a home not as a residence but to provide community based services. We provide childcare services, we've had certain universal pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs, we provide employment training and training programs, we also house a woman and infant care program operated by some others. But we decided to turn it into a family resource center and to make services available to support and sustain family life in the community. Story_ID: 564455 Speaker 1: So you said that when you moved to the Bronx [New York] and you started working with LILCO [Long Island Lighting Company], that you were married and started a family. Where did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: I met my wife in high school, in Tech High School [Technical High School, Springfield, Massachusetts], but we didn't--we got engaged in my senior year of college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. So we were able to--she saved--when I left for college she moved to New York [New York]. Her family had moved to Springfield [Massachusetts] when she was in elementary and junior high school and so that's why she was there, and she had wanted to go to nursing school, so when I left she came back to New York and started working and going to school. She decided to stay, so when my mother [Daisy Smith Williams] remarried and she moved to New York, so then Springfield was no longer my destination. During the summers I would come here and so when I graduated I returned to New York and Sandra [Sandra Terry] was here then, and we got married in July of--July 5th, 1969 and we had two children. Dennis [Dennis Terry, Jr.] was born in--my son Dennis was born in 1971 and my daughter Kelly [Kelly Terry (ph.)] was born in 1978, and we all resided in Highbridge [Bronx, New York]--Woodycrest [Avenue] in Highbridge and now I reside in 1001 Jerome [Avenue], which was a three bedroom large place and that's where our family grew up, so I'm still there and Dennis's still there. So we're all are getting along. Kelly's in another part of the Bronx doing human service work. She works as a co-director of a community development corporation and focuses on the environment and young people. So she got bitten by the work, by the bug so to speak (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're spreading it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 564456 Speaker 1: Will you tell us about your board membership on the South Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation? Speaker 2: Well, that began some time in probably the mid about '76 [1976], '77 [1977]. That was an organization that had been founded sometime in the early '70s [1970s] as a result of the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], changing of the demographic of the Bronx [New York], and it was viewed as a way in which to coalesce businesspeople and people who wanted to create an economic environment that would promote jobs and just support and sustain the family life and community life here. So I agreed to serve not in an officer capacity, but people asked me if I would and I said yes and I did. So I served it for many years and I eventually ended up being on their executive committee although not an officer but to assist, I think John Patterson [John T. Patterson, Jr.] was the executive director when it started, and I stayed on until Phillip Morrow who is the now president of it, succeeded John and I thought that at that time that was enough twenty-seven years was enough of that. But it's grown to be a rather substantial and quite effective organization in the life of the economic development of the South Bronx because it has provided loans and financing for a number of the Bronx businesses down there. I think that started out small and has grown to be substantial midsize firms, a trucking company, a brewery- a beverage distribution company and it just emerged as Bronx stories so to speak. They can tell their own story I'm sure if you get to their website, but it's part of the Bronx community now, but then I remember when it was in its formation and struggling. Only those of us who lived in the Bronx believe in it the way we did. For a decade or so this--I'm not sure if people really understand the significance of this, but this borough was pretty much disinvested by its--by city government here. There was a policy called planned shrinkage and it was a policy that was formulated and implemented by Roger Starr who was a housing commissioner here and he later became a professor at urban planning over at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. So there was disinvestment not only in the--by government, in the resources and the people of this borough. Story_ID: 564457 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the--your attendance at the National Black Political Convention. Could you-- Speaker 2: Well during the early '70s [1970s] I think liberation was very important. The liberation movement was sweeping through the former colonial- colonies of the world, so many of us viewed our status in this country as similar to that of a, of a colonized people, so I think the black political convention was an opportunity for those of us who were young and interested in full participation in the political process in this country--was attracted to it, so I went out to see what it was about. I read about it, I knew many, many people who were part of it so I took a boat ride--a bus ride with a group of people out to Cincinnati [Ohio]. I took some time off took a day or two of vacation from Long Island Lighting Company and went out there. I ran into some former classmates from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] as well as high school [Technical High School, Springfield, Massachusetts] (laughter) and upon my return to Long Island Lighting Company, I'm in the corporate dining room and one of the waiters said to me, "Did I see you on TV this weekend in Cincinnati?" I said, "I don't think so" (laughter). I'll never forget Betty [ph.] asking me that question. I hadn't realized they had-- Speaker 1: Did you know you had been on television? Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't know that but I certainly wasn't about to let them know that I had attended. They already knew I was progressive and somewhat radical with a beard and an Afro in their executive dining room but to go out to that one would have been (laughter) a bit much. So if they caught me going I didn't confess to it, but I was there. Story_ID: 564458 Speaker 1: You received a couple of awards recently, one--well at least recently was the Congressional Record? Speaker 2: Well, my local--yeah the local congressman, Congressman Jose Serrano [Jose E. Serrano], who was one of the--we kept him in office long enough for him to be the head of the House Appropriations subcommittee [U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Commerce, Science and Justice], so that's a nice little thing. But he's been a, I guess an acquaintance and our congressman for a good number of years now, twenty-five or so and they contacted me and said that they thought that I--would I accept an award to be recognized in the Congressional Record. So I conferred with my daughter and she said, "Yeah you have to dad, you just have to do this." So I said okay. So last April they presented me with a certificate of citation and so I enjoyed it. I invited some friends and family and I along with others partook of it. It didn't really dawn on me that we do this every day in [U.S.] Congress where we recognize the citizens of this land--this great country of ours who make democracy work, make the country work by working every day doing what they do to make it better themselves and their neighbors. Speaker 1: And what about the Citizens Advice Bureau [BronxWorks]? Speaker 2: Well that's Carolyn McLaughlin who heads that--launched this recognition process of those of us who work in the Bronx [New York] and live in the Bronx and who have been doing what they call unheralded or unrecognized work through their work with institution building and providing for the needs of the residents. So she does a living legend awards ceremony and she too asked if I would accept and I said okay, and then I had the difficulty of finding the appropriate bio and all those sorts of things which I always seem to do and they presented me with a wonderful award and some artwork that had been prepared by artists affiliated with the Bronx Council on the Arts (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was the quilt? Speaker 2: This is a wonderful piece of quilt work, yes just absolutely lovely. So I was very pleased I had accepted that. But I haven't consented to do anything lately. I tend not to do that, I don't even hang my awards normally not lately--not the last twenty years, I keep them in a box. I guess now I have two grandchildren I will probably hang them up (laughter). My children [Kelly Terry (ph.) and Dennis Terry, Jr.] have seen them so now I'll pull them out again and let the, let the little ones see them. Story_ID: 564459 Speaker 1: Presently what are your future plans? Speaker 2: Well, my future plans are to continue doing some of this work. I'm still affiliated with Mid Bronx Senior Citizens Council [Mid Bronx Senior Citizens Council, Inc., Bronx, New York] and we have some properties that have potential to be developed into a higher use or a better use for the community, housing, et cetera. We intend to develop that and in the throes of doing that, that will enable us to expand our endowment and to ensure that the platform that we have will live beyond those of us who have founded it and provide an opportunity for our children and other young people their age to step in to assume leadership positions of institutions that service their community, that of course would look like them which is an important legacy to leave behind. Based on our experiences this is far different than when we found our communities so those that we had to--if we didn't have institutions some of us, some of us had to build some. So I think that institution building is what a lot of people in my generation found an opportunity to do. It was necessary to do it and some of us found an opportunity to do it and I'm pleased to be an American as they say 'cause I don't know if it would have happened in any other place than America. As challenging as it has been, to spend equally a rewarding as well as disappointing at time, I think time has tempered my expectations and I know that the nature of humans change incrementally and less more so than revolutionary. I'd say that's probably what I learned most over the time. That's how change comes about; I've learned how little I know as well (laughter), so I'm excited about every opportunity. I still learn, I love to learn, I'm still inquisitive and I love to engage old people, young people, in between people about living and what we do and what's possible. We face a challenge now with our young people and people wonder what's going to happen to them. I say they will be all right in the long run as long as we don't stop just keep challenging and keep working we'll be all right 'cause they'll find a way to work in ways that will ensure that we'll all right, I believe. Coalition, working in coalitions is a very difficult kind of work. Be it individuals or institutions, egos are egos and they are always present, but if you get past it and can get work done it tends to last a lot longer than the individual achievements I believe. So, I wonder if I was born at the right time though with some of these views. Collective approaches are not necessarily what a corporate environment is, I found that out after twenty-five years or twenty-six years of it; I could not move that monster to move in a collective and collaborative approach. That's where you sharpen your individual and competitive drives are within those institutions. So clearly Grandpa Jake [Terry's maternal great-grandfather, Jacob Smith] must have left me with a different kind of perspective, was a little more humanistic and universal. So, but I accept it and welcome the gifts that the creator has bestowed upon me and my family and work with what I have. Speaker 1: Well, we thank you for doing that work and for doing the community building and providing (cough) homes and support for people in the Bronx [New York] and for creating that legacy and we want to thank you for your time today. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Speaker 1: Thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 564460 Speaker 1: Well, we're looking at the christening of my daughter and she's being held by her Aunt Gladys [ph.] and Gladys' husband, Wayne [ph.], and their two daughters, Denise [ph.] and Kimberly [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And what, what year is this (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is about 1979 probably. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And where? Speaker 1: In the Bronx [New York], in the Holy Name parish [ph.] in Highbridge, Catholic church. Speaker 2: And that's a baby photo of my daughter, Kelly [Kelly Terry (ph.)], and I'm guessing she is within, oh boy, maybe six months, six, seven--six months to a year in that range that would put it about 1979, '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: And that's my son, Dennis [Dennis Terry, Jr.], and he's in a similar range too I think. Sandra [Terry's wife, Sandra Terry] used to take pictures of them at similar ages, so that's Dennis the older, her brother. Speaker 2: And that's in 1969, that's a photo of the wedding, our wedding photo, one of them. Yeah, and I had hair then. Yeah. Speaker 1: And that looks like my daughter's christening. So, she's (unclear) by her mother. Speaker 2: This is of course a picture of my son holding his sister. Speaker 1: And this is a special one, this is my--that's Kelly on the left being held by my [maternal] grandmother [Julia Smith Jones], that's my mother [Daisy Smith Williams] in the middle and that's my Aunt Roscie [Roscie Smith] on the right. Speaker 2: And this too is very special because we're catching my grandmother and mother on the left and, and that's my mother-in-law, Jovita [Jovita Rodriguez Solivan Vazquez] and her husband, Nicholas [Nicholas Vazquez, Sr.]. This too is at the christening of Kelly outside the church. Speaker 1: And again this is the family at the christening. Dennis, Kelly, my wife, Sandra, and myself. Speaker 2: That's my high school graduation picture in 1963 from Springfield Technical High School [Technical High School, Springfield, Massachusetts]...