 Story_ID: 98757 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Sterns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please. Speaker 2: My name is Myron H. Thompson or Myron Herbert Thompson, its M-Y-R-O-N, Herbert, H-E-R-B-E-R-T, Thompson, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: January 7, 1947. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Tuskegee Institute, Alabama. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm now a United States District Court Judge in Montgomery, Alabama. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: The location of this interview is at the, the federal building in the courtroom of the United States District Court, courthouse. It's a rather noteworthy and historic place, it was the site where many important decisions were handed down back in the '50s [1950's] and '60s [1960's], some of the more famous ones being, the one that led to the Selma to Montgomery march, voting rights march. It was the judge who sat in this courtroom, Judge [Frank M.] Johnson, who authorized that march, it's also the courtroom where the case that eventually resulted in the desegregation of the Montgomery buses, was held, the decision came from this courtroom. It's the court from where other extremely important decisions were made dealing with the rights of prisoners. One of the first cases in the country to, to say that prisoners had a constitutional right to be free from cruel and unusual punishment, in particular, overcrowding. It was also the courtroom that rendered one of the first decisions saying, that the mentally ill had a right to humane treatment. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 20, 2007. Story_ID: 98758 Speaker 1: Okay. I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish-type questions, okay? Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color? I'd say blue. Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you like to eat? What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I really don't have a favorite food, I like all foods. I like variety. Speaker 1: All right. When you go on vacation, is there a favorite place that you like to vacation? Speaker 2: Yes, Mexico City in Mexico. Speaker 1: Okay, the time of the year that you prefer? Speaker 2: I think the fall. Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I'm not sure I have a favorite phrase or saying, no. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Let's begin by talking-- Speaker 2: I, I always find that brief phrases never really capture what I feel. Speaker 1: --Okay. Story_ID: 98759 Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family, your mother and father, let's start with, with your father. Tell me your father's name please? Speaker 2: My father's name was Lawrence Thompson, Sr. Speaker 1: All right, and do you know where he was born? Speaker 2: Not sure, I think he was born in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: All right. And what-- Speaker 2: I think he was like the--while he was a senior, he was maybe the second or third Lawrence Thompson, I do know that. Speaker 1: Okay, what about his parents. Speaker 2: I never knew his parents. Both of his parents died before I was born, and I think they died when he was rather small himself. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: He had a step-mother, whom I did know. Speaker 1: All right, and what was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Myrtis [ph.] Thompson. Speaker 1: And did you have a relationship with her? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, will you share some information about that? Speaker 2: She had been a teacher, she was a very warm, kind person. Actually she was the only grandmother that I knew and then, and 'til later in life, I was not aware that she was not my real grandmother. She had married my father's father, I think late in his life, I think she was a bit younger than he was and I don't think she was ever a true mother to my father, I think he may have been grown when they were married. But she was a true grandmother to me. She was very close to my family. To my mother and to me, my parents divorced when I was very young, so I think it was rather unusual, but very good that my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] stayed in touch with my father's family, including my grandmother, well actually, my step-grandmother, as well as my father's other relatives. Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: On which side? Speaker 1: On your father's side, was he Lawrence [Thompson]-- Speaker 2: His name would've been Lawrence too. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: In fact, his name is Lawrence, my father's name is Lawrence, my brother's name is Lawrence, and my son's name is Lawrence. So there're like four generations of Lawrence's and they actually may go back further than that, I've been told. Story_ID: 98760 Speaker 1: All right. Well let's talk about your father [Lawrence Thompson, Sr.] then. Share with us information about growing up that your father, maybe he might have shared stories about his growing up? Speaker 2: His growing up. I don't remember a lot of stories about his growing up. My father left when I was five. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the only memories I have of him, before five, were of his hunting. He was a hunter. I know he would hunt squirrel, and I remember his going hunting and bringing back squirrel and other than that, I just remember his leaving home. I remember when he left, even though, I'm not sure that the memory's a valid memory, you know children tend to make up things. It's more like what you're told, then what you actually remember. And so, I'm not quite sure it's the real memory, but, I do remember, I think I remember his leaving and then he left when I was five and then, I saw him once again, when I was seven, and then I did not see him again later until I was a teenager, very briefly, when he was then, living in New York [New York City, New York] and I went to visit him in New York. Speaker 1: Okay.-- Speaker 2: So, I, I don't have a lot of memory of my father-- Speaker 1: --Okay.-- Speaker 2: --Other than, that I look like him. I am convinced that genetically, I think I share a lot of him. I think I'm physically like him. I think that, just things like, you know, I tend to--my leg goes like this, you know people who do that with their legs like this? He did the same thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm an avid reader and was always an avid reader, and I think I got that from my father. He was kind of iconoclastic, in other words, he didn't always do what everybody else did, he had his sort of, had his own beat, he lived according to his own drummer, and I think I share that with him as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he loved movies, and we definitely had that in common and we came by that totally independently. Only when I saw him again as a teenager, that I realized that we both were, through, through just my having grown up with my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] and having just a dear love of movies. I found out that he shared that love when I saw him again. Speaker 1: Okay, what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: When I was growing up, he had gone to college at Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], but had not finished and then he became a shoe repairman and he ran a shoe shop on the campus and I understood from stories that were told about him, that he was extremely a good shoe repairman, people loved him. And then, when my parents divorced, that's when I was five, I don't know what he did after that. Later when I saw him in New York, when I was a teenager, he did, I think he had served as a waiter in New York, I think he mentioned that. He'd also been a stock broker in New York, and then a sales man, he sold women's apparel for a while, just sort of an array of things. He was also an extremely good bridge player, and he played bridge. He was a tournament player, as a matter of fact, and I used to read the New York Times, and he would read the New York Times, but the first thing he read was the bridge section because he loved to read the hands in bridge, big, big bridge time player. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Story_ID: 98761 Speaker 1: All right, let's go to your mother's side of the family. Tell me-- Speaker 2: I know a lot more about my mother's side of the family. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, okay. What is your mother's name? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford. Speaker 1: Can you spell Glanton for me please? Speaker 2: G-L-A-N-T-O-N, that's her maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then she was a Thompson when she married my father [Lawrence Thompson, Sr.] and then she was a Buford, B-U-F-O-R-D, when she married my step-father [Kenneth Buford]. Speaker 1: All right, and what about your grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: My grandparents on my mother's side, I knew my grandfather very well, I knew my great-grandmother on my mother's side, somewhat, she died when I was fairly young. Speaker 1: What was your great-grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Oh dear, what was her name? I--it slips my mind right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't tell you. Speaker 1: And your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was John Henry. Speaker 1: Glanton? Speaker 2: Glanton. Speaker 1: Tell me about your grandfather. Speaker 2: My grandfather is a very interesting person. He finished--he only went to the fifth grade, he--I don't think it's disputed that he was a product of, of a relationship between his grandmother [sic, mother] and some--and a white male, so he was extremely fair and he was a ve--extremely hard working, was very sensitive about that part of his heritage, which he never talked about, that he was half white, half black. I've never been able to fully uncover the true history of all of our family because, he never really wanted to pursue it, and to be honest with you, I'd never pursued it except on the black side. He later educated himself, pretty much, as I said he only went to the third grade, but he (unclear), became a well-educated man. Had six children, all of which he sent to college. He became a farmer, he strongly believed in their going to college, well pardon me, (unclear) going to school at all. As a result my mother, who was the oldest, left home to go to school, when she was in the seventh or eighth grade, because there were no schools for blacks back in the early part of the 20th Century, back in the 1900s, for blacks beyond the seventh grade. There was a white high school, but there was no black high school, so my grandfather sent my mother away, in fact, to Tuskegee to go to high school, Tuskegee at that time had a high school, college. And then his second daughter, who, when she reached that age when she could not go to high school, he sent her away to high school as he did the third daughter. So, my grandfather essentially was sending his kids away to go to high school and then of course he then put them through college as well. And they all, well my mother, went to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], one went to, I think two went to Tuskegee and one went to Alabama State University [Montgomery, Alabama]. But, when the first of his sons was born, he decided that he'd had enough of sending his children away to school, so he decided to start a public school in Dothan, Alabama, which is where they grew up, Henry County [sic, Houston County], down in the southeast corner of Alabama, and went and raised money, found a teacher, housed the teacher in his home, and started the first public school so that his sons would not have to go away from home in order to get an education. So they were able to go to the schools down there, eventually they went to the public schools when they were, eventually established public schools for blacks down in Houston County. He ultimately became, as you probably can guess, a rather prominent figure in Houston County, he raised peanuts, cotton, pecans. When I was a child, I remember going down to see him and he always had just bags and bags of pecans and peanuts which he would give to us. Our family was extremely patriarchal with my grandfather at the top and then my grandmother, who ends up, was actually my step-grandmother, my real grandmother had died when I was two or three years old, but I did not know that until later in life, I always thought she was my real grandmother. But, he then went into real estate, made a sizable sum of money that way and just became a central figure in Dothan, Alabama, which is where he eventually moved his family after he sold the farm, he moved to what we call the big city of Dothan and started a real estate business and he was very involved with just everything in that community. Story_ID: 98762 Speaker 1: Do you know how your grandfather [John Henry Glanton] acquired the land for his farm? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. I, I didn't--I never heard that he got it through any type of particular government, you know, re--giving away of land to blacks. As far as I know, he basically bought it. My grandfather was extremely proud and had a strong sense of earning everything that he got and refusing to, to take anything from anyone else, probably almost to a fault, because he couldn't understand why other people couldn't do the same thing. He was an extremely generous man in the sense of what he did for his community, he was incredibly generous to me. Through my college years, sending me money or, or just supporting me generally, as a child, I--there's a part of me I haven't told you about, and it sort of shaped my future dramatically when I was two. But, everyone in Dothan [Alabama], just loved him, absolutely loved him. Speaker 1: Well?-- Speaker 2: But, the negative side was, he went to places other people couldn't go. You know he was--I remember when I first started my law practice, you know, I went to, down there, you know, he could get me a loan, he walked into banks, he did all these things, a lot of other blacks couldn't do that and, I don't think he ever realized that he had certain privileges that other blacks did not have and I think that may have colored his perspective sometimes on the plights of others. Speaker 1: I see, and that was because he was very fair? Speaker 2: He was very fair. Yes, extremely fair and sometimes you could not tell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His mother actually was, was part Indian and she was also very fair. Speaker 1: Do you know what tribe? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I do know that I was told definitely she was Indian, part Indian and in fact, her hair, when I saw her as a young child, I would just--use to remark that hair which, went all the way down her back in long big plaits. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I assumed, she was probably a mixture of Indian and white and black. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about-- Speaker 2: But my grandfather never talked about that, he was--I always got the feeling he was slightly ashamed of that part of his family, the white part. Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: Now the only other story I know that we used to tell when we were kids were, you know, the black part, the black history, being that, you know, we had some ancestors who were definitely slaves and there was one woman who my parents [Lawrence Thompson, Sr. and Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] used to talk about who--the story was that, that--it sort of reflects a little bit on the story I'm gonna tell you about my mother. My mother used to always say that--and this reflects to time, I don't think it's a valid assessment of women's plights today, but of the--a female plight today. But she used to say, "If a man hits you once, it was his fault, if she--he hits you twice it was your fault." So, when she said, you know, I'll--"You shouldn't stay around after he hits you once," was the way she viewed it. Of course, you know, that's--we now know that, that just doesn't work that way, that women can--can't get up and leave like that, but that was her view, she was a very independent woman. But, along those lines, I remember once, my mother telling the story, and my aunts and my grandfather, about a great-grandmother we had who was a slave and how she said that no man would ever hit her and when someone tried to hit her, she jumped on the well and said, it you hit me, I'll jump in and kill myself, and the man never hit her because he knew that, that's the only property she had was her life, and that if he hit her, he would lose her, he would lose that property, and she would take her own life and take that away from him. And so she was never hit. Story_ID: 98763 Speaker 1: Tell me your, well I guess she's your step-grandmother, what was her name? She was the grandmother that you knew. Speaker 2: The grandmother that I knew, gosh I haven't seen her in so long, I'm trying to remember. I just called her "Big Mama," you know, it's funny how you don't get names. I can't remember her first name now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a very quiet person, reserved. I think basically, tended to my grandfather a lot, I think she had taught when she was much younger, but as far as I can remember she never taught when I was growing up. She cooked a lot, she was always cooking for the family. Whenever I was around her it was always, you know, trying to get food down me. That--I think that was some of the reason for her being, you know, was to feed us all and to make sure the house was warm and (laughter), I--one of the funniest stories to, when you think about your grandmother is the smells, and I remember that, whenever I would go stay at her house, and I would sleep in a bed, especially when I would go visit with my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] and sometimes my mother and I would sleep in the same bed, I was a little boy and I remember the smells and the talcum in the bed. She would put talcum powder in the bed, so that the bed had this wonderful odor of a smell, delicious smell of talcum and to this day, you know, I, I've never been in a bed where anybody put talcum in it and, to me it was just heavenly to sit there and also it was so hot, you know, this was before air conditioning and you would be so hot, and then, then it would just be that sort of coolness of the powder and then the smell was just so delicious and it's just a fond--when I think of her, I think of that. Story_ID: 98764 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well now, tell me about your mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford]. She went off to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], did she--? Speaker 2: She went off to high school when she was seven because, you know, she couldn't be educated. Speaker 1: In the seventh grade? Speaker 2: Cause there were no schools for her. And, in seventh grade, you're right, and then she went to Tuskegee, where she studied business and eventually became a secretary. Tuskegee was well known, it was, you know, Tuskegee went through a period where the question was, you know, was it going to be a trade school or was it going to be quote, sort of like a renaissance school, you know for people who wanted to go out and, and become, you know, educators and scientist and so forth, or did it want to be a school that basically catered to tradesmen, carpenters, plumbers, builders, things like that. And, so my mother went there during that period, when that debate was going on, which is an interesting debate, which is actually, parallel the debate between Booker T. Washington, and what's the guy [W.E.B. DuBois] from Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], oh goodness, the well-known one, anyway, (laughter) everybody knows his name except me right now. Speaker 1: It'll come to you later. Speaker 2: It'll come to me later. Anyway, Booker T. Washington believed in the trades, as he said, you know, what's the good of studying Greek and Latin if you, you know, how's that gonna help you be a bricklayer and actually my father [Lawrence] had very strong feelings about that too, because he, he strongly believed that Tuskegee at that time should retain its, its reputation as just being an incredible trade school, even though it was a college, but it, it had the trades part of it. And blacks who came out of Tuskegee back then were just extremely well-known for being, you know, not good carpenters, but the best carpenters, not good printers but the best printers. And anyone who had a Tuskegee degree, you knew was, as far as the trades were concerned, were, were just the best that you could find anywhere, you know. If you had a Tuskegee bricklayer, you knew that you had the best that there was. And Dubois is his name. Speaker 1: Oh, W.E. B. Speaker 2: But Dubois had this view that, you know, blacks should be receiving, you know, the classical education, you know, studying everything from Greek and Latin, to history and so forth, philosophy and Booker T. Washington, of course, thought that Tuskegee should cater to the farmers, which is Tuskegee was located in the farming area and that's what--he thought that that's the, the people that he--that the school should serve. And when my mother went there, she became the secretary and she was good, and I think throughout her life, she never felt that Tuskegee or any other school produced black secretaries of the quality that came out during the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] out of Tuskegee. Because then, its mission changed, you know, it became more of just a regular college, rather than a school that produced people who just had incredible--at least, incredible trade qualities. She eventually, was a secretary for a while, in fact a secretary at the college, she later became a postal worker and then later became registrar of the actual college itself, sort of worked her way all the way up. Story_ID: 98765 Speaker 1: Tell me about your personal relationship with your mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford]. Speaker 2: This is where it gets back to something that happened to me. At the age of two, I had polio. The--this was during the period of this polio scare of the '40s [1940s], everyone knows about President [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt having polio, this was before the polio vaccine and I think this may have been either the last or the next to the last great scares, I think there was perhaps another scare in the fif--early '50s [1950s]. But I caught polio at the age of--in 1949, when I was two years old, and rumor has it from my parents, that I was completely paralyzed and I can imagine how devastating that was for my mother, I'm assuming my father [Lawrence Thompson, Sr.] was still there as well. But, a lot of kids were struck with polio and this actually has--this story goes two different ways, first of all, obviously, a mother who has a sick child, will develop a close relationship with that child and I spent a lot of my growing years in the hospital, I had series of surgeries, therapy and just learning how to live with, with a disability. And I remember the hospital there, a lot of children died, I think there were three types of polio and for some people, it was totally, you were--you died, well I did not have that type, I was paralyzed. Story_ID: 98766 Speaker 1: All right, so we were talking about-- Speaker 2: Polio. Speaker 1: Polio. Speaker 2: So my--you were asking about my relationship with my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] and as a result, I spent a lot of time with her, you know, visiting the hospitals and going through the therapy, getting the braces and actually, you know, that had an impact on me as a kid because, we used to have to come to Montgomery [Alabama] from Tuskegee [Alabama], which was forty miles away from Montgomery to get my braces, my leg braces and my mother would then take me to the stores and she would usually treat me to something, you know, like a hamburger or milkshake or whatever, and that was really my first real knowledge about segregation because when she would take me to things like Walgreens or places like that, we would have to go to the basement to get the hamburger and I really--that was the first time I knew about a truly segregated community. Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] at the time was all black, that is the colleges, which is where I grew up, so I never confronted on a daily basis, the segregation, because if you're around all black people there was nothing to be segregated from. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, we lived right, pretty much right on the campus and I just never came in contact with white people, I didn't know any white person, almost, I never really developed a white friendship with someone I can say that I appreciatively knew as white 'til I went to college, but that's another story. But getting back to the polio, we would come here to and, to have the braces and then of course as I said, there were the surgeries, there were the summers in bed, I was recovering from the surgeries. But the other side of that story is that Tuskegee was sort of the center for the treatment of polio. The hospital at Tuskegee was where all of the kids who had polio, I assume there were some adults too, but I only remember kids, would come and it was actually nationally known for treatment of polio and today, if you go to Tuskegee, the college there, they actually have a museum that's dedicated to the polio epidemic and how the college was the sort of center. I remember being there, I remember the doctors who were, who treated me there, and I think one of the reasons it was also well known, is these were all black doctors and rarely could you find in one community, this cadre of extremely well known black doctors who were expert in a particular area of science. And there was a Dr. [John] Chenault who's just nationally known for the treatment of polio, he treated me, and when you go to the museum there even today, and I understand the hospital, they eventually tore down the hospital in Tuskegee, you see they had just a big hospital, but the polio wing they kept because it was so well-known, and, and considered sort of the mecca of, for, for people who had suffered from polio. And years later, talking to people and the scourge of polio and how horrible it was, and how Tuskegee was just sort of this hope in this desert of this of, of this disease called polio, there's sort of been an effort now to, to tell the story and I find myself, and I've had several people confront me, you know, and say "Why don't you tell the story of your experiences growing up as a polio victim and particular, you were one of the children who was treated at Tuskegee, and one of those black kids that who was treated at Tuskegee." And I do remember the children dying, the only other thing, getting, getting back again to smells, I have a feeling that smells are very important to children, was one of the things I hated about the hospital was, they had a burn unit at the hospital and the children who had been burned were in the ward next to mine and the smell was just horrendous, I hated it, and it was obviously some type of medicine or cream they were using on their, on them, and it just smelled so horrible and I would always hate to be around the children who had the burns, because I just could not stand the smell, and so that sort of sticks with me as a side effect of having, having grown up with polio. Story_ID: 98767 Speaker 1: The impact that really had on me is in the sense, because I was--I couldn't do things other children could do. I, you know, I, I was never able to run, I'm incapable of running, I can walk and I'm a very big exerciser, I exercise, I exercised this morning for an hour, but I just can't run, that's one of the few things I cannot do. I'm just incapable of running, I can walk very, very fast, in fact, for periods of time some people don't even notice that I have a limp, but I do, but I'm just--I, I have, I have a muscle that's missing in my legs that won't allow me to run. And, but for that, you know, it just led me to have a fairly normal childhood, but not just an extremely active one. I know, I never could play football, or basketball which meant I spent most of my time reading, so I became a very academic-oriented kid. I, I read everything, constantly and spent most of my time just doing things that were passive I guess you would say, and as a result I was just very good academically and I have this view too about children, that a child does as well as you expect him or her to do. And if you expect a child to be a "C" student, he or she will be a "C" student and if you expect a child to be an "A" student, they tend to be an "A" student. Obviously, there are limits on that, I was telling you before I don't have any favorite phrases, because if a child obviously has certain limitations, they can't be an "A" student, but I do think that's true and I, and I point to myself as a prime example, one of the things about disease, and I have very strong feelings about this is, if people are like deaf or they're mute, or suffer from any type of disability, most people think that they're mentally disabled as well. For instance, if you're like physically disabled, they'll also assume that you're probably mentally deficient-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And they'll treat you that way. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, even though it may be that your disability has your inability to speak or you're blind, but it doesn't mean that it affects your brain. But people just make that association, so they will tend to treat you as if you are limited. And I think I got a little bit of that as a child, I, I don't remember it directly, but I think that in my early years, I think that perhaps even my relatives assumed that because I had polio, because I was an invalid, because I was not as active as most children are that as a result, perhaps, you know, I was probably not as bright as, as some of the other kids were. And I remember my third grade teacher, whose not a remarkable woman at all, but for some reason she got it in her head that I was smart, and she just started treating me that way, when I went to her class, someone must of told her that, and from that moment on, I made straight "A's" from that very moment on, and then went to the top of my class and continued from that point, and then people began to expect it of me. And, that--I sometimes think the polio had, both that negative impact at the beginning, where I think that people assumed that if you were disabled, you were probably limited mentally. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: As well as the effect of, as you get older, some people made the opposite conclusion and it led me down another path. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, the polio of course had a strong impact on my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] and my co--my undergraduate, my elementary school years and, you know, I just couldn't do the other things the other children could do. Story_ID: 98768 Speaker 1: All right, what lessons can you point directly back to your mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford], that she taught you? Speaker 2: Lessons my mother taught me, she taught me one thing in particular that I will never forget. I remember once, I was a member of Jack and Jill [of America] when we were growing up and I guess we were a very middle class family, the community was very stratified, racial, I mean stratified economically, not racially, it was all black. But I rem--well actually two lessons, I remember my mother teaching me. I remember when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] started the Montgomery Bus Boycott and we had in our house a maid, who, I think, both took care of me and washed and, and so forth, and this was a period of time when my mother may have been, had not remarried and was struggling. You know, she had this child who was ill, she had an older, my brother who was five years older and my father [Lawrence Thompson, Sr.] was not supporting her and I think she was probably relying significantly on my grandfather for, for, if not financial help, at least strong emotional help. But we had, nonetheless, we had a lady who worked for us, who was paid nothing almost I would think back then, and I remember we would take her home every day and she would always sit in the back of the car and I would sit in the front and sometimes I would sit in the back with her, 'cause I liked her, the maid, her name was Maryann [ph.] and, you know, I mean, and we would just--she always found me a little fascinating a little weird kid, because, you know, I liked music that was kind of out of--I loved jazz, even at the age of seven or eight and I loved to read music, I mean I loved to read and I would listen to classical music and just do things that other kids didn't do and I think she just found me a little bizarre. And, but, but we laughed a lot, I mean, we loved each other a lot, but when Martin Luther King started the Bus Boycott, and the women started walking in Montgomery [Alabama], and they were not gonna sit at the back of the bus, I remember my mother telling us and telling Maryann that never again would she sit in the back of our car, that she was gonna sit up front with her when we went places, and I would sit in the back or in between them if I was small enough, but never again would she ride in the back. And it was so funny because, I think that, that Maryann felt more uncomfortable about that than I did, and that my mother did. I think that she was the one who really had to come to grips with the notion that my mother now said, you know, "No more, no more, you know, class, you know, you're not, we're not gonna reproduce what white society has produced, you know, you'll work in my house and so forth, but you're gonna, you're gonna be equal," and that was the first thing that my mother taught me which I remember very strongly when that happened. The second thing was, once I was having a party and, Tuskegee [Alabama] was a community, that--a college community [Tuskegee Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] so a lot of the parents of the students whom I went to school with was a very good, extremely good private school, probably one of the best private schools in the state, if not the best private school in the state at the time. Those parents were college professors and doctors who lived in the community and I remember having a party, I wanted to invite my friends and my mother said to me, but all your friends are people who are college professors and so you have to have friends from other places, and she told me to make sure that my, my party had kids who, who lived on the other side of town, and I remember she made sure that I did that. And so, you know, quite often when people talk about blacks, we never really confront the on class--the classism in our own community and how some women, and I would say this was more women than men, I don't ever remember men doing this, but I do remember women doing it, we're very sensitive to the classism in our own, our own society, and how it really was important that kids knew, even privileged black kids knew what it was like to have friends of all types, even though they may be of one race, but also of, of different economic backgrounds. And that had a strong impact on me that my mother said that. Story_ID: 98769 Speaker 1: And then the third thing, I know you were asking what my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] said to me? Was when I finished law school, I'd gone to Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut] as an undergraduate, I'd gone to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] and the debate was where would I go and practice law? And I had worked on Wall Street in Manhattan [New York City, New York] and I could have, you know, made an incredible salary being a Wall Street lawyer and I--there's another side to her remarks, but I remember that she was asking me what I was gonna do with my life now that I had, I had done all of this. And I said, I wasn't sure, but you know I had these offers to go to New York and make a good sum of money and my mother says, "Don't you care about your people?" And I said, "What do you mean by that?" And she said, "Don't you care about coming home and helping other people?" And I, you know, I'd tell my friends, I told my friends at Yale at the time, I said, I'm probably the only kid whose parent doesn't want him to make a lot of money, who wants him to come home and be of service to his community, you know, must parents want their kids to go out and get money and be successful, but that was the opposite of my mother. And, I did it, she got me to come home. Of course, she got me to come back and live near her, but (laughter) that is probably the other side of the coin, but she wasn't totally interested in my making large sums of money. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She, she was a very strong believer in civil rights and I remember doing the--when [Richard M.] Nixon and [John F.] Kennedy were running against each other back in the '60s [1960s, sic, 1960], and you remember when Kennedy called [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] in, in jail in Atlanta [Georgia] and my father, my step-father then, he was actually field secretary for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and very much involved in civil rights but was a staunch republican, but that's when all blacks were republicans, you know, they sort of Lincoln republicans before they really became democrats back in the switch in the '60s [1960s] and the '50s [1950s]. But my mother was one of the early ones who went democrat and she was a strong believer in Kennedy and, I think she just had a very strong sense of equality and I, and I think that her sense of equality was very much a feminist sense too, because I also remember my mother said she'd never went on a date where she didn't have enough money to pay for her way back home. She never believed that she would ever be--she said, "I'll never be dependent on a man in my life." I think that may have grown out of my father. She said, "I'm an independent woman, I will always be an independent woman and I'll always be able to pay my own way." And, I think that transcended any race thing, I think that trans--I think that laid itself out in the sense of, that, you know, sex for her meant being equal, you know, there's no such thing as men being superior to women, we're all here equal and I also think it played itself out economically, you know, that, that regardless of race that, that black men could be just as sexist or blacks could be just as economically biased as anybody else and we have to fight against all forms of bias, no matter what form it comes in. Story_ID: 98770 Speaker 1: All right. You mentioned your step-father. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Did your mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] marry while you were still-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --A child? Speaker 2: She married when I, I think I was in the fifth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your step-fathers name? Speaker 2: His name is Kenneth Buford. Speaker 1: And tell me a little-- Speaker 2: He was a minister. Speaker 1: --More about him. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: He was a minister in Tuskegee [Alabama], when my mother married him that meant we had to move to the church and move into the parsonage and I became very much involved in the church at that time, as was my mother. Speaker 2: What church was this? Speaker 1: It was called Butler Chapel Church, it was A.M.E. Zion Church, which is actually where Tuskegee was founded. The grounds where the church is where the Tuskegee was founded, and it's probably my earliest direct involvement in the Civil Rights Movement as they call it, the Civil Rights Movement. My step-father was extremely, and was very much a part of the Tuskegee, I think it was called the Tuskegee Improvement Association, I'm not quite sure, and in particular in voting rights, heavily involved in voting rights, which probably leads to my own particular interest as a judge. I've been very, very aggressive when it comes to voting rights, and I'll admit that. But, he, he lat--his church was a very much a focal point for much of the events that occurred during that period of time when it came to the desegregation of the schools, when it came to the, the preparation for blacks to go down and register en mass, a lot of the meetings were held at our church and I remember going to those meetings, and I remember sitting down at those meetings out on the floor quite often in the front, just before, you know, the pew--the, the front pew. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And I'd just sit on the floor there and all these adults were around me and, and one of the reasons I there is because I was responsible for opening up the church quite often, I'd turn on the lights and, and I'd get it ready. He'd send me over there to do that and when people would arrive, I'd stay and I'd here all the speeches and, and it got me very much involved, and I, and I was energized by it and I was of course fascinated by all these people who were so excited about what was going on, I'm not sure I totally appreciated it, 'cause I was so young, but I was definitely a witness to it as a child. Story_ID: 98771 Speaker 1: You told me about the community when you were living and--in the Tuskegee Institute [now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama],-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, when you moved to the parsonage, where the church was-- Speaker 2: That was very dramatic in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I'd moved from a community where there were doctors and lawyers, to a community where the economic cross section was definitely something I was not used to. I had been gro--I when I went to the, to the elementary school there, which was known as Children's House, and it was a well-known elementary school and as I said a lot of doctors' children and lawyers' children and professors' children went there, in fact when I, in the seventh grade--eighth grade, I finished the eighth grade there, half my class went away to boarding schools, up east. And then when I ended up at Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut], three of us out of that school were at Yale, one or two of us were at Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] and one or two of us were at Brown [University in Providence, Rhode Island], schools like that. That school had produced these kids and we had sort of reconnected. I was one of the few kids who went--ultimately went to an Ivy League School, but went thru the public school system, because my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] had strong beliefs in public schools, so I stayed in the public schools. But having grown up in that community, when we moved across town, and then literally across town, in with my--it's very interesting how you picked up on that, to live with my step-father [Kenneth Buford] in the church, you know, it was no longer the church I went to which is was mother's church where, you know, the college teachers went and their wives and their children went, but now you know it was just the, the maids and everybody else went to the church and my father had just a country church, my step-father did, and it was, it was interesting, I, I was not used to that. And, it was good, it really, it really, I think it rounded out me, as a, as a person, and I think it really played a lot into my sense of, of, of--that the real problems in this society are not always racist, but economic and that the real problems in our society are not always racist, while racist, racism is very critical in our society but also sexist and I think that, that move and having lived in both environments, let me see that and a lot more, in a lot clearer terms. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the element--the name of the elementary school that you attended, once you moved across town? Speaker 2: The--well I stayed at the Children's House. Speaker 1: Until? Speaker 2: When I moved across town, but my friends were different, because the kids I played with were, near the church and so forth. Then I eventually went to the high school [Tuskegee Institute High School] which was a public high school which everybody went to, except those kids who had, who had gone to my elementary school, a few of them did go to the public high school with me, but a lot of them had gone away to these prep schools. Story_ID: 98772 Speaker 1: And, I, I, just to give you another funny little story, I remember riding the bus to high school when we moved across--actually what happened was, we didn't move across town, now that I remember, until I actually went to the seventh and eighth grade. We lived in the house where I had grown up in, so I never, well I went to the church where my step-father [Kenneth Buford] was, I didn't actually live in that community where the church was, but when I reached seventh and eighth grade, when I started going to public high school, we also moved across town, which meant for the first time I had to take the public bus. And, my parents [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford and Kenneth Buford] always, you know, I either walked to school or something like that and here I was on the public bus and I remember riding a community bus with these kids from the county, they called them the "kids from the county" and they were so different from me and they considered me nothing but some sort of egghead, you know, the kid, the badger, and I remember there were two girls on the bus who just badgered me all the time, and they would walk up to me on the, when I was--well they'd approach me on the bus and sometimes even when I would sit down they would get on the back seat behind me on the bus and threaten to beat me up, these were two girls, and but they were just--they just knew that I was just so afraid, you know, these country kids and had never been in this environment, they weren't gonna really beat me up, I didn't know that. And four years later, in high school, we became best friends and then we went back to a reunion for our high school and we're still best friends, I mean, and you know, it, it was just these girls were so different these two girls were so different from me and, you know, they just taught me the real world, they taught me, you know, you don't--you can't live in this sort of isolated environment and, and, you know, and, and I remember one of them was so funny, of all my other friends from, from elementary school, none of them ever mentioned the fact that I had polio, these two girls would say, they called me "Hopalong Cassidy," they even had a nickname for me, so they, you know, they were just unafraid to harass me and badger me and do things like that. And in a way it was very freeing, and, and yet, I knew they respected me, and I knew that once they came to realize that, that, you know, I'd gotten over being afraid of them, that I knew, in fact I often, I often thought that one of them had a crush on me, because she, she used to just hit me all the time, it hurt so bad, she'd punch me in the shoulder and suddenly I realized, maybe she's trying to say something else to me. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: But, you know, I--it just--it was just really nice and I remember them so fondly and yet, you know, these are the two girls that just bullied the heck out of me when I first (unclear)(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Do you remember their names? Speaker 1: I don't remember their names, no. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Not now, but I do remember them so fondly, and when I see them, you know, I went back to a class reunion and we just, we always joke about it, and they still call me "Hopalong." (Laughter) Speaker 2: All right, now-- Speaker 1: They're the only ones who have the guts to do it. (Laughter) Story_ID: 98773 Speaker 1: Now, you talked about smells-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that you remember, what about sights and sounds? Speaker 2: Sights and sounds-- Speaker 1: Of your childhood. Speaker 2: --Smells have a much stronger impact on me. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I remember, when I was reading a book, I remember when reading when I was a kid, I would associate smells with reading, reading a certain book, so even when I have that smell again now, I will remember the book I was reading when I had the smell, that's how much I loved books back then, because they were the only thing I could, I mean, they were like my world, that's the way I got out of bed sometimes, just by reading. I don't remember sights and sounds as much, I--the only way sights come in is growing up in an all-black community, I remember I, I did not know what white people looked like and that was a kind of interesting notion for me. So when I went to Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut], it was my first experience ever being around someone who was white and not being able to tell them apart facially, so that I couldn't--I didn't know what--I would look at them and I couldn't tell them apart, they all looked the same to me, (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter), that's interesting. Speaker 2: It is, but it's the truth and it's so funny, I went back to a college, the, Yale was all male at that time and I went back, just last year and two of the guys who, who were members of our sort of small group of eight guys, we'd get together every so often, meet in New York at the Yale Club and I was looking at them and we were showing pictures of ourselves when we were like nineteen years old, freshmen in college, and they looked nothing alike, and these were the two guys I could not tell apart. Story_ID: 98774 Speaker 1: Tell me about your sibling, your brother. What is his name? Speaker 2: Lawrence [Thompson, Jr.], but we called him "Bootsy." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we are very different. My brother went to college, he never really finished, married very young, and had children, because we were five years apart, he really left home when I was what? Seventh grade, and went to college and so he wasn't around during a lot of my, my childhood and then because we were five years apart, we didn't play together a lot. But I've come to realize later in life just how significant it must--his role was in my life, because he was there during those early years instead of my father [Lawrence Thompson, Sr.]. It must have been awfully difficult for him to, not to have a father and to have a very sickly brother, and above all, I think because a lot of my mother's [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] attention was probably, and I'm pretty certain, was redirected towards me, taking me to the doctor, taking me to hospitals, I'm sure that took me--took her away from him and I've never ever known him to display any jealously or resentment as a result of that, not even a hint, but I can't, you know, but it ha--had to have affected him. He's been very successful, with his life and a lovely family and so forth, but we just have different interests, he's not as bookish as I am. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98775 Speaker 1: Besides reading, you were active in the Jack and Jill club? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your extracurricular activities? Speaker 2: Well, I, as I said I didn't do sports because I couldn't and the Jack and Jill was really one of the few things that I did like, except I sometimes found it very limiting in the kids that I got to knew, got to know. I, I, we took a lot of field trips, we would go to places like Atlanta [Georgia], Auburn [Alabama], and the reason we did that was because we couldn't go to places because they were off limits for blacks, so we would go to things like museums, Jack and Jill was just very well known for trying to expose black kids to things that they otherwise would not have been exposed to because of limitations placed on them by society. And the Tuskegee [Alabama] Jack and Jill was extremely well known for that, it was also an incredible network of getting to know people from other communities, so for instance, if, if I went to Detroit [Michigan] for vacation, and my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] wanted me to meet other kids, she would just find out who the black and--the Jack and Jill kids were in Detroit and that would be the connection. And, we also had these regional conferences where all the black and Jill kids--Jack and Jill kids would get together and I got to know kids from other towns throughout the South, kids that I would otherwise have not have known, even here in Montgomery [Alabama] to that degree. You know, I got to know kids from Montgomery who were in Jack and Jill, so Jack and Jill was just an incredible social network for children and it was a way that black children really were able to connect in this society that otherwise said, you know, that you were excluded from others, other aspects and it, and it did, and it, and it tried to provide something that was in--nurturing, like they had reading groups, they had concerts that we would take us to. And they'd try to provide things that, that otherwise for some Jack and Jill kids, they might not have had an opportunity to go to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That that was probably my main outlet. I never really, I never was that ac-- as I said, you know, because of the polio, my activities were probably somewhat limited, so it was mainly just reading and studying a lot. You know, I remember something from Ralph Ellison, I don't know if--who by the way, went to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: To Tuskegee. Speaker 2: But, he talks about "covert preparation for overt action," my favorite phrase, is talking about a favorite phrase, I remember reading that in high school and on, I was re--I did a lot of reading in high school from Ralph Ellison to James Baldwin, you name it, but that was one of my favorite and I always considered that period of time when I was doing all that reading, my covert preparation and today is my overt action. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98776 Speaker 1: Okay, so now you're going to enter high school in 1961. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Tuskegee Institute High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I didn't like the fact that I didn't get to go to a prep school by the way, even my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] said I was gonna go to a public high school, but she was right, she was very smart, and I deser--I needed to be in a public high, public high school. It was a great education. Speaker 1: Now, during these years, in high school, civil rights-- Speaker 2: Really-- Speaker 1: --Really getting-- Speaker 2: --Going everywhere. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about your experiences. Speaker 2: Well, this is when my father [Kenneth Buford] was very much involved, my step-father, I should say and he, you know, I, I just did a lot of things with him and the conversations at the dinner table tended to be more, you know, focused on, you know, what was going on, there was also the period when I, I just read the Atlanta Constitution [now the Atlanta Journal-Constitution] religiously, I was all--I was just very much into public events and things like that. I was not a socially active child though, I, I was--I remember the kids who were required to integrate the Montgomery, pardon me, the Tuskegee, or Macon County school system, they were all friends of mine. Now, I always felt somewhat left out that I had not been chosen as one of the kids to integrate the white high school over there. And I always, to this day, and I never asked my mother whether it was because of my polio, you know, maybe they were just afraid that, you know, I couldn't run, and, I could not run fast enough to get away in case something happened. But, that was when that was going on and I remember the kids who had been chosen and I always had mixed feelings about it in another way too. I always thought, "How could a parent let their child be exposed to all that danger" and, and yet, I also was curious as to how the children had to courage to do what they did. And even to this day, I'm always awed at these children who, who went through that, and so many of them have just such incredible scars left from that period of time that I've seen appear before me in court, and I've heard and feel very deeply about the sacrifices that they made, that I was not required to make. But that was my high school experience, but at the same time, because I was not involved in the desegregation of the Macon County School system, my high school experience was just very typical. You know, it was the prom, you know, going to the football games, falling in love, you know, being jilted, having crushes, you name it, what every high school kid goes through, you know? And. Speaker 1: Obviously you continued to be an excellent student? Speaker 2: I was. Yeah. I--It's kinda curious, you know, I, I was actually number two in my high school, I was not number one when we graduated, the guy who was number one was a kid who I had always--he had not gone to elementary school with me to that very good elementary school [Children's House] and I later found out he was competing with me all the time and I was unaware of it, and it actually made me feel very good, you know, he, he--that he did that. I was not a terribly competitive person, I just did it for the heck of it, I- Story_ID: 98777 Speaker 1: My high school [Tuskegee Institute High School] was not a very hard high school, in the sense that, it was not academically really hard, it was like a lot of black high schools back then, were you tended to have two tracks, you tended to have the kids who were going to go--not going to college, then you tended to have the kids who were going to college and the kids who were going to college did need to go along one track and to be very candid with you, they got the better teachers and so forth. Which taught me another lesson in high school, another little story here, one of the--in the ninth grade, through some fluke, I got separated from the kids who were going to college, and I got put into a class with the kids who were not going to college for an English course and I was upset as hell, and there was nothing I could do about it. All my friends got to go--be taught by the, the kid--the teacher who was teaching the kids who were going to college. It ended up that I later learned that, the teacher I had was the better teacher, but she just was not in the same social circles as the other teachers were. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And therefore, she was teaching the poor kids, and she also went to my church, my step-father's [Kenneth Buford] church, so I knew her already. I'm not sure how that happened, I've often speculated that she did it, she took me out of that class and put me into her class. But I told you about my third grade teacher [at Children's House], the one who, who expected so much of me, the next great academic change in my life was that year I spent with her, she literally self-taught me for an entire nine months. She took my desk, she moved it to the front of the class, she made me sit right next to her, she gave me an English book and she made me do the whole book that year separately, and she literally just taught me everything I, I don't think I ever learned after this--later three years of high school, the four years of the Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut] undergraduate school and Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], as much as I learned from that woman during that nine months. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: Oh goodness, she lived across the street from us too. She's dead. And she actually would even carry me home from school sometimes, oh dear. Speaker 2: Well, that's okay. I just thought may-- Speaker 1: I just can't remember and, I, I could call it right after--cause I've just known her my whole life until she died. But anyway, she--I, I'd never been so furious about anything that happened in my life and I've never known anything to be that rewarding. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And, I remember we--she taught we prepositions, she taught me just gram--basic grammar that other kids never learned, until this day I still use, I even use with my law clerks now, you know, I--you know, just things that she taught me, she just made me learn it, made me learn it. And, I do think that, as a result of that, when I later decided about my college career and my--particular my readings that I was doing at the time, which she made me do, when I took the SAT's, what they call them, I don't know if you know what the SAT's are, Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Scholastic Aptitude Test in high school, I just, and I'm being very candid with you, I just blasted them. I mean, I scored over 700 [out of 800] in math and, and so forth, and close to 700 in verbal and I got into every coll--I got early admission into Yale, I got early admission into Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], everything just right there on the spot, and I owe it to her, she did it, she just prepared me. I just literally from that moment on, I'd, I think she convinced me, I was smart and she also convenience me to work really hard and to be really prepared. And she was the black teacher who was teaching the kids who were the poorest in the school and she was not teaching the kids who were smart. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And-- Miss. Perry was her name, P-E-R-R-Y. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I--and she just--she just--I just remem--and I remember riding around with her, she would take me places with her and we would talk about grammar and she would correct me. I remember she would all--I would often say, often and she said the word, she said, "You don't pronounce the "t" when--in often, it's often, not often," and I remember just really a minutia of grammar rules that a lot of people don't know, that she just made me learn. And when I write now, my opinions as a judge, you know, she speaks through me right and left, and she has no idea, I don't think she ever knew the impact she had on me, Miss Perry. Speaker 2: Did she live to see you become a judge? Speaker 1: No. Story_ID: 98778 Speaker 1: Um-hum. Now, also, in these years, '61 [1961] through '65 [1965] Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: The country went through a lot of changes-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Do you remember the March on Washington?-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --And [President John F.] Kennedys death? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me--(unclear)(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I remember Kennedys death and I remember, I remember I was in high school [Tuskegee Institute High School] and I remember the class I was in when Kennedy died and I remember just, you know, how horrible that was and how the--we actually recessed class and I heard about the white school, the kids in the white school, you know, cheering-- Speaker 1: Cheering, yeah. Speaker 2: --And I remember all of that, and my parents being very upset. You know, I, I get, I get back to the [Ralph] Ellison thing about covert preparation for overt action? Speaker 1: Um-Hum. Speaker 2: Well, I was very upset about that. I was never that active socially, I'm still very much a recluse, I, I was reading what--I knew what was going on, I was reading about it, but I never did anything. So, I never probably went out, you know, and demonstrated, or anything like that, I probably curled up with a book somewhere. And that had nothing to do with polio, except for the extent that I was use--that was my reaction usually, to things, was to go read. So, when you talk about that period of time, I still remember it as being a period when I--while the Ken--there was a Kennedy assassination, there was the March on Washington, I remember watching that on television, I remember my parents watching it too, and I remember it definitely having an impact on me. But, I'll be very candid with you, I was probably back in my room reading philosophy or reading classics or reading some novel or, and I'll be also very can--I was also back there preparing for my SAT's [Scholastic Aptitude Test]. I studied for SAT's for three years, literally, and I remember when I took my SAT's my senior year in college, the ones when my math, which I knew, I said, I said I don't think I got one of the answers wrong on my SAT test and it ended up I got one wrong 'cause I didn't make 800, I made 700 and something, but I was that confident, but that's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was just that hard a studier and that's all I did, so, and I think a lot of people thought that I was indifferent to civil rights. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But, I think that I knew that, that what I needed to do was to get myself ready, because I'd, I'd--I'd always had this feeling that something else was in store for me, and it was a matter of being ready for it when it happened, and making sure that when it happened, I was gonna be number one. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 98779 Speaker 1: When did you decide, or how did you decide that you would go to Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: One summer I'd gone to the, an institute, a science institute at Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], I did that in the summers, I loved them, my parents--my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford], made me do it too, but, and I loved doing it. It was also a way to get me out of the house, 'cause we would live on the campus, but I was in the community, my home was right there too, but it would get, get me out of the house. And I met some kids who had come down from Yale and Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], these were college kids and some from the law school as well, and then when I first went to see my real father [Lawrence Thompson, Sr.] in New York [New York City, New York], they were up there in New York, two of them were and they apparently recognized that--that I probably had the potential to go to Yale or Harvard or any school like that, before I even did. I had actually applied to a number of small mid--midwestern schools for college and when they, they invited me to come interview, to tour these schools, which I had never considered going to, while my friends from the elementary school I had told you about, had gone too these schools, I never thought that I was of the caliber to go there because I had gone to a public high school. So they, they took me around and they introduced me and they showed me Yale and they showed me Harvard and they showed me Amherst [College in Amherst, Massachusetts], I had, had dinner at the president of am--of Amherst's house on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], in which brings up a little story I want to tell you about, which it is, sort of plays into my life, and I suddenly realized, you know, maybe I can get into these schools and then in the meantime I got my SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] scores back and when they, when everyone saw those then the schools all, literally they said you're admitted, there were early admissions everywhere and then I got a full scholarship to the--in the midwestern schools and ended up going to Yale. And the reason I went to Yale, and I was--I got into Harvard as well, was because they thought, because I came from a small community, like Tuskegee and never been away from home that Yale was much more of an undergraduate school, assuming I was not gonna go to a small private school, college. I wanna tell you this story about when I went up to Martha's Vineyard with a friend of mine, who had taught me that summer, who's still a good friend of mine in New York now, he, he went to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], where I eventually went to Yale Law School, just following, and he went to Yale undergraduate school as I did too. And, he was taking me around New Haven and I remember going and staying at his house at Martha's Vineyard, and this was my really first time of seeing people outside of my community like Tuskegee, you know, all black and certain, you know, culture and so forth, and I don't think his parents meant it as an insult, but I remember being upstairs and we were staying--they had this beautiful house on Martha's Vineyard, you know, I was sort of--I was ogled by the wealth and he had gone swimming that morning in the ocean, he liked to go swimming in this cold ocean, I wasn't about to get into that freezing water, and I was walking down the stairs and I heard his mother say, "Doesn't Jim bring the most unusual guest home?" And it dawned on me then, that I was sort of like an experiment, that I was sort of like a, a, you know, sort of unusual, I was like a stray dog or something that, you know, I was not, I was not the person that Jim would typically have brought home, you know, from Yale, and so forth, I was this unusual person. And, you know, and I, and I kept that in for a long time and I just never forgot that comment, and yet his parents were just as sweet and as nice, and I'm sure they were just as liberal and loving of black people as they could be, but with that one comment, I knew that I was not one of them. Speaker 1: Interesting. Story_ID: 98780 Speaker 1: Now, let's see, in '65 [1965], you enter Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut] and-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Tell me about that experience. The transition from Tuskegee [Institute High School]-- Speaker 2: To Yale? Speaker 1: --To Yale. Speaker 2: The main thing was, my parents thought that I would be totally devastated, being away from my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] and my step-father [Kenneth Buford], mainly my mother. I was not, I never got homesick, I loved it. I love Yale, I found it rather daunting academically, because that's the first time in my life I'd ever been challenged academically, I was no longer a straight "A" student, it was easy to be a straight "A" student in my high school, here I had to work for my "A's". Also, I was rather undisciplined, because while my study habits were to go into a room and just read, and read and read, I read what I wanted to read. I'd never been told I had to read a book or I had to produce a paper by a particular time and so forth, so I had a really hard time getting used to the rigors of, of, of requirements that a university or any school placed on me. I just was self-educated, very candidly. And, except for the time with Miss Perry and a few other people who kinda helped me out. So, Yale to me was very new in that regards. I mean, I had these requirements that had to be met and I had to, to live by their, I had to read a book when they wanted me to read it, not at--and I also had to do it when they wanted me to do it, not at the leisure that I wanted to do it at, and I found that very hard, but once I got use to that, it was okay. There were not many blacks at Yale. This is, this is pre, the real movement to include blacks, so there were only maybe 10 or 11 blacks in my class out of a 1000, and in my college, Yale was divided into 12 colleges, and still is, and I was the only black in my college, so I had no black friends except, unless I went up to another school to visit, you know, some black friends or if for dating, sometimes blacks would get together so that we could date, so, I nev--I just had no black friends. Speaker 1: Well, how was that experience for you? Speaker 2: I think that one of the reasons that--I know that some people had it--found it very difficult, I told you there were two guys there from Yale, two guys from elementary school [Children's House]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: They were used to that, I mean, they lived in that environment, one of them in particular, had grown up, had gone to Mount Hermon [Northfield Mount Hermon School in Gill, Massachusetts], he lived in that--he knew how to live in that environment, and he actually adopted sort of the culture, actually he was sort of a hippie-ish type guy too, I think he, he later died for other reasons, but, for he had mental health problems, but he was much more acclimated to that environment. I was not, and I think because I, in many ways, because I was so academic anyway, I, I, I just think I was used to being alone, and I did develop close friends, I never really found it that hard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I know it sounds odd, but I never, I never found the adjustment that difficult, other than the part I mentioned about telling people apart. That went away after a year, and then I was able to tell people apart and I would just meet them in the hall and It was just say, "Hey you," you know, "how you doing?" And then eventually, I was able to give them a name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: How many of the black students graduated? Speaker 2: From Yale? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Most of--I'm sure they all did. Speaker 1: Oh, they did? Speaker 2: Yale was known for always--if you went--if you got into Yale, it was known for graduating, yeah, you didn't flunk out. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: And still that's true today. They, they, you may be a year behind, sometimes they'll ask you to take a year off, but you graduate. That, it's--it has an attrition rate that's--that boarders on zero, and it was--that was true back then and I think it's still true today. They, they've taken it, it used to--back then it was a 1000 men and they graduated a 1000 men. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now it's men and women. Story_ID: 98781 Speaker 1: So you received your undergrad, your B.A. [from Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut], in? Speaker 2: In political science. I, I, you know, I'll be very honest with you there too. I was very apolitical, and I think some people thought that I was rather conservative, but it wasn't really conservatism, it was indifference, to politics. My parents [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford and his step-father Kenneth Buford] were still very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement, I was not. A lot of activity was going on at Yale, which I was not involved in, I tended to study and I liked movies a lot, so I just went to movies all the time, and, and read. And, when I eventually came up for the judgeship, I think I still have that reputation as being very academic and I think some people thought that I was extremely conservative, when in truth, I was not, conservative at all. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, I think that was probably--that's one of the reasons that prompted my mother's comments, I think she also thought that perhaps I was a bit removed from the reality of some things. Story_ID: 98782 Speaker 1: You were talking about not being politically active but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --That you wanted to read and watch movies. Tell me about the films that you enjoy? Speaker 2: I just enjoyed movies that were out of the mainstream. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember movies like "Black Orpheus," Portuguese film, will actually it's from South America, Portuguese, it's one of my favorite. I liked foreign movies, I loved French movies extremely, [Francois] Truffaut movies, I think that came from the reading, because I just liked different cultures, and I--and for me, in a way it kinda grows out of polio again, it was for me, a way to escape the limitations of my life and, so to me, movies were a way of getting out of whatever it was I was in or whatever limitations were placed on me, and I could experience it either through a book or through a good movie. And I, and I liked things that were very unlike me, the more unlike me it was, the more I liked it. Speaker 1: Where were you introduced to foreign films and operas and-- Speaker 2: Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], Tuskegee had an incredible film society, you re--this is hard to imagine, but back in the '60s [1960s], and I'm sure even the '50s [1950s], for I can remember, black colleges were just sort of this mecca of culture, my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] actually went to Tuskegee, as I told you before, and Tuskegee was known for its incredible choir, with William Dawson who, actually, I think it was [Igor] Stravinsky, did a piece with Stravinsky, and they went to Carnegie Hall [New York City, New York] and my mother actually sang at Carnegie Hall when she was in the choir at Tuskegee. But, Tuskegee would bring all these just super, super artist to Tuskegee, not just black artist, you know, you, you could hear anything from Count Basie to, you could hear Yehudi Menuhin, who was a great violinist, matter of fact, I heard him at Tuskegee, and that's where my interest in music, and particular music that was not necessarily black music, just even classical music, but not only just black music and classical, even black and classical, like William Dawson who, who was there, who sort of tried to bring the two together. In fact, he lived down the street from me when I was growing up and I was always in awe of him, but when I was growing up, I could go to all of these movies and I could go to these concerts and I, I saw ballet all the time when I was growing up, and I loved ballet and I think one of the reasons I liked ballet was because I had polio and I knew that I could never be a dancer, so it was one of those things just beyond my reach and this was a way to experience something that I knew that I could never do. But, Tuskegee brought it all there. And I remember when I was growing up my mother who recognized how much I loved the arts, I always had seat one, row one at every concert, I had seasons tic--season tickets and every year the college would sale season tickets to the--everything from "Porgy and Bess," as I said, to a [Ludwig Van] Beethoven concert, and I always had seat one, row one, and I was right there for everything, and my mother would go there and they would always reserve it for me. And, I think, to give you an idea of how this played out racially, the kids from Auburn University [Auburn, Alabama], would sometimes come to Tuskegee to see the concerts, it was, it was the reverse of what you would expect. I remember the time Yehudi Menuhin came there, there were several kids from Auburn, they were white kids who had, who, who were studying violin, who came of all places to Tuskegee to hear this violinist and you would think the black kids would be going to Auburn to hear this, they were actually coming to Tuskegee to capture this culture. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And, today, you know, when I, I, I see Tuskegee and I, and I see other black, what they call other historically black colleges [HBCUs] now, you know, I, I miss that, I, I think that's a lost that integration has brought, that, that this sort of mecca, almost a saturation of culture, that black kids could experience back then. You know, you can't do it. You can't experience that anymore, and you can experience within your own culture too, which was kinda nice. Story_ID: 98783 Speaker 1: But you were actually, going back to whether I was politically active in college [Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut]. I was not. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Again, I tended to be basically, I did a little socializing but I can't say that I, I was that involved in what was going on. The war [Vietnam War] of course was big during the latter part, we're talking '68 [1968], and '69 [1969]. I remember when [President Lyndon Baines] Johnson came on television to announce that he would not run for re-election as president, a lot of the kids went out and celebrated, I did not. I consider my awakening to have started in law school when I became more soc--socially active. When I got into Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], which to me was quite, quite exciting, that wa--[Secretary of State] Hillary Clinton was in my class and [President] Bill Clinton was behind me and [Supreme Court Associate Justice] Clarence Thomas was two years behind me, I consider that the exciting time, that's when I became sensitive about the war and I guess sensitive about other issues. What had also happened was, I think that, when I renewed my relationship with my father [Lawrence Thompson, Sr.], had gone to New York [New York City, New York], this is in high school. My father was extremely liberal, I thought my father might even be a communist, I mean, (laughter), I don't think he was a communist, but back then I thought, you know, he was just espousing these ideas that were just so radical to me that, and I'd grown up in a little town, I just said, you know, these are un-American ideas, and I think I was rebelling against him a little bit. So, I think I, to some degree, was taking the opposite position of things that he would take, and he came out against the Vietnam War very early on, and I thought that was the most un-American thing that anyone had ever--could ever do. And, I told him that, by the way, and we would have these long and involved arguments about the war. And, and then I also came to a realization that too that I thought that he was probably smarter than I was, even though he hadn't finished college, even though he'd never been around me and so forth, and I suddenly realized that, that my being at Yale and all that I had achieved, you know, I'd probably gotten from him because I realize it was probably his genetic makeup that was--even my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] had this strong impact, but it was his genetic makeup that was really giving me what I was using and I didn't like the idea. And, so I think it was a bit of rebellion against that too. And-- Story_ID: 98784 Speaker 1: But when I got to law school and there was this strong impact of my step-mother and my, I mean, my step-father [Kenneth Buford] and my mother, and the war breaking out, the war movement being at its real height. I remember the [Robert George] Bobby Seale trial and that was my first real involvement on a public level. The Bobby Seale trial, I don't know if you remember that, was when he was a Black Panther and he was tried in New Haven [Connecticut] for murder and the President of Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut] named Kingman Brewster, had questioned whether he could get a fair trial before a jury in Connecticut, particular for this may--might be an all-white jury. And a lot of editorials were written attacking Kingman Brewster for his comments and indeed Spiro Agnew, who was then Vice President of the United States, with [President Richard M.] Nixon had attacked Kingman Brewster for sort of saying, questioning whether Bobby Seale could get a fair trial. And I wrote a letter to the Montgomery Advertiser here in Montgomery, Alabama, and I, and I remember prefacing it by saying that I am an Alabamian, I didn't say that I was black, I just said I'm an Alabamian and I think that the question of whether a black person can get a fair trial is an appropriate question to ask. And I remember after writing that letter, which they published in a local paper here coming from someone at Yale, my mother [Lillian Glanton Thompson Buford] said that several FBI agents came to see her and said that they had seen the letter, now you have to remember that my mother and I had different last names and, as far as she knew, they did not know that I was her son, and that was really the beginning of my sensitivity of what, what was going on in the world and I guess that's when I admitted, sort of metaphorically speaking, I started looking up from the pages of the book and then decided, you know, what did I want to do with my life, I'd gone to work on Wall Street [New York City, New York], I'd--in the summers, I knew what it was like to be a Wall Street lawyer and then I decided I wanted to do Civil Rights work and to come back to Alabama and to devote my life to, to doing Civil Rights work in Alabama. And I will say this in my behalf, and I'm somewhat proud of it, I was a late bloomer in the sense that I was the one who woke up late, but I was the only one who took--who ran the whole course. (Laughter) Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Many of my friends who were out their demonstrating did not come back to Alabama and do what I did. Speaker 2: Right, you're exactly right. Story_ID: 98785 Speaker 1: So you received your law degree [from Yale Law School in New Haven, Connecticut] in 1972? Speaker 2: '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay, and you talked about working on Wall Street [New York City, New York] during the summer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Between '72 [1972] and '80 [1980], when you-- Speaker 2: When I was appointed. Speaker 1: --Appointed judge, tell me what you did during those years? Speaker 2: For two years I was an assistant attorney general. Speaker 1: In what state? Speaker 2: In the state of Alabama, I was the first black Assistant Attorney General for the State of Alabama, I think ever, definitely since Reconstruction. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, that made a lot of news. Alabama had an incredibly progressive, young, energetic, attorney general named Bill Baxley [William Joseph Baxley, III], wasn't much older than I, he'd been elected attorney general just through the force of his personality, but he believed in equality and he decided that he wanted an assistant black attorney general and he called me at Yale [Law School in New Haven, Connecticut], literally called me and invited me to come back, and I remember coming down for the interview and I agreed to come back here and work and I thought it was a good way to introduce myself into--back into Alabama. I'd been gone since my high school years and I hadn't decided where I wanted to setup a law practice or whether what type of law I particularly wanted to practice at that. Of course, the first hurdle was to get by the state bar and that was an interesting experience because I, I'd have to admit that I never--the support I had to make sure that I passed the bar was just incredible. I mean, from Bill on down to everybody in that office, they were determined that I would be prepared. And this was a time when I finished--the bar was given in June, now, I think it's given in July, and I only had two weeks to study, (laughter), so I had--I studied, you know, catching a few hours' sleep when I could, I, I studied for the bar, of course, I passed, but also, Alabama--Yale was notorious for teaching people to become professors and things like that, and not necessarily teaching the rudiments of the law, they taught more theory and so, when I came back here, I really had to learn the basics, like I didn't know what Yale--Alabama at that time, used something called "common law pleading," I'd never even seen common law pleading, so I was sitting there studying for common law pleading, never having seen this, what I considered arcane view of the, of the practice of law. Fortunately, and I, sometimes I think that there's somebody watching out for me above, I walk into the exam and the professor says, "Alabama is now going to get rid of common law pleading, we're now going to test you on the Federal Rules of Procedure, which are what Alabama's going to." I had taken two courses in the Federal Rules of Procedure at Yale Law School, I knew that inside out, so, somebody was watching out for me. (Laughter) If it had been common law pleading I would not have passed. Story_ID: 98786 Speaker 1: Okay. And for two years you were, you were in (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: The attorney general's office [of Alabama]. Speaker 1: Um-hum, and then what happened? Speaker 2: And then six years, I was in private practice in Dothan, Alabama. Speaker 1: So that's from '74 [1974]-- Speaker 2: '74 [1974], through 1980. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wanted to be a hip pocket lawyer. Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: I wanted to be a hip pocket lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know if you've ever seen-- movies? You've ever seen "Anatomy of a Murder"? Speaker 1: Um-hum, yes. Speaker 2: [James] Jimmy Stewart in that movie is a hip pocket lawyer, what it is, is he's a hometown lawyer who has all the law in his hip pocket, he's just a good trial lawyer and he takes anybody who walks in the door and, and, you know, he just likes to be in court and that's what I wanted to be. And, of course I was not a real hip pocket lawyer, I mean, I, I did open a law book and I, and I did research, but my image was of a hip pocket lawyer. So, what I did was, I took the money I had saved from the work I had done as the attorney general's office, who--I didn't make very much, but then I didn't spend very much, and I literally had money saved up from my work on Wall Street [New York City, New York], that's how much money I was making on Wall Street during those summers. I used that money to buy a house in Dothan, Alabama, an old house, one block from the county courthouse, lived in the back and opened an office in the front, and I just put out my shingle. Speaker 1: Oh. (Unclear) Speaker 2: And, invited people to come in, and my grandfather [John Henry Glanton] was down there at the time, and he was very helpful obviously and in fact bought, bought me a lot, he bought me my desk for my secretary, little things like that, and, and he had a lot of real estate so I did some of his business, but I was the only lawyer that would do labor law. All the other lawyers wanted to work for banks and stuff, I would represent unions and most of my practice dealt with Civil Rights law. And as a result of that, I did mainly school desegregation cases, I inherited most of those, I did the Dothan school desegregation case, I was a lawyer in that, I did a lot of first amendment cases, I represented professors, and a lot of my clients were white, like professors at Troy State University [now Troy University in Dothan, Alabama], who had first amendment claims, I would represent them. Speaker 1: You said many or most of your clients were white? Speaker 2: I was say they were half and half. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I would do sex discrimination cases and race discrimination cases obviously, so the breadth was pretty, pretty broad. But I also did divorces and I also represented--I did criminal work, I did it all, that's what a hip pocket lawyer does. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But I was very comfortable in federal court, and quite often, when a lawyer would get a case that involved federal work, they would associate me, because I knew the federal terrain, 'cause I was comfortable in federal court. Speaker 1: And, and that's a little unusual because, with the criminal, the state courts and the federal courts are so different. Speaker 2: Extremely different. In fact, one of the things I would do when I had a union case, like they would bring a case against a union, when I--union would hire me, 'cause I would remove it, you could do it back then to federal court and they would dismiss it 'cause the lawyers were afraid to go to federal court. And for me, it was like throwing me in the briar patch, you know, and they didn't want anything to do with federal court, but I wanted to get to federal court, 'cause I, I knew this court, I knew the procedures, I knew the judge, Frank [Minis] Johnson [Jr.], and I knew I could get a fair shake. Story_ID: 98787 Speaker 1: How was it working with Judge [Frank Minis] Johnson [Jr.]? Speaker 2: I remember working with him then, it's a hard question to, to answer, without going through so much. Speaker 1: Well, to know him, I mean he's-- Speaker 2: Well, he was bigger than life. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: This is his courtroom that we're sitting in right now. Speaker 1: This is his building. Speaker 2: This is his building, and I-- Speaker 1: Building is, is named after him. Speaker 2: And I can remember sitting right there, where, you can't see it here but, the chair is over here and the bench is over here-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And I remember sitting in those chairs one day and being nervous as I could be because I had to make an argument before him but boy did he make sure you had to be prepared, and I was prepared. And once, I had worn contacts back then too, and one time my contact got out of place and I started crying and I was so afraid he was gonna think I was crying in his court. (Laughter) But, no he was bigger than life and it was, it was incredible to practice before him and you knew that you got a fair shake. When he was appointed to the Eleventh Circuit [United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit], I had three cases on his docket that had been filed maybe within a month or so, this shows you what an incredible man he was, he knew that I was not gonna--well I don't wanna say that, he knew that the likelihood I could get a fair shake, for another judge it was less. He set all of my cases for trial literally one after the other with--within four months later, 'cause he was gonna be sworn in as the new circuit judge-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --For this (unclear), which meant we had to get ready in four months and we--and I was scurrying around trying to get evidence, get ready for trial, and to be here for trial and he ruled in my favor in all three of them, pop, pop, pop, just like that, and I knew why he did it-- Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: The best thing that ever happened to me. Speaker 1: Why did he do it? Speaker 2: Because he knew that I had meritorious cases (laughter), and he wanted to make sure that they came out the right way. Story_ID: 98788 Speaker 1: Okay. What did you learn from him [Judge Frank Minis Johnson, Jr.] as a judge? Is there something that you use today that you remember or something that he might have done? Speaker 2: I think, I think the notion of impartiality, I think the notion of making sure that everyone gets a fair shake in your court. You know, my law clerks will often ask me why I don't look at witnesses, maybe that's why I'm looking you--to--you commented back something you said if--you said sometimes I look down, I look down a lot, but the reason I look down a lot is because I don't like to look at people sometimes when they're appearing before me, and the reason I don't look at them is because I want to make sure that what they look like has no bearing whatsoever in my decision making process. So like, if someone's testifying whether, I'll go back in chambers and my law clerks will say something like, "Did you see what that person was wearing?" And I'll say "No," "Did you see what, you know, whether they had a mole, or whether they were old or young," I'll have a general impression, but I try to make sure that whether you're poor or whether you're rich, whether you're black, whether you're white, whether you're male, whether you're female, whether you're gay, whether you're straight, you get a fair shake here and I don't care what you look like and all I wanna do is hear what you have to say, I wanna hear what the other person has to say, and I'm gonna decide it purely on that. And so, sometimes I just, I'm totally oblivious to those factors that to me, what I consider in our society to be totally irrelevant. So, you know, it will be like a witness, you know, I'll just, I'll just kinda put my head down and I'll just listen, trying to figure out, you know, what are they saying and I, and I just try and I think you have to be very conscious this, you know, I try to discount whether or not, you know, they're from the rich side of Montgomery [Alabama] or the poor side of Montgomery, to me it is, you know, how logically and how believable is their story. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that to me is Frank Johnson. You know what? I was, I was in fact giving a speech not too long ago and I was saying, you know, it's really remarkable that here's a white man from Alabama who had an incredible ability to empathize with black people. Where would he get that from? I mean, he is, he's not black, an incredible ability to, to appreciate what it's like to be a woman and to be discriminated against, where would a white male growing up, you know, back in the 1900s acquire that sensitivity, an incredible ability to, to understand what it's like to be in a mental, a mental hospital, and to, and to realize that as a mental patient, you deserve just basic dignity. Where does a man get that sensitivity? Or, the ability to recognize that the mere fact that you're in a prison system doesn't mean that you're stripped of all your dignity, that you still have basic human rights, you know, again where does that come from? And I think it comes from the fact that, that you just don't judge people by appearances, you just look to their inner core and you say, no matter who they are, that there's just something so basic, so central to the nature of a human being that, that's what you look for in every person that comes into your court. And so the mere fact, well once you realize that, you know, whether it, it could have been Asians who came in here rather than black people, I think he would have done the same decision. It could have been, you know, Hispanics, he would have done the same thing, because I think he just looks pass those, those superficial qualities, and that's, that's what I try to do all the time, it's a very hard job, and I'm not sure I succeed at it but, I sure try. Speaker 1: Well, the cases that you just mentioned are some of your landmark cases, I guess you would call them-- Speaker 2: Well, some of them are mine too. Some of them are his and he sort of set, he definitely set the groundwork. Story_ID: 98789 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about some of your cases-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Memorable ones that you want to talk about. Speaker 2: Well, you I, now you're talking about what it's like to be a judge. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I was the youngest judge at the time in the country, I was thirty-three years old and that's another story and you really ought to talk to Fred Gray, about that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Because he probably knows more about that than I do. I, I was more catapulted into this position, I did not earn it. Speaker 1: What do you mean? Speaker 2: Judge [U.W.] Clemon earned his position, do you know who Judge Clemon is? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: He's the district judge, he's a black district judge in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He paid his dues, he, he was a state legislator, he was very much involved in civil rights work, he bought some incredibly important cases desegregating various institutions in this state as a lawyer. So when it came time to select a federal judge he seemed like, a black federal judge in particular, he seemed like a logical choice, here's a man who'd spent his life at that point and time, dedicated to equality for everyone. I was thirty-three years old, I barely had time to find my way to the courthouse. The two candidates at that time were Judge Clemon and Mr. Gray, Fred Gray, who's Rosa Parks' lawyer, Mr. Gray who was probably one of the foremost black lawyers, not only in Alabama, but in the United States. President [Jimmy] Carter had nominated both of them, Mr. Gray to replace Frank [Minis] Johnson [Jr.], and Judge Clemon to assume a new job up in Birmingham as a judge. Judge Clemon got through, Mr. Gray did not and Mr. Gray was vilified so unjustly and I think that sometimes, it's sort of like Moses, you know, you get to lead the people there, but you don't get to enjoy the-- Speaker 1: Um-hum, you don't go into the promise land. Speaker 2: You don't go into the promise land. So, Fred Gray, who had represented Rosa Parks, who had represented the troopers and the trooper case here in Alabama and appeared before Judge Johnson many times, got incredible rulings, the [Montgomery] Bus Boycott, the desegregation of the buses, you'll see Fred Gray on all of those cases as the lawyer. He built--he made a lot of enemies, and when his time to become a judge came up, those enemies surfaced and they blocked his nomination and finally Senator [Howell] Heflin who was the senator at the time, who was sort of spearheading the nominations said, that he could no longer support Mr. Gray because of the opposition in Congress, the process of selecting a federal judge is, you're nominated by the President and then you have to be confirmed by the [United States] Senate and so you have to go up to Washington [D.C.] and have a senate hearing and Mr. Gray was up there having a Senate hearing and it was just a blood bath. It was horrible the way he was treated and he finally said he would withdraw his name, but only if I would replace him and I'd just been married a year, my wife [Ann N. Oldham] and I had gotten married in May of the year before [1979], I was thirty-three, I was literally, you know, I'd been practicing law for six years, most people get appointed to judgeships in their 40s and 50s, some people get appointed to judgeships at my age today and I've been on the bench twenty-six years, I actually feel comfortable now, the other judges on this bench are more my age today than when I was thirty-three. And I was the youngest in the country. Story_ID: 98790 Speaker 1: Okay we were talking about-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Fred saying that, Fred Gray, Mr. Gray saying that I--he would withdraw if I was the person to replace him. I had known Mr. Gray all my life in the sense of someone I knew from a distance, he knew my parents very well. You have to understand that this is in 1980, and there were very few black lawyers in Alabama, very few and actually you had, in a way, you had lawyers who were sort of, of Mr. Gray's age, older lawyers who were, you know, represented Rosa Parks, very much involved in Civil Rights Movement, and the younger lawyers, whom, of whom I was a member and perhaps was senior, sort of the oldest. And, I think it really came down to turning to whom they wanted to replace Mr. Gray and in a way I was the only one there. I, I--some of the older lawyers for reasons, and I have susp--I suspect they may have been personal reasons, did not want to be put through that blood bath Mr. Gray had been put through. And maybe I was so young, as my senator said, I'm so young I haven't had enough time to do anything wrong. So, my, my--I was clean because I didn't have time to get dirty, I was, I just had been out for such a short period of time working and so he, he--they selected me and [President Jimmy] Carter was running for President, for re-election, this is in 1980, they approached me in July, saying that I was the choice, that the black community said that they had to have a black federal judge and that there was no one out there other than I who could perhaps pull it off. I turned it down. I turned it down primarily because I'd only been married [to Ann N. Oldham] a year, I really thought I was too young, just six years of experience and to me it was sort of like going to high school, going to college without going to high school, you know, I would miss all those years of practicing law, of having the stories to tell, of bringing great cases, instead I would sort of enter into this sort of hallowed but removed environment of being a judge and at 33 it just seemed too young to sort of be lifted into that, so I, I turned it down. Solomon Seay, who's a lawyer I'd mentioned to you earlier, was the one who approached me the first time, he came back again and he said "You know, you have to do it," I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "It's either you or no one," and he just, he viewed it as a sacrifice on my part. He also told me that either if I did now or I wouldn't ever get it because, you know, being a federal judge is sort of like lightening striking, you know, or I guess it's like being, the stars have to be all aligned for you. You have to have your president in office, you have a senator who, who's willing to support you, you have to be the right age, you know, you've got to have not so many enemies, and he says, "You know, either it's going to be now or it's going to be never," so finally I said yes. And I did it. And, I was approached in July, I filled out my papers in August, and then I was sworn in, in October [1980]. So the process all--and I had my senate hearing in September, I went to [Washington] D.C. and went before the Senate Judiciary Committee and was voted out of the Senate unanimously in October. It all took, well actually you consider August and September, it took two months. Now you have to realize, that Judge [Truman McGill] Hobbs, who was also appointed the year before me, cons--was considered a very fast appointee. His took a year and a half. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Judge [U.W.] Clemon, I think probably took anywhere from a year and a half to two years. I did it in two months. I didn't even--when I woke up and found out I was a federal judge, I mean it was literally like waking up one day and just suddenly, you know, someone telling you the day before and then the next day waking up saying, this is it. It was so fast, it was just like a whirlwind, I, I never really had time to really think about it. I had a law partner at that time who had joined me and had only been with a year, I felt horrible about abandoning him because he'd only joined me for a year earlier. It was going to require that I move to Montgomery [Alabama], my wife would have to relocate, give up her job, she was a social worker, well, mental health worker at that time, it was just a lot. Story_ID: 98791 Speaker 1: Another important factor was my grandfather [John Henry Glanton], who, getting back to him, had, I think suddenly seen in me sort of the pinnacle of all that he had done. I remember when I was riding around with him one day practicing, when I was a practicing lawyer, and he kept saying that "one day, you're gonna be a judge and I just want you to keep your hands clean, keep your hands clean, so that when it comes, you'll be ready for it." And I remember during my investiture, it was in this room, and my grandfather was here, I guess he would have been ninety-one, at the time and he sat there at the front row and he cried through the whole thing, just tears streaming down his face during the whole time, and he had also was the one, I once went to Europe when I was in college [Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut], and he gave me the money to go to Europe, I'm sure he had no idea why I wanted to go to Europe, that was during my period of covert preparation. But, it just all sort of happened then and it was just one of those things that happened, you know, I told you someone was looking out for me, it was just, it was just there, it happened. And it was, and I was catapulted, I did not earn it. I had done nothing in anyway comparable to what Fred Gray had done, nothing even approaching what, U.W. Judge Clemon had done, nothing approaching what some of the other, just incredible lawyers who had risked their lives, had done for this state, and suddenly here I was, you know, going into the promised land that all of them had been denied. And it was hard. Story_ID: 98792 Speaker 1: It was a promised land, but it was hard. And I--getting a little bit into the judging, I remember my first decision [Ayler v. Hopper, 1981], controversial decision dealt with deadly force and I was the first judge in Alabama to have declared the use of deadly force without probable cause, that is shooting someone like a fleeing felon without probable cause to believe he was a danger, was unconstitutional, and several people told me I invited, I invented that out of whole cloth. Several judges told me that I probably would be reversed on appeal and I remember, this gets back to Judge Johnson, Frank [Minis] Johnson [Jr.] met me in the hall one day and he says, "Myron, he says be prepared to get reversed," but he says, you're right, your ruling is right, but if anything I can do as an appellate judge, I'm gonna make sure that you're ultimately affirmed." And a year after, two years later, after my decision went up in another case, that ended up, same decision, the Supreme Court came down with the very same decision I came down with and the Eleventh Circuit affirmed me in my case and went out of their way to say that the district judge is to be praised for predicting that the law, how the law was going to become out here. But I sweated, and it was rough, but it was definitely worth it. And what we obviously--the undercurrent here is we know who's being shot, these were black defendants who were fleeing and they were routinely being shot whether they posed a danger to anyone or not, you know, the police would just shoot you, and they can't do that. And I said, it's wrong, you just can't do it. Story_ID: 98793 Speaker 1: And, and then it led to other decisions, just a whole host of them over the years, you know, even myself, I picked up on the case involving the mental health system which I eventually released, I've handled quite a number of cases involving desegregation, you know, one of my, the cases that's not mentioned that often but, is really close to my heart is a case involving special education. Evidence came before me in a statewide case that all these black kids were essentially being sent into special education which is a way of almost re-segregating them. But that's not the bad part, the thing is they were not only being sent into re-segregated, through special education, they were being warehoused, you know, you would think that if you're being put into special education, you would get an education, not only that, you're supposed to get a special education, which should mean it's a better education, that's-- or at least an education that's tailored to your needs. But these kids were getting no education, they were just being warehoused, they were just being pushed through school which meant they would eventually get into high school, be put out into society incapable of reading and writing. And, this was actually recently, I, I got that case and I worked on it and I eventually held the state responsible for all of Alabama's special education programs. Ultimately, through a consent decree required, that they have criteria to determine which kid should go into special education and above all, that the teachers, who teach, have to be capable of teaching these children, so that now Alabama has a system of special education that's geared towards helping these kids, that they don't just warehouse them in the system, in these systems and definitely, they're not used as a means to re-segregate the school system. And, I just released the Alabama Department of Education that is the state, the governor, and the state board from the court order two weeks ago. I'm saying that they have fulfilled their obligation to the court. Story_ID: 98794 Speaker 1: Probably the most well-known case that I had was the one involving the state [Alabama] Ten Commandments, the chief justice [Roy Moore] put Ten Commandments, a monument in the judicial building of the Alabama Supreme Court [2001] and I ordered that he remove it. And, I don't know if you remember all the-- Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: --Hoopla that was surrounding that. By the time I'd been on the bench for twenty-six years, I'd kinda gotten use to it, so it wasn't quite as, as difficult a case, what was difficult was that I knew that I did not want another "stand in the schoolhouse door." He had hinted that he was going to--which he did do, was stand in the State Supreme Courthouse and not remove the commandments and dare me to send the marshals up there. I knew two things, I was never going to send the marshals up there unless, you know, it was a last resort, but really I thought I would not have to do that and I was gonna remove those commandments without lifting one finger and it was an exercise in restraint, and that--you were talking about something that I learned from [Judge] Frank [Minis] Johnson [Jr.], and that was one of the things too, you know, it's important to have a lot of power, but it's tyrannical sometimes to use that power, unless it's necessary. And, so while once I had ordered the Ten Commandments re--to be removed, I knew that I had to show restraint in bringing that about, I also knew that I had to show respect to the Chief Justice of Alabama, because after all, he was the Chief Judicial Officer of the state, and he was--and I had to respect, even if I didn't respect him, which I did respect him, I still had to respect the position. And so, what I did was, I waited until my order had been affirmed by the Eleventh Circuit, I waited until it had gone to the Supreme Court to get some idea as to where it was there, then I had ordered it implemented, when he refused to do it, I then turned to other state officials to carry it out including the other justices on the Alabama Supreme Court and the governor, it ends up that the other justices removed the monument. And to be quite candid with you, the case became, not so much one about freedom of religion that is that the state should not endorse religion, it became a case about the rule of law. And I knew that those other justices on the Alabama Supreme Court would never defy the rule of law. And once the law was stated, they had to comply and they did, and it was removed and no marshals had to go up there, there was no violence, I never had to lift a finger, I just made the decision. And that, that's something I did learn from Frank Johnson about restraint, the importance of, the importance of, caring out an order, but knowing when to hold back too, and knowing how to achieve an end, but doing it in a way that respects all individuals. Story_ID: 98795 Speaker 1: Some of the other cases, there's been so many. Speaker 2: What about the-- Speaker 1: Another great case I like, I--involved the gay/lesbian case, the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], which is a very important case to me because I strongly believe in the rights of homosexuals, I think people should be judged on their dignity and not on their sexual orientation and I wrote that in that opinion even though it was a first amendment case, and I think all these cases come down to just the notion of, of human dignity. And another case, I, I, I, did some involving the Montgomery Police Department and the Montgomery Sheriff's Department, this is sort of an interesting story too. I'd found that the Montgomery Police Department discriminated against women in hiring women and the women in the department took out an ad in the local paper here in Montgomery saying, after I had declared this case to be a class action on behalf of all the women, that they did not want to be a part of my lawsuit, quote "my lawsuit" as the judge. I entered a relief, required the city to no longer discriminate against women, saying women could compete for all those positions, they should not just be out there, you know, in school zones, they can do everything men can do, you know, as long as the requirements are there, you have to meet the requirements, but if they meet the requirements, they have to be put in the position. Almost to a letter, every woman who had signed that petition filed a claim in my court saying she'd been a victim of discrimination, which is really remar--which shows you-- Speaker 2: That's remarkable. Speaker 1: --That quite often--well I always thought that the reason the women signed the petition and signed the articles from pressure from within the department, that's another story. But you know [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] used to always say, and I believe him and I think he was absolutely right, that he marched for two reasons, the first reason was to inform white people about the dignity of black people, the second reason was to inform black people about the dignity of black people. And I think that a lot of times, things like the scho--the case involving the women, I don't think those women really realized that they could do that, that they really had a right. I think that it took a lawsuit and it took education to let them know that they could become chief of the department, that they could become captains, just like black people, it took black people a long time to realize, you know, that, that one day we can become President of the United States, I think for a long time many of us just thought that it just could not be, and Martin Luther King was out there marching, I think for people like me, you know, a little kid, you know, telling me, you know, you can do this, you don't have to live under this stigma that, that you're inferior, he was marching to teach both blacks and whites. Story_ID: 98796 Speaker 1: Now you wanna ask me about my family? (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, if you've finished talking about cases. Speaker 1: Well I, I, you know, I don't know how much you wanna go into--, Speaker 2: Well they were, they were, well, I mean-- Speaker 1: --There's so many of them, I, I didn't want to spend a lot, I-- Speaker 2: --Well, I thought an interesting one was in the prisons. Speaker 1: Well, I've had two prison cases, the first one was Alabama, the hitching post case, which sort of made a lot of national news. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Alabama adopted a system of hitching prisoners to post and it was clearly inhumane, I mean, the evidence was just overwhelming, some of these prisoners were left out in 100 degree weather, with no water, some of them defecated on themselves because they couldn't go to the bathroom, that was an easy call, that, that was a cruel and unusual punishment, I mean, I mean it, there's just a fundamental sense, it's everybody has a right to go to the bathroom, everyone has a right to just water. There was even an instance where one prisoner, who was on the hitching post, they would put them on this hitching post, that was a way of punishing them, and they would pour the water out so the dogs could drink it, it was just so inhumane and of course I struck it down and said that Alabama could no longer use that form of punishment against prisoners. The other case, which is a much more recent case and it's somewhat still in litigation, and I don't talk about cases that are really in litigation. Speaker 2: Um-Hum. Speaker 1: But I will just say that, that held it, the women's prison here, north of Montgomery, I found was unconstitutionally overcrowded, Tutwiler Prison [Julia Tutwiler Prison for Women], and that's about three or four years ago. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Those are most of the-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I can't, you know I have--oh, the only other area that I'm really proud of is my voting rights cases which I mentioned about how important that was for me for my youth. I did have a case called Dillard [Dillard v. Crenshaw County, Alabama], which was filed back in the '80s [1980s], that would eventually expanded to include most of the cities and counties in Alabama and it resulted in 200 cases and as a result, I would say anywhere fr--I don't know how many, I'm just estimating two to three hundred new black elected officials were elected, various school boards, cities, counties across the state, and that all grew out, that's one case I did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was just one of the big voting rights cases, I've done a lot of other voting rights cases, one of the other ones was I did require, and this was a kinda interesting case too, I don't know, you, you, you're probably very young and you don't remember what it was like to vote back in the early and late '60s [1960], how intimidating that was? I remember voting for the first time in Alabama and being scared, frightened because you never knew what these people would do. You heard these stories--like in Tuskegee [Alabama], you know, you knew that they would meet in these vaults and you knew that you could be arrested if you didn't do things right and I knew that for a lot of black people who had been exposed to the intimidation of the '50s [1950s] and the '40s [1940s], of even going into a place where you were not welcomed, was so strong that just the simple act of voting took a--just an incredible amount of courage and that to expect, especially these, you know, maids or gardeners who had worked for these white people, to go in there now and cast, stand up and cast a ballot, just had to be so frightening for them, you know, and they knew that people had been killed, literally killed trying to engage in these simple acts. So, they brought a case in my court saying, that depending upon the percentage of poll watchers there, at a particular voting place, there had to be "X" percentage of black poll watchers there. And I wrote that, the only way we can begin, and I didn't say dispel, but it began to dispel this environment of intimidation, was to make sure that when these black people went to a voting place, they saw black faces, that way they would know, in fact I said this in the opinion, that they were welcomed. Without a black face there, sitting there as a poll official, as one of those officials, they would know, I have nothing to fear. So, I entered an order requiring that in all these places the percentage of black polling officials had to represent the percentage of blacks in the community, and the ultimate result was, I wanted to make sure that after centuries of humiliation and degradation, that black people could walk into a voting place, which to me is the true sh-- shrine in our democracy, and see a black face there and seeing a black face there, they could know, I belong here. Speaker 2: All right. Great (unclear)(simultaneous) Speaker 1: And that's one I, I love that case too as you can gather. Story_ID: 98797 Speaker 1: Okay. So now tell me about your family. Speaker 2: My family? Speaker 1: Um-Hum. Speaker 2: Well, my wife [Ann N. Oldham] and I were married a year before I was appointed as a judge, so-- Speaker 1: What is her name? Speaker 2: --Her name is Ann, and she was a, a mental health worker, came to Montgomery [Alabama] and did that but, about five years after we were married, she--we had two children, a son and a daughter, we had twins. Speaker 1: What are their names? Speaker 2: And their names were Myles and Lilly. And then she stayed home with them and I'd have to say that was the most wonderful time in my life, when they were born. I was thirty-seven, very late and I, you know, to the extent I believe in miracles, when there birth, which I was there for, was the miracle to me, to see some, two people that you love that much born and, and I guess in a way that was, I was still a very young judge, and I took them everywhere with me including judicial conferences, I'd, I was known for that, because, you know, here's, you know, usually you think of judges, these sort of grey haired men, walking around with grandkids, well these were my kids, and I took them literally everywhere, and, In fact I'd--when they were babies I brought them into chambers and I would spread out a little blanket with their bottles of milk and stuff so they could play while I worked in chambers and I also changed diapers, 'cause, you know, you preach being a liberated dad, you also have to act like one. My wife reminded me of that. And it was just truly, truly absolutely wonderful, but then I had a horrible tragedy, I lost my daughter at the age of ten, and just very, very rough for my wife and I and it was a matter of just keeping going, 'cause we had our son to think about and I decided that the best thing that I could do for her was to give two more children an opportunity. So, we adopted two other little boys, ages two and three and they are now twelve and thirteen and they are Jalen [ph.] and Jason, and now, my son is now a senior at Morehouse and the twelve and thirteen-year-old are still at home and they're a full-time job for me and my wife, but we love them dearly. Speaker 1: That's great, that's great. Story_ID: 98798 Speaker 1: Because this interview is gonna be archived-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --For generations to come, what message would you want to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: A message to the future generations? You know, I, two messages I guess. Number one is, being prepared, really being prepared for whatever comes about, because you never know what's going to happen. You never know what event will strike your life that will put you in a position where you can do incredible things and how important it is to be prepared to, to take on that. And I, I guess, you know, I, I have mixed feelings in some ways, now which I guess is the way life is, life is never simple and it's never reduced to a few words or just one attitude, it's usually an amalgam of attitudes, and at one point I want them to remember that, you know, while black people during this period of time had it very, very hard, it was also an extremely rich culture and I'm very fortunate to have been raised in it. And while segregation was just, just a horrible thing, even though my parents did the best they could, to protect me from it, even within the context of that segregation, it was just sort of this, this renaissance of, of, of, art and history and science within this culture that, in many ways can never be, be repeated. And, I would want people in the future to know about that and to remember it. Story_ID: 98799 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there anything that you regret or that you would change? Speaker 2: Yes. Sometimes I wonder whether if, you know, if I had not assumed this position as a judge what I would have done otherwise. And sometimes I think I may have been a much happier man in the sense of maybe I would have done something more artistic and maybe explored my artistic side more. But it's not a real regret. I'd, I think I'm where I should be at the right time and the right place, I, I think I've done what I was supposed to do, and I'm comfortable with that, just on a personal level, sometimes I wished, you know, I could have painted, or something like that, or maybe written a little bit more. This, this job is a very lonely job, especially here in Alabama, it's a small community, you know, I don't get to go out and have drinks with the fellows like some of the other people can do, I, I do have a measure of, of decorum that I always have to sort of maintain and I've been doing that since I was thirty-three and sometimes I think that, you know, I'd kinda like to be able to let go a bit more often, but I can't do that. But no, no, no real regrets, pain is always hard, but I think it's pain that makes life richer and definitely makes it easier to, to put up with certain things, I mean, whenever I, I think about the pain I've experienced in my life, and I hear these people come before me in court, I cannot imagine how they do it, and I would not know that unless I had had that pain myself. But that's not a regret. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But what would I--and your other question was? Speaker 1: Right, what would you like to do that you have not already done in your life? Speaker 2: Okay, I--in five years I can take senior status. And what that means is that, as a federal judge, I can retire, which means that the president can then appoint another judge to take my spot. At that point, I can hear cases if I want to hear them, or I can decline to hear cases that I don't want to hear. The number of cases that I hear will pretty much determine how large a staff I have, if I do nothing, I will lose my secretary and my law clerks. I can hear a full case load, which means I can keep my clerks, my law clerks, those who help me and my secretary. If I take, I don't have to take senior status at all, which means that I can remain an active judge until I die. That's one of the nice things about being a federal judge is that, it's a lifetime appointment. The only way that you can be removed from office is to be impeached by congress, which means, sort of like--I'm sure many of you know what happened to President Clinton, they would first have to impeach me in this, in the house and then try me in the senate, so the job has a lot of job security, and it is for life, which means that I have this job until I die, and I don't run for office or anything. But if I were to take senior status, the thing I would like to do is perhaps write and I'd like to teach. I do enjoy teaching to the degree I've done it, I, I've done a little bit of teaching here and there, not a lot, just mainly going around talking to students, law students and I, and I think if I were to teach, I'd want to teach in a law school. And I'd like to write and I'd like to write about things other than things about the law. I'd probably like to just write stories about things that have happened, even though they might be in a novelistic form, but as it's true of most novels, they tend to be a bit autobiographical too. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And I do like writing, I love writing, getting back to Miss Perry, who taught me how to write. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98800 Speaker 1: And you, you said you wanted to talk about a contemporary issue. Speaker 2: Oh, I can't, you know, I, I was going to say that one of things I had found very enjoyable about being a judge is the companionship of other judges. When I was younger, being very young, I almost felt like, a child, to be very candid with you, among all these older judges, in fact, I was quite often mistaken for a law clerk. We would go to conferences and people would walk up to me and say, you know, who's your judge? And, then later have to explain it that, I am the judge. But I do enjoy it and I've learned a lot and I, I was thinking about in the Ten Commandments case, during some of the trying periods of that, when it was the difficulty of, of dealing with a huge public issue, of knowing that the, what's occurring outside your courthouse could easily erupt into violence, it was comforting to know that I could talk to other judges and rely on their advice and, and, and their counseling. I try not to take my work home with me, because I think that when I go home, I want my children to view me as dad and that's it, I'm only dad at home, nothing else, so quite often at school, you know, they will hear about me, or their friends will talk about it, like in the Ten Commandments case, we had guards and security and marshals and all of this, but the effort was to make sure that my fam--my home life was as normal as possible so that, that, you know, you're dad and that's it, and that's the way I want to be with my wife [Ann N. Oldham] too, you know, never judge, that, that stays here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess that's really all I have to add of my personal side. Story_ID: 98801 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be or how do you want to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: I want, you know something my middle son, no, yeah, my middle son, Jason, the thirteen-year-old, once said, talking to someone else, I don't know how it came up, like "What is your dad like?" Maybe something like that or maybe just an adult saying, "What's it like to live with him?" or something like that, and I happen to overhear the conversation, and he said to the person, "He's a good man," that's it, that's all I want to be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If I can measure up to his view and nothing else, and I decided then, that's all that I want on my grave stone, assuming there's a grave anywhere, "He's a good man. -Jason." (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much for your time. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you...