 Story_ID: 313871 Speaker 1: Good afternoon. My name is Regennia Williams and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey. And, we have one observer for this interview, and that's Miss Artha Woods. So, I just like to get started by doing some slating and would first like to ask if you would please state your name; first, middle and last name, and spell all three? Speaker 2: All right. Stanley E. Tolliver, Sr. [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.]. That's S-T-A-N-L-E-Y, initial E. for my father Eugene [Eugene Tolliver], Tolliver, T-O-double L-I-V-E-R, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay. And, today's date, please? Speaker 2: Six, thirteen, o'five. Speaker 1: Actually, I think it's the 16th. Speaker 2: Is today the 16th? Speaker 1: Yeah. Yesterday was a payday for us that's the only reason I remember. Speaker 2: Oh, well, then the 16th [June 16, 2005]. Speaker 1: It's the day after payday. Thank you so much. Speaker 2: All right. Okay. Speaker 1: And, the location for this interview. Speaker 2: 1464 East 105th Street, Cleveland, Ohio, Suite 404. Speaker 1: All right. And, Mr. Tolliver, would you please state your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney. Story_ID: 313872 Speaker 1: Now, the next section of questions actually we refer to as our People magazine-ish type questions. And, there are five in the series. First, I would like to ask, if you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Food? Speaker 1: Yeah, a favorite food. Speaker 2: Well, I love all food. I guess, black--well, I guess I started something called, hoppin' john; chitterlings hoppin' john. And, you take some rice and you put it in a bowl, then you put black eyed peas on top of that, then you put some chitterlings on top of all of it and you mix it with a spoon. And, I call it Chitterling Hoppin' John. But, you have to put hot sauce on it, and cornbread and buttermilk (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, that's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Chitterling hoppin' john. Speaker 1: Okay. And, how about a favorite color. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Well, the color of my favorite women, black. Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Yes, I guess I like summer because I'm an old athlete and this gives me chance to go outside and run. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, let's see, I haven't traveled much outside the United States other than Canada, Jamaica, and Cuba. I love San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For some reason, I love that, that city. Speaker 1: Okay. And, last but not least, for this series of questions, do you have a favorite motto or saying? Speaker 2: The struggle continues. Story_ID: 313873 Speaker 1: Now the next section of the interview deals with your early life, especially your, your childhood and school days. So, I'm just wondering if you would please state your parents' names. Speaker 2: Eugene Tolliver, and my mother was Edna Riles Tolliver. Speaker 1: Okay. And, do you remember either of your grandparents, either side (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I only remember my grandmother, my maternal grandmother. My father's mother, I have no recollection. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what was that grandmother's name, that you remember? Speaker 2: Henrietta. Henrietta Riles, well, she had about four husbands, so I'm trying to remember the last one. Henrietta Davis that's what it was. But, she was a Riles and then she was something else, and something, and then Davis; Henrietta Davis. Speaker 1: Okay. And, if we could just talk about your mother's side of the family for, for a while. Where was your mother's family from? Speaker 2: Franklin, Louisiana. Speaker 1: So, was your mother born in Louisiana? Speaker 2: Yes, she was. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember her date of birth? Speaker 2: Yes. October 8, 1900. Speaker 1: Okay. And, did your mother ever share with you any stories about growing up in Louisiana? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. A lot of 'em. Speaker 1: What are some of your favorites? Speaker 2: Well, living out in the country, she used to talk about my grandmother's pecan trees. And, she had pecan trees, and she always said that my grandmother was a nurse. And, later I found out she was actually a midwife. My mother was very proper and she said she was a nurse. And, my mother was always fascinated by music, and she was a piano teacher. And, her favorite musician was Chopin [Frederic Chopin]. And, she taught me the notes on the piano. And, I was always a lover of music because my mother was a lover of music. And, she was the first one to that taught me to read. And, she always taught me to have faith in God. My mother was a true religious person. She would always say, "If God is with you, he's more than a world against you. Always stand up for what's right and be honest with people." And, I'll never forget during my lifetime and living in Cleveland [Ohio], we had a, we had some stores; one was the colored store, and the other one was the Jew store. Now, the Jew store, always we had credit. And, you had a book and he had a book. Although there would be things on his book and wasn't on your book. And, since I was the most educated at that time, I--my job was to go to the store, and, and compare. But, my mother had a real high voice, and she was only about five feet tall. And, she would say, "Now, now, Stanley [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] you go to the colored store first, and if they don't have it then you go to the other store." So, that taught me to do business with my people. And, my doctor was black, Dr. Scott [ph.]. Oh, was it? Yeah. My dentist, I can't remember who my dentist was, but it was always black. And, she would take me to what we called, Lakeside Hospital, like University Hospital [University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio], 'cause I had asthma--oh, what was it? It was eczema. She called it exzema [ph.] but it was eczema. And, I was an only child. And, my mother and I were very close. And, when I was running track and the coach would call, "He's in the bed. I'm not letting him out." And, of course, you know, I wanted to get out and get with the girls, you know. And, that's one she taught me about, your body is a temple and God doesn't dwell in an unclean temple. And, you can't be hanging out with those cooties out there in the street, smoking that pot, and drinking that wine. You have to keep your body pure. And, then you have to get good grades, so you could stay on the track team. And, I was quite a sensation because I was winning these races, getting my picture in the paper, you know. Story_ID: 313874 Speaker 1: And, we lived on--we moved up from Everton Terrace [Everton Avenue] to 86th Street. And, when you live pass 79th [Street] you were into something, see. But, at the same time, I went to school at Rawlings [Rawlings Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio], Quincy School [Cleveland, Ohio], and East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. So, I was raised in the black community. What we call the hood; then, we called it, the ghetto. But, I was always taught that cleanliness was next to Godliness. My mother [Edna Riles Tolliver] didn't swear. And, she would always tell me when I bathe, "You wash in the back of you," (laughter), you know. Now, my aunt [Marie Riles Smith], who was her sister, was just the opposite. She scratched, they smoke, and she swore, and she would call it like it was, you know. But, she would tell me, "You wash in the back of you," (laughter). So, I was always taught to bathe. And, since my grandmother [Henrietta Davis] was a nurse, my mother knew about food. And, she would always see to it that I was properly fed. She knew that I needed carrots. I needed cod liver oil. God, I hated that stuff. I needed--and we ate the soul food, you know. We ate the pot liquor, and really that's where all the nourishment was, you know, in that pot liquor. And, fruits, she always saw to it that I had fruit, meat, because she understood that if I didn't develop, if I didn't have the right nourishment, I couldn't develop. So, I was always bigger than most kids and, just as smart or smarter than most kids. And, I realize now it was because of the diet that my mother gave me. She always gave me potatoes and carrots, fruit, you name it. And, 'cause I love black eyed peas and corn bread, red beans and rice, greens, even rutabagas, rutabagas, turnips. That was the kind of food that I ate. And, I realize now, it helped me to develop. And, my mother and father [Eugene Tolliver], were married fifty-four years, and my mother never worked a day. Her job was to raise me. And, I was her life. And, that's what kept me a lot of times out of trouble, 'cause I couldn't bear to see my mama cry for something I did. And, oh, she was very proud of her son. And, on the street, you know, where we lived, if I got into something, my mother knew it before I got home, and even though we didn't have a phone. That was the kind--and she always taught me not only to have faith in God, but always to respect older people; yes ma'am, no ma'am. She didn't swear and I didn't swear. And, we would listen to the radio, you know, didn't have TV then. And, I remember on Sunday nights, we'd listen to this real spooky thing called 'The Hermit's Cave,' you know. And, she felt safe 'cause I was there with her. But, we were both scared, you know. And, she taught me to be proud of being black. That I shouldn't be somebody else, you know. She, she was really my, my--and every girl that I met, if I was gonna think about getting married, I'd always compare her with my mother. A lady, you know, real high class lady. And, she graduated from high school, my mother, when she was sixty-two years old. And, wouldn't allow them to--she wouldn't tell her age. She didn't want anybody to know who--how old she was. And, she was the oldest in the class, you know, was supposed to get the medals and what not. "I'm not telling my age. No," (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], I thank you for sharing. Speaker 1: And, she never learned to drive a car. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. I--she's sounds like such a wonderful person. Speaker 1: Oh, she was that, now. Story_ID: 313875 Speaker 1: You mentioned that she [Tolliver's mother, Edna Riles Tolliver] had those southern roots in Louisiana. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: And, because I'm interviewing a lawyer today, I just have to ask about being born, the turn of the 20th century just four years after Plessy Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], and you introduced the subject of race already and, you know, the great pride that she had in being a black woman. But, did she talk at all about race relations--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: In the South or, or in the North? And, I'd also would like to know how she got form Louisiana to Ohio. Speaker 2: Well, when my father [Eugene Tolliver] came out of the [U.S.] Army, he was a World War I [WWI] veteran, he came back to Cleveland [Ohio]; I mean, he came back to Louisiana, married my mother, and came to Cleveland. Speaker 1: So, he was also a native of Louisiana? Speaker 2: No. He was a native of Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. But, a southerner? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And, the reason why he came to Cleveland was because, he wanted to vote, and black people couldn't vote. And, he wanted to vote, so that's why he came to Cleveland. And, every--and he knew--all though he had a third grade education, as I've often said, if I have to get four more degrees, I may have half as much sense as the old man. He believed in voting. He knew who his precinct committeeman was. He knew who his ward leader was, and he would keep up with what was, as he say, what was going on. And, he believed in voting. And, everybody that lived in his house, had to vote, 'cause he believed in voting. And, he just thought it was ridiculous for black people to be in the North, and could vote, and wouldn't vote. Oh, he just dogged them out, see. So, that's how I got to Cleveland. That's where I was born, in Cleveland. 'Cause my dad left the South because he couldn't, he couldn't vote. Speaker 1: So, your parents meet in the South? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then migrated here as a married couple (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then mi- that's right. Story_ID: 313876 Speaker 1: Now, you said you didn't remember your--anything about your paternal (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --grandparents? Okay. But, I'm just wondering, did you father [Eugene Tolliver] share with you any stories-- Speaker 2: Well, I got a good one. Speaker 1: --about growing up--? Speaker 2: I got a good one for you on that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father kept telling me about his cousin, his first cousin who was named Lafayette Tolliver. They were both in World War I [WWI]. And, when he left, he went to Seattle, Washington. And, my father kept telling me about these five hundred relatives that I had in Seattle. In fact, I got the book on it now. So, my wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver], my son [Stanley Tolliver, Jr.], that's a long story but I'll try to make it short. My son brought home a girl when he was in college, and she was from Seattle. And, my wife, when I would--I had these trips that I would take as a board member, you know. We went to California. She had to go to Seattle to check out this girl, see. And, then I kept telling my dad. My dad kept telling me about all these relatives that I had up in Seattle. And, I found out that my cousin, or his cousin, Lafayette Tolliver, had founded the first black church in the state of, of Washington. And, it was called the Tolliver Temple Church of God in Christ [Seattle, Washington]. So, he kept telling me that I had these cousins, in fact, L.E. that's what he was called, came to Cleveland [Ohio] once on a convention and I got a chance to meet him. But, I didn't particular wanna go, but that wife of mine wanted to check this girl out, see. And, she belonged to Reverend McKinney [Wade McKinney] who was pastor of Antioch [Antioch Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio], his son Samuel [Samuel McKinney] went and started that church and she was a member of that church. So, after I left San Francisco [California], I had to go up there. So, I let 'em know that I--this long lost cousin was coming up there. But, I had to go to that church first so she could check out this girl, see. And, I told Sam what was happening. We came there, they was having some kind of meeting. And, he announced that she was up there to check out this, this girl. And, this lady kept following Dor--I said, "Dorothy, you see that woman following you?" And, finally, the woman introduced herself, Marilyn Cobin [ph.], to whom my son is married now, that was his mo--that was her mother. And, she was one of those Boston [Massachusetts] school teachers too. So, they really fell in love, see. So, finally, I said, "Now, can I go see my relatives?" And, it's nothing like Holy Ghost people. When I came in there, they had a picture--in fact, I have the, one of my, some of my cousins, you know, are Ph.D.s and I got the whole family history from the time that we were on the plantation down in Hazlehurst, Mississippi. We were Taliaferros. Then, when my father was born, we were Tolliver. And, I have the whole thing I can show you, 'cause they did the research. I even have the plantation on which they were raised, and how much each of 'em was worth, and the--and, so, the original name was Taliaferro. And, we--and then when I went up to that Tolliver Temple, "He looks just like the Bishop," you know. And, that wife of mine, you know, she had a heck of a sense of humor. She said, "Now, you know you can preach. You know you can do the han--holy dance. You know you can sing." Now, here's a church for you, 'cause the preacher was old, and you got all these cousins. And, I said, "Well, what I, what I do with my, my license?" She said, "Well, you can get reciprocity 'cause you've been practicing so long." And, Stephanie [Stephanie Tolliver], my oldest daughter, you know, could direct the choir, and she would direct another choir, and Sherrie [Sherrie Tolliver] would be--she had it all planned out, you know. Hard--she was signifying, you know, as we say. And, well, look at here, you just got you a whole congregation up here, see. And, those people, boy I'm telling you, it was so many of us. When we went up there for a reunion, we had to go out in the park. It was about five hundred of us. And, cook; my Lord. That's the first time I've ever had any barbequed chicken necks (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were delicious. Story_ID: 313877 Speaker 1: Here's the story I heard (laughter) in that, that your family roots are in the Deep South. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: In Mississippi and Louisiana-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That your parents [Edna Riles Tolliver and Eugene Tolliver] met and married after World War I [WWI]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And, then migrated to Ohio. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And, that's where you were born. Speaker 2: That's where I was born. Speaker 1: That you're a native Clevelander [Cleveland, Ohio] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm a native Clevelander. Speaker 1: Okay, but, you've got this family of yours have branches all over the country and still roots in the South. Speaker 2: That right. That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, his is good. Speaker 2: And, if you ever go to Seattle [Washington]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All you have to do is call. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, say, I'm a friend of Attorney Tolliver's [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], and you'll be five hundred pounds when you leave there 'cause that's how they'll feed you. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I have to ask too, since you tell me about that branch of the family out in Seattle, about the, the Taliaferro-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we were born-- Speaker 1: Now, Tollivers? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, that's Booker T.'s [Booker T. Washington] middle, name. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is there any relation there? To Booker T. Washington? Speaker 2: Not that I, not that I know of. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. 'Cause I read in a, in a biography that he pronounced that; spelled it Taliaferro-- Speaker 2: Taliaferro. Speaker 1: But, it's pronounced Tolliver. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That's how he pronounced it, okay. Just wondered. Speaker 2: But, now, they pronounced it Taliaferro. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then it became Tolliver. Speaker 1: Okay. In your family? Speaker 2: For some reason the white folks changed the name from Taliaferro to Tolliver. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know why, but they did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, so, when we have the convention, it's Taliaferro, Tolliver, Chapman [ph.] and some others who are in there. It's about five or six families. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, all of 'em have come out of this Tolliv--out of Lafayette [Lafayette Tolliver], Taliaferro, see. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who founded that church [Tolliver Temple Church of God in Christ, Seattle, Washington]; Lafayette Taliaferro. It's a beautiful church too. Speaker 1: In Seattle, Washington. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 313878 Speaker 1: Now, can we talk for a little while about your childhood in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now that--now, when did your parents [Edna Riles Tolliver and Eugene Tolliver] marry and come to Cleveland? Speaker 2: Let's see now, my parents married, let me see now, 'cause I, I had the marriage license if I remember. They married, let's see, and I was born in '25 [1925]. They must have married, 'cause my father was twenty-three when he married; my mother was sixteen. He was six years older than her. So, they must have married in about 19--, right after the war [World War I, WWI], about 1916, or 1917. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause she was about sixteen or seventeen when she married my father who was twenty-three. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, then, soon after that, migrated to Cleveland? Speaker 2: And, migrated to Cleveland. Speaker 1: Okay. Did they ever say--well, you talked about your father wanting to vote in Ohio. Did you mother ever talk about her reasons for wanting--or in the North, did you mother ever talk about her reasons for wanting to come north? Or, was that just to be with her husband (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, because, they just wanted, yeah--and then they wanted to leave the South. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, they would talk about the racism in the South; the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], and how black people were being treated. My father was really the one got me started on black history. He had a book called 'The Negro Soldier,' [ph.] and it talked about the great exploit of blacks. And, it started with Crispus Attucks and all the way through the Second World War [World War II, WWII]. In fact, my neighbor, when I moved on Wade Park [Avenue] was Dr. Garvin [ph.], who was an officer in the First World War. And, Claiborne George, you remember was from here, and he was an officer. Speaker 1: The attorney, also? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, he was an officer in the First World War. And, they talked about the segregation how black soldiers were being lynched, even in their uniforms. And, how blacks was so loyal to this country. And, he got me started. That's the reason why I'm a historian. In fact, that picture you saw out there, came from my wife's [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] book store, 'cause I got her started. And, I would tell, and I represent a lot of white people, and I would ask some of 'em to look at that picture. And, I said, "Do you know who that is?" And, they wouldn't know and I say, "You go to church? You're a Christian? You don't know who that is?" You mean black Jesus? I say, "Well, why you call him black Jesus? You call the other one white Jesus?" They say, "Oh, he didn't look like that." I say, "Oh, no. Then what did he look like last time you saw him?" And, they look at me kind of funny. And, he, my dad was always into it with the minister, 'cause the preacher was preaching one thing and doing something else. Or--and, then I almost got into it with him. I had to chew--get put out of church three, four times, you know. 'Cause I didn't like what the preacher was doing. One time he and I was going after, after the same girl. But, the difference was, he was married, and I wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, he married her. Thank, God. And, when I was her last she would say, "Just think Stanley [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] if I'd married you, I'd be on the big time." I said, "Well, thank God you didn't. 'Cause if I had married you, I'd be doing time." Story_ID: 313879 Speaker 1: (Laughter) You have shared some really wonderful (laughter) stories with us about your parents [Edna Riles Tolliver and Eugene Tolliver] and your early life. But, there's one questions we ask, and that is that, well, one of my favorites, if you could talk about some of the sights, sounds, and smells that remind you of your childhood in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah, well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, you told me about the smells; chitter--chitterlings, you said. Hopping jack-- Speaker 2: Hoppin' joh--hoppin' john. Speaker 1: Hopping john. I stand corrected. Speaker 2: Don't put no N--don't put no G on it, now; hoppin' john. Speaker 1: Hoppin' john, chitterlings, hot sauce, and rice, and other things. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's--see, my mother came from Louisiana. That's where hot cause comes from. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, from New Iberia [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, I think I know the smell of barbeque chicken necks. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: But, are there other smells that remind you of your childhood in Cleveland, or your family life? Speaker 2: Let's see. Watermelon. Speaker 1: Does watermelon have a smell? Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We used to have what they call a watermelon polar. And, the guys would take watermelon and put 'em in a case, and put a lot of ice on it. And, you would buy it by the slice, you know. You wanted the nickel slice, and he'd cut it and give it to you, see. So, I loved that watermelon smell. And, then I like, like fish too. Particularly, red snapper. Although, when I was a kid, my mother would always buy a sheep head. And, salmon, or salmon they call it; but, salmon. And she always would have som--oh, yeah, and I'll tell you what the delicacy was. The delicacy was kidney, kidney veal. The veal with the kidneys in it. And, she would cook that, my mother was a great cook, and she would cook it in crackle meal, and put the--and have some kind of egg solution she would put on it, and cook that. And, we were eating high on the hog then, see. And, then every now and then, and then we would have beef. She loved to cook beef stew. And, I love beef stew. So, I'm really am a person who loves food. There's no kind of food that I don't like. Story_ID: 395547 Speaker 1: And, when were you born again? Speaker 2: October 25th--29th, 1925. Speaker 1: Okay. What is some of the, the sights that remind you of, of being a child in the 1920s, and '30s [1930s] in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Well, I'm blessed to have had the kind of daddy [Eugene Tolliver] that I had. So many of these kids don't know who or where their daddies are, or who he is. But, everybody knew who my daddy was, especially me, okay. Now, first of all, as I say, he only had a third grade education, but he taught himself to be a cabinet maker, and carpenter. He worked in the saw mill. My dad, if you saw Mr. T, my dad was built just like Mr. T, only he was a little bigger than Mr. T.; big arms. He wasn't as tall as me, but he was--big arms, big chest, hairy, you know. "Now, boy, if you stays in this house, you goes to school." I didn't have a choice. I had to go to school. And, when I graduated from high school [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio], I had thirteen years of perfect attendance. And, when I think about it, I know now why. I went to see 'King Kong' and saw that big black hairy hand. And, it reminded me of my daddy, see. And, I would've rather for the police to catch me than him, see. And now, and he was very proud of his son. He cut out all--in fact, I got scrapbooks that he made of me running, in his handwriting. And, he would brag about his son. And, at the church, you know, I got my picture in the paper, I was a runner, I could sing. And, he would always talk about, you know, that he loved Reverend's preaching and all that. But, Reverend's mouth ain't no prayer book, 'cause it open and shut, that's what he'd tell me, see. And, when--I tell you how, what kind of guy he was. Now, he didn't know about mus--while he loved jazz, and so did I, rock 'n' ro--well, not rock 'n' roll excuse me; blues. He loved the blues. Now, so did I, you know; B.B. King [HistoryMaker B. B. King], Lightnin' Hopkins, the Howlin' Wolf. I still love that kind of music 'cause that's my music, you know. But, because of my mother [Edna Riles Tolliver], I also liked--and I also love the Ink Spots. She can tell you. I got several albums of the Ink Spots. Man, I loved Ink Spots, The Mills Brothers; oh, what's his name, Billy Eckstine; what's her name, Sarah Vaughan. And, I used to date a girl by the name of Dinah-, by the name of Ruth Jones, and she would come from Chicago [Illinois]. And, her name turned out to be Dinah Washington. And, I have a picture of her--me, and Dinah Washington, was taking at the playground at 89th [Street] and Quincy [Avenue], long before Karamu [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio] was built. And, I got on my zoot suit, you know, big hat and, and Ruth Jones. And, she could sing even then. She was gospel singer. And, then of course, she went with Lionel Hampton. But, I have a lot of her records. But, my dad, I'd never forget, he--they would go to all my track meets, even if they didn't have a car. He didn't always have a car, but he'd catch the bus, and they would come to my track meets. And, I was in this opera at Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]. I starred in several opera. I was Amonasro in 'Aida' [Giuseppe Verdi]. I was Count (unclear) in 'Figaro' ['The Marriage of Figaro,' Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart]. I was Mephistopheles in 'Faust' [Charles Gounod], and then I played the part in this operetta called 'The Frantic Physician' ['The Frantic Physician: or Three Drams of Matrimonium,' Charles Gounod]. I play the part of Valere [ph.]. And, I was the only black in the whole school until Harrison Dillard came back from the First War--or, Second World War [World War II, WWII]. And, I'm down there and this white guy came up to my father, I could tell by the way he talked that, you know, that he was not formerly educated. And, he said, "Oh," he said, "That ma--that opera, 'Die Fledermaus' [Johann Strauss], it was a beautiful opera." Now, dad didn't know 'Die Fledermaus' from Mickey Mouse, you know. And, he looked at that white man and he said, "Listen, what's in ever it is, it's beautiful, 'cause my son's in it." And, then he had this way, you know, how black folks would do the mouth after they mean something. And, the man looked at him and said, "Yeah, I see what you mean," (laughter). And, I just looked at my old man. I said how proud I was of him. Now, he didn't know what was going on. He's down there with all these white folks in this conservatory where they sing Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] and Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] and all he knew was, I was up there. And, "It was beautiful, 'cause my son's in it," that's all. Story_ID: 395548 Speaker 1: So, if that, that image of your father [Eugene Tolliver] then, being there, you know, for all the track meets and just his presence in the community, in the church, and working at, I think you said, the saw mill, or just being a big man-- Speaker 2: A big man. Speaker 1: --in the community. And, that's a powerful image or a sight from your childhood. Are there, there other sounds, you know, in addition to the music that you've talked about, your mother's music and the music of opera (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I sang in the choir. I remember Wings Over Jordan [Wings Over Jordan Choir]. Speaker 1: Well, what can you tell me about Wings? The name comes up a lot. Speaker 2: It was a, it was a choir, and they sang acapella music. And, it was started by James Tate and then later it was taken over by a white director by the name of--oh, it'll come to me. And, they would start off with the Negro spiritual, and they would have Glenn T. Settle, a min--a minister, narrate. And, they would tell what the, the spiritual signified. Like, "When I go to heaven, I know that they'll be angels up in heaven. And, I'll be able to look up in the sky and say, over my head, look, I see angels in the air." And, then they would start, (singing) "Over my head, I see angels in the air. There must be a God somewhere." And, when Wings Over Jordan came on, everybody ran to the radio. And, my wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver], we still have the original song of Wings Over Jordan. Speaker 1: Recordings or sheet music? Speaker 2: Recordings on 78 records; old 78 records. And, and I love the spirituals, because spirituals to me show the, the black man struggle in American but his imagination as to what heaven must look like. When he gets up there, there'd be no segregation up in heaven. That the Lord--and, that's why I love Paul Robeson, see. He was a great singer and an athlete. And, I love Negro spirituals. And then, of course, I love the blues too. And, I was thinking about Billy Eckstine. Yeah, that was another one I used to love. In fact, her brother Milton [ph.] used to imitate Billy Eckstine; he was a great singer. But, I love black music. And, see, I depart from this rap, you know, because it's too vulgar for me. Well, that's another story. But, anyway, I'm trying to make a record. She's been after me to make a record. And, that's one of the things I'm gonna emphasize, the Negro spiritual because that's America's music. The Negro spiritual, the hillbilly's music as we call it. Those are really the only kinds of music that's--and jazz of course, what's his name; Louis Armstrong. I have a lot of jazz records, you know, Billie Holiday; what's her name, Josephine Baker. So, I got into that. Story_ID: 395549 Speaker 1: And, I guess the reason why I got to be such an authority on black history was because of my dad [Eugene Tolliver]. Now, he taught me where the Garden of Eden was; in Africa. And, he taught me--and, I came to my own conclusion that they can talk about, what is it; the Ten Commandments all they want but, Moses did not look like Charlton Heston, (laughter) see. And, of course, that makes me some kind of radical because many of our people are so brain washed that they, they hate being black. I used to always say that if I could invent a pill that would turn black folks white, I'd be a millionaire tomorrow morning, because some of us don't want to be black. And, when I was a kid, you call somebody black; that was a fight. But, my dad taught me that black was beautiful. That Moses' wife was named Zipporah, an Ethiopian woman. And, then I learned how black, beautiful women, like Aida--well, the opera 'Aida' [Giuseppe Verdi] is a black opera, between the war between the Egyptians and the Ethiopians. So, when Radames sings this song, (Singing in Italian) "Celeste Aida, Bella Aida," which is in Italian, meaning beautiful Aida. Well, he's singing to a black woman, see. And, he was an Egyptian and she was black, so it's a black opera. So, when Leontyne Price--and people go upset. I don't know why they got upset because it was a black opera. And, then I learned that Othello was black. And, I tried to play Othello when I was in college [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], and they knew who Desdemona was. And the, and the coach, Dana Burns, they wanted to disguise some white man to be black to be Othello. He said, "No, we have Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] who fits the part. He's tall. He speaks well." They taught me to speak. 'Cause I can't--and I considered myself a Pygmalion in technicolor. But, that white man took time to teach me how to speak. I won this oratorical contest representing the college. And, I was so militant. That's the reason why the coach and I couldn't get along. Now, Green [ph.], the coach at East, at East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio], he--I loved him. He was like a daddy. And, but, but Finnigan [Edward Finnigan] and I didn't get along. Now, he loved Harrison [Harrison Dillard], 'cause Harrison was quiet. I was never quite, see. And, but, he did tell me something. He said, "Now, Stanley, you and I don't get along." And, this was after I had founded the first interracial, interdenominational, Greek letter fraternity called Sigma Sigma Epsilon, and of course, I was the first president. It is now Phi Beta Tau, or Sigma Sigma Tau [sic. Beta Sigma Tau; Pi Lambda Phi] now. It's national now. But, anyway, he said, "Now, Stanley, I know you and I don't get along, but I wanna tell you something." He said, "If you really wanna help your people, you should be a public speaker and not a singer." Now, I'm thinking he's trying to get me out of the conservatory, see, because them white girls were playing for me. And, he didn't particularly care for that, you know. But, he said, but he said, "I wanna tell you something," and that has followed me 'til this day. He said, "White people like to be entertained by Negroes, but they don't like to be talked to by your kind of Negro." And, I have never forgotten that. 'Cause so many times when I speak, I don't let white folks know I can sing, see, 'cause I want them to pay attention to what I'm saying rather than hear me entertain 'em. And, I love to sing. But, I'm--and then of course, they wouldn't send me to college, I found out what the word radical means. It means people who advocate change. And, then what is a militant? A person that has a strong conviction. Well, it's that what a Christian supposed to be? It's that what Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was? Isn't that what Jesus was? So, I'm the kind of person that don't set well with even some black folks because I'm not caught up in this thing about trying to be like them. I'm, I wanna be like me. And, I have something to be proud of. Story_ID: 395550 Speaker 1: I just wrote some letters and they were published about the real hero, for example, at Watergate [Watergate Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.]; Frank Wills. Speaker 2: The security guard? Speaker 1: That's right. People didn't known that. And, the plain--what was it; the Sun press [Sun Newspapers] and the Free Times [Cleveland Free Times] printed my letter. And, people looked at--they didn't know, see. And, so, I've become a pretty good authority on black history. And, I always love the talk about Bathsheba. I said, Mo--I said, "David saw that black woman bathing. His nose got so opened, he had her husband killed so he could get her." And, that's Solomon's mother, see. So, there's a great black history in, in the Bible. Although, all the times they show it, it's always white folks. And, I said, "I'm very proud of the brothers and sisters that are coming forward now showing blacks to be in this position." And, even though she was councilman in that war, she never went to the Scrumpy-Dump [Scrumpy-Dump Cinema, Cleveland, Ohio]. And, that's where they showed all the blacks movies, see, at Scrumpy-Dump. And, Winston Willis [Winston E. Willis] was my client. (Cough) And, he was the one that owned all the hundred--and he made his money on these peep shows and what not. And, these white men would come down there and be entertained, you understand. That's how he made his money. But, then he opened up that Scrumpy Dump and got all the black movies, see, and I stayed in that place, see. Story_ID: 395551 Speaker 1: I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What schools did you attend in Cleveland [Ohio] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, Quincy School [Cleveland, Ohio], and there my favorite teacher was Miss Fooster [ph.]. She was a music teacher. And, she was the one that taught us a lot of Negro spirituals, that some of 'em we don't sing now. Like (singing) "Old Black Joe, I'm coming and my head is bending low." We can't sing that now. (Singing) "I hear the gentle voices calling, Old Black Joe." And, she taught it in the context of why--how it came about. That black people had this imagination of heaven and how it would be. And, then they would talk about their experiences. And, because they could sing in the mist of the--being beaten and tortured, it gave them the strength to survive, see. I--and, it, and it reminded me of why they kept of out of sports as long as they could. Because they knew if we got in it, we'd take it over. And, they kept us out. I was at the first game with Larry Doby, played for the Cleveland Indians. And, my uncle who was a waiter chartered a bus to go to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to see Jackie Robinson play. And, they deliberately kept us out of sports (background noise) because they knew how good we were. That's all right, I got an answering service. And, they knew how good we were (background noise). Oh you have to-- Speaker 2: So, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], you said your favorite teacher was-- Speaker 1: Miss Fooster. Speaker 2: The music teacher. Speaker 1: Music teacher. That's right. Speaker 2: Okay. So, she's a hero for you? Speaker 1: She was a hero. And, of course, I liked Mr. Weregal [ph.], he was the track coach. But, she was the first black teacher I saw. Speaker 2: And, that's at Quincy School, you said? Speaker 1: At Quincy School. They only had two, she and Miss Schumer [ph.] who taught art, but she was kind of mean. But, I--in fact, Miss Fooster used to buy the Call Post [Call and Post] from me. The Call Post sold for a nickel, and I'd get two cents, he'd get three cent. It came out on Thursday, but she'd let me give it to her on Friday. So--and she would buy the Call Post from me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, she was the one taught me these Negro spirituals and had me singing Negro spirituals and she would always teach what--why they're Negro spirituals. And, how it was the thing that kept black people strong during all of this hell. And, as I tell my Jewish friends, I say, "You're always talking about your Holocaust. Well, your Holocaust ended forty years ago, we're still in ours. And, we been in it since we been here, and we're still in." And, the problem is, you don't wanna, we want--you wanna respect--us to respect yours, but you don't wanna respect mine. I said, "We're still in the holocaust." As you notice, Monday they had a--they gave an apology. Isn't that a lot of nerve? To all of the five thousand blacks that they found had been lynched. Now, they gave reparations to the Japanese, and to the Jews, but for us, only an apology. And that to me is an insult. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, people went up there and accepted the apology; that's the way we are. Story_ID: 395552 Speaker 1: All right, now we gotta get back to the story of your, your school days (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. All right. Speaker 1: And those heroes. I mean, and the other is important too and maybe we can come back to it. But, I don't wanna forget to ask about other heroes that you had while you were in school. Speaker 2: All right, when I went to Rawlings Junior High [Rawlings Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio], I met my first black male teacher. And, Mr. Gilbert Cargill, who died recently, and I was shoc--he and Mr. Obannen [ph.]. I was shocked to see black male teachers, 'cause I didn't see any in elementary school. And, then my other teacher was Mrs. Shaloggauder [ph.], she was the music teacher. And, she had me singing in operettas and then I would sing popular songs. I remember how the girls was swooning when I was singing 'Stardust,' and the girls would just swoon. And, then she would have me sing 'Deep River, My Home is Over Jordan.' And, she gave me a letter to go to the, what is it, The Music Settlement [Cleveland, Ohio]. And, in those days that was something boy, 'cause I'm living down on Quincy [Avenue] and The Music Settlement was down here. And, you had to come up by a street car. Speaker 1: And, down here, what community that, was that? Speaker 2: Right over where I'm living now. Was the music--over on Magnolia [Drive]. Speaker 1: So, University Circle [Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, that's the one you went to? Speaker 2: But, that wasn't no University Circle to me. And, I come from down there and I was walking down that long street and it was cold. And, this was the first time I got chance to sing in a mix audience. And, they taught triads, where that was, that was the key. And, in every class I had to sing in front of the white people, and I was--and they thought I was from Rawlings College [ph.] because I looked older. They didn't know I was from Rawlings Junior High. And, I'm trying to think of the song I was taught to sing, 'None but the Lonely Heart' by Tchaikovsky [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky]. (Singing) "None but the lonely heart;" that, see. And, I would sing that in front of this white audience. And, I was just a kid. And, then I had to walk that long walk, you know, and it was cold. But, she was the one got me started. Story_ID: 395553 Speaker 1: So, may I ask, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], you said, you attended Quincy School [Cleveland, Ohio] and Rawlings [Rawlings Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio], and the faculty is integrated. But, is it predominantly an African American School, or completely African American? Speaker 2: Well, at that time, it was about, mostly white. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Mostly white, but it was, as time went on it became more and more black. And, of course, at East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio] I told you about Coach Green [ph.], you know. But, I'll never forget it and I--oh, yeah, let me tell you. I was pugilistic 'cause you had to be a fighter to live in the ghetto. I could out run--if it got more than two, I had to split, see. But, I could duke, now, and I was good. And, Joe Louis was my idol because he was knoc--he was beating white folks and getting paid for it. That was the first time we ever had a hero, see. And, when Joe Louis would beat up somebody, Harlem [New York, New York] would turn out. Aww, we'd just have a fit. When he knocked out Max Schmeling. Remember Schmeling was a Nazi? But, when he got knocked out by Max Schmeling, oh, we was sick. And, any white person try to laugh, we wanna hit him, see. (Laughter) 'Cause he messed up and Murray Hill [Road] up where the Italians were, you know, we always knew that would be a fight. We had to run like hell out there, 'cause those Italians were tough. So, I could run. That's how I learned to run too, see. But, I, but I wanted to be a boxer fighter like Joe Louis. Now, Jesse Owens was great but Jesse Owens wasn't making any money, see. He was just (unclear) and everything. We loved him and they had a parade for him, we were there. But, Joe Louis was making money beating white men. And, so, I wanted to box. And, I was pretty good at it too, see. My old man [Eugene Tolliver] would sneak me around, you know. But, then this guy right here, where is his picture; Jimmy Bivins. Speaker 1: Maybe we can get a picture of that later on-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Jimmy Bivins. Speaker 1: You know, when we shoot the photos. Speaker 2: Let's see Jimmy Bivins; now, he was the kind of guy--now, people like Lloyd Marshall, and some of these other boxers, they take it easy, you know, they know we were just kids. But, Bivins was an evil something, boy. And, I went in there and was boxing with him and he hit me upside my head, boy. And, then I realized I didn't wanna box no more. And, I interviewed him and I told him, and my mother [Edna Riles Tolliver] found out that my dad was sneaking me around. And, oh that's when hell broke loose. My mother got on my dad, boy, and she said, "Now your brain gonna last longer than your jaw. You going to school." And, I look at my dad, he said, "Well, that's the end of that," (laughter). He wasn't gonna argue with my mother. So, but, Joe Louis was my idol because of the fact that he was beating these white men. And, that was our way of fighting segregation. Here, we had this great black champion. Now, I had heard about Jack Johnson. My dad would tell me about Jack Johnson. But, he got in trouble, white slavery and all that, and Joe was a good ol' boy. And, he was the champion and we would go to the Haltnorth [Haltnorth Theatre, Cleveland, Ohio] or the Quincy [Quincy Theatre, Cleveland, Ohio] or the Globe Theaters [Cleveland, Ohio], and that was in the hood, you know. And, the fight out come out. Ye--you know, weeks later, the fight would come out and we'd be all around the corner waiting on the fi--now, the fight has been fought. And, we'd go in there just like we would go and, when we used to have--before they had TV and they would have these fights in the theaters, and you pay to go in. And, you would think that the fight was being fought then, see. And, it had been over with and we know who won. And, you'd pay a dime, you know, and you get a whole lot for your money in those day, you know. You'd see a chapter, and that's the part, you know, the hero, just before the hero vanish, then you'd have to come back the next Sunday to see what happened, chapter two. You'll see a funny, you'll see a cartoon, you know. But, we all wanted to see the fight, see. And, when Joe Louis would hit that so and so, hit, and we'd holler and scream just like it was the fight was taking place at that time, see. But, so, that was part of my childhood. Story_ID: 395554 Speaker 1: But, then I met Paul Robeson, and I met another one, great woman, Mary McLeod Bethune. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She came to speak and Robeson sang, and she spoke at the Old Paradise [ph.] owned by James Bell [ph.], down on 55th [Street] and Central [Avenue]. And, oh Lord, did I love the hear her, that woman speak. Oh, God, she was fascinating. And, then-- Speaker 2: Do you remember what Mrs. Bethune spoke about that, that moved you so? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: When you met her? Speaker 1: Education. Talked about how smart we black people are. And, that the God has endowed us with talent and we must use that talent, and don't let anybody discourage you from using that talent, see. And, she then became, as you know, the confidant of Eleanor Roosevelt, see. And, then she started, as you know, Cookman, Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida]. And, every time she would come, oh, I would be there. And, then of course, a person she can tell you about was John O. Holly [John O. Holly, Jr.]. He started a thing where, don't buy where you can't work. Boycott all these stores. If you're not working there, don't buy it. And, he started that and got a lot of black people hired in jobs that would not had been possible if it hadn't been for him and his boycott. John O. Holly, the Future Outlook League, and he wrote a book called 'The Future is Yours' and she's in the book. She was the first black hired by the Ohio Bell Telephone Company. And, she's in the book. Speaker 2: Okay. And, just for record because people can't see who you're pointing to. You're pointing to Miss Artha Woods-- Speaker 1: Well, she was Artha-- Speaker 2: Who's a witness here. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was Artha Douglas at that time. Story_ID: 310158 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, can you tell me please how you decided that you would attend college at Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't decide. That was the only one I could get into 'cause I had a scholarship. My father [Eugene Tolliver] didn't have the money. And, I have to tell you this, I would go to get a job in those days, I was a college trained and high school graduate, and I would wanna white collar job. And, they look at me, "How tall are you, Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.]?" "Six feet tall." "How much you weight?" By that time, I was weighting about a hundred and eighty, seventy-five. "Oh, we got a good job for you." Sledge hammer, wheelbarrow, and the boss would be a DP, couldn't speak the English language. But, here I'm a college person, and he's my boss, see. And, so I'm working at this place, and it was the heat treat. And, you have to keep that, the cord, you know, would be put in the, in sand and it would come up and you had to be the knockout man. And, all these black fellows had children and of course, I was single living with my mom [Edna Riles Tolliver] and dad, see. And, I mean I had to keep that rhythm up, see. And, "Old college boy, get busy, get busy," you know. So, this guy would run around and touch black men in the behind, goosing 'em, you know, and they go, "Hee, hee, hee." So, he tried that on me, and everybody was looking 'cause they knew how militant I was, and I did laugh 'cause I wasn't ticklish. And, he want to, "What's the matter with you?" I said, "Now if you wanna get a beat so-and-so," I cussed in those days, "Go get your mamma" (laughter). "What you say?" I said, "You heard what I said." "You's one of them smart Ns." I said, "That ain't what your mamma told me last night." And, all the guys were, woo. And, he swung at me. That's what I wanted. And, I beat him half to death, see. And, they called the police. Police came, and but the boy then spoke up 'cause they was happy that I did what they couldn't do, see. "Naw, Tolliver didn't start it, and he swung at him first." So, the man said, "Get your money and get the hell outta here." So, I got my money and left. And, I didn't have a car 'cause I didn't learn to drive 'til I was twenty-three. That's P-O, I was, po. But, (laughter) anyway-- Speaker 2: So, this is all while you were in college? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The fighting, and (laughter) the working, and studying? Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. So, when I got home, I told my mother. Oh, she was scared to death. Oh, God. Police gonna come out and arrest her baby. Oh, she was scared to death. Said, "I'm gonna tell your daddy." Soon as the old man got home, and I told him what happened, he started laughing. And, my mother was upset. "You laughing. That's not funny. They gonna put my baby jail, and you think that's,--" oh, she was just fussing, see. So, the old man looked at me he said, "Now, boy, let me tell you something. As long as you're going to school, you know you got a place to stay. Your mamma take care of your clothes." And, I would give my mother, you know, some money, you know. He'll say, "Because I can't send you to college." He said, "But, I'm gonna tell you something, you get something in your head, that you--and work for yourself 'cause you too crazy to work for white folks. I knows how you is," (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, that stuck with me, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 310159 Speaker 1: So, now what kind of student were you at Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]? Were you a good student? Speaker 2: Oh, I was better, I wish I was a better student at Baldwin-Wallace than Bush [President George Walker Bush] was at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Well, you must have been pretty good. You went to law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: I was, oh, yeah 'cause-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was, you know, I wasn't brilliant but I stay up at night, you know, and study. And, and some of the teachers would take interest in me, you know, and they would give me extra credit. And, particularly the drama coach, Mr., Professor Burns [Dana Burns]. And, by coincidence I was in Lorain [Ohio] today, and one of my people that went to school with me made a special trip to come to court, and she hadn't seen me in over fifty years. She remembered me from, from B-W [Baldwin-Wallace College] and her son was the head person, and he was her baby, a six foot something baby, you know. And, we talked about those days and how--like I said I was a Pygmalion because I'm listening to the reverend preach and he kept talking about sepulker, sepulker [ph.]. So, I was reading this thing ['Annabel Lee'] by Edgar Allan Poe about, what was it about; his Anna Lee who was buried by the sea, that the guards was jealous of Annabel Lee and Me that they, and he said,--and I said, "Sepulker." And, the white kids laughed 'til they cried. The word is sepulcher. But, I'm listening to the preacher, see (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, may I ask you something else specific about your college days and the fraternity--? Speaker 2: But, it was lonely. Speaker 1: That you launched. I'm sorry? Speaker 2: It was lonely there. Speaker 1: It was lonely? In what way? Speaker 2: It was many day and times, I was the only black in college. It was lonely. The kids were friendly but when it came time for fraternity or sorority, I wasn't invited. So, I was there by myself. So, it was lonely. Speaker 1: So, did that motivate you to start the interracial multicultural fraternity? Speaker 2: It did. It did. Harrison Dillard is a charter member. And, now they're having meetings under the new heading. And, I took her with me a couple times when I went out there. But-- Speaker 1: So, what years was that fraternity launched, again? Speaker 2: That must have been about '46 [1946]. Speaker 1: And, that's Sigma Sigma Epsilon? Speaker 2: That was the original. Now, it's Beta Sigma Tau [Pi Lambda Phi], now. Speaker 1: Okay. Beta-- Speaker 2: Sigma Tau. Speaker 1: Sigma Tau. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. This is great. Now, I think one of your fraternity brothers interviewed for this project as well. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Steve Minter [HistoryMaker Steven A. Minter]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, Steve Minter, when he made a speech one of the first things he said he got through was that college, 'cause he remembered I was the one started that fraternity. He'll tell you that. He, Harrison Dillard, George Forbes [HistoryMaker George Forbes], and me, we were inducted into the first African American, Black Hall of Fame; the four of us. And, he made a speech at Antioch [Antioch Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] and told 'em that was one of the reasons why he went to Baldwin-Wallace 'cause he wanted to belong to that fraternity that I started. And, he'll tell you that. Speaker 1: All right. Now, that hall of fame that you all were inducted into--? Speaker 2: The Black Hall of Fame. Speaker 1: Is that at Baldwin-Wallace or? Speaker 2: At Baldwin-Wallace. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Just wanted that to be part of the record too. Speaker 2: And, of course, I'm in the Athletic Hall of Fame, and then I'm in the; oh, what was it? What's the name of that one? Outstanding Alumnus Hall of Fame, I'm in that too. Speaker 1: At Baldwin-Wallace? Speaker 2: At Baldwin-Wallace. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 310160 Speaker 1: And you mentioned that Harrison Dillard was a, was a hero for you. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had come back from, Second World War [World War II, WWII]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Greatest athlete I had ever seen. The guy was just phenomenal. Two time Olympic champion, and I wanted to hit the coach in the mouth. Because in 1948, when he went to run, he was trying to run the hurdles and the dash at the same time. And, he messed up on the hurdles, because the coach was running him too much. And, he wasn't supposed to win the hundred meters, Bonnie Hurl [ph.] was, but nobody told Harrison. And, he won the hundred meters, and then of course ran on the victorious four by one hundred meter relay. The guy was the fastest man I had ever seen in my life. I was not as good as he was. I was good enough to get through college [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], 'cause I ran the 440 [440-yard dash], and half mile. And, I could kind of fill in on the four by 200 meter relay, and he was the anchorman, of course. But, he was the greatest runner I have ever seen. Speaker 1: Now, for Jesse Owens and Harrison Dillard. Were they both native Clevelanders [Cleveland, Ohio], or? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Both came from East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Both. Okay. Just-- Speaker 2: But, Owens is older than Dillard. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: See, 'cause Owens won his in 1936. And, Harrison won his in 1948 and 1952. Speaker 1: And, that's their gold medals? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Olympic golds? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 310161 Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], when did you finish up your undergraduate work at Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]? Speaker 2: In 1948. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was in, I was in the class of '47 [1947], but, I got credit for '48 [1948]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then I went to law school four years at night. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, Miss Schloggada [ph.], no not Scholog--Miss Riemenschneider, Professor Albert Riemenschneider, who was an authority on Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach]. I hurt my leg and couldn't, and couldn't maintain my scholarship. Mrs. Riemenschneider took interest in me. And, she got a friend, whose name I can't mention, to help pay my tuition. And, from the--and I would do work for her, you know, I'd cut her grass and what not. And, she took an interest in me 'cause I wrote a letter to (unclear) and told 'em how I was, thought I was being mistreated. And, she took an interest in me. And, then wanted to pay my way through law school. But, I said, "No, I'm working, and I'll do it myself." But, this lady before she died had chance to see me as a successful lawyer. And, and she just felt that--she was one of these good Christian women that though that we were forced over here on a ship. And, that we should help those who want to especially do something for, to help their people. And, she was kind of hard on Jews and I told her, "No, don't do that," you know. She felt that they were taking, they were exploiting black. Well, in a way they were, but it was not their fault, we were just dumb enough to let 'em do it, you know (laughter), you know. We just had this image and of course I, I would remind them of Schwerner [Michael Schwerner] and Goodman [Andrew Goodman], the other lawyer, you know, the one's that perished down there in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Yeah. The three civil rights workers. Speaker 2: Yeah. The, yeah-- Speaker 1: Chaney [James Chaney]. Speaker 2: Chaney. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Chaney was the black one. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, I said, how Jews had been a part of the civil rights struggle for us. And, I remember how Rabbi Lelyveld [sic. Arthur J. Lelyveld] from Cleveland [Ohio] went south and almost got killed, down there in the South with Reverend Donald Jacobs [Donald S. Jacobs]. Well, the next year I went, and that was an experience; south, to be a civil rights worker. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, I'd like to hear about that too, but you also said that you attended law school but that you finished your studies while you were in [U.S.] military. Speaker 2: No. No (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or, how? Speaker 2: I passed the bar. Speaker 1: You passed the bar. Okay. Thank you. Speaker 2: I had graduated from law school when I got drafted. Speaker 1: And, what law school did you attend? Speaker 2: Cleveland Marshall [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Cleveland Marshall. Okay. Speaker 2: Cleveland State [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio], now. Story_ID: 310162 Speaker 1: And, so, you were in the [U.S.] military then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From '51 [1951]. Speaker 1: --during the Korean conflict [Korean War]? Speaker 2: From '51 [1951] to '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I sang, I sang at the commencement [at Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] and my wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] who was then my fiance played for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, that was the highlight of the commencement, 'cause I was the soloist. And, one of the people took interest in me was Dean Stapleton [Wilson Gesner Stapleton], he was the, he was the dean of the law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], former mayor of Shaker Heights [Ohio]. And, he took a great interest in me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, so, when I graduated from law school, I got drafted. And, I told you the reason why I was drafted. I mean, how I got to--'cause I was so crazy, you know. I just wasn't gonna take that crap from these crackers, as I call 'em. Speaker 1: Well, I think you shared that with me before we actually turned the camera on. So, would you like to talk about some of your military experiences? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't wanna go. I was not a volunteer. But, it's your duty, as a citizen to serve your country. And, I did the six week, and one of the things I did when I was in basic training; I used my voice, you know to get closer to chaplain. But, I also called caters, and they called me Jodi. (Singing) "Ain't no use in writing home, Jodi's got your gal and gone. Ain't no use of feeling blue, Jodi got your mamma too," (laughter). "Am I right or wrong, man, you always right" (laughter). "Sound off, one, two." So, I could make up these caters and I, I can't sing some of 'em that I made up, and the guys would help me make 'em up, you know. And, we'd, (singing) "Sound off, one, two. Sound off, three, four. Sound, break it on down. One, two, three, four. One, two, three, four. Gotta a gal name, gotta a gal from triple war, gotta a gal from triple war; ugliest gal you ever saw, ugliest gal you ever saw; face like a monkey, shaped like a frog; face like a monkey, shaped like a frog; but, she got good loving ooh, hot dog," (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, that's, that, we'd make up those caters. Well, that helped keep me out of KP [kitchen patrol], see. 'Cause they said, "Naw, Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], you got to be out there singing," you know. And, I had one of these old cracker, sergeant. Oh, he just love my--"That boy sho can sang (laughter)." And, when we get ready to march, "Where's Jodi?" "Here I am." "Come on up here," (Laughter). So, when I--we were married in the [U.S.] Army, that same sergeant got made with me, put me on guard duty. And, you walk, walk to this post a mile a minute. Dirty in one end, ain't a damn thing in it (laughter). And, he had me on guard duty, and I told him I was supposed to get married. He didn't pay any attention. Boy, you should have seen him running with his coat tail just flying. "Private Tolliver, you supposed to get married." I said, "Well, I told you that, and you wouldn't listen to me," and I just kept on marching. "Now, you got to go. Now, you got to go." "Why do I have to go?" "'Cause that, that captain say that if you wasn't there in fifteen minutes, he was gonna bust me lower than a private (laughter)." Speaker 1: So, where were you stationed when all this was happening? Speaker 2: At Camp Breckinridge, Kentucky [Camp Breckinridge, Morganfield, Kentucky]. Speaker 1: In Kentucky. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 310163 Speaker 1: And, your wife's name? Speaker 2: Dorothy. Dorothy Olivia Greenwood Tolliver [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver]. She used it all. Particularly when she graduated from Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]. She graduated from Baldwin-Wallace and got her master's [degree] when she was sixty. And, that's the name she used. Dorothy Olivia Greenwood Tolliver. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, we were all there. And, oh, she just strutted. I got the movies, you know. Oh, she just strutted, boy. And, we were just hollering, boy. And, she got her master's when she was sixty. Speaker 1: And, so, your wife was a musician too, a pianist. Speaker 2: Oh, great music, great musician. She can tell you, she was a great musician. Speaker 1: And, you were both in the, was it the conservatory [Conservatory of Music] at Baldwin-Wallace, or? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, we met at Karamu [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, we both met--'cause we were both trying out for 'Carmen Jones' [Oscar Hammerstein II], the black play that's based on 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet], but, what's his name? Speaker 1: Bizet, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, did--no, well that's the original. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, I'm trying to think who wrote 'Carmen Jones,' they jazzed it up-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: You know. And, I had the part of the prize fighter. Now in 'Carmen' it was, the fighter was called, oh, what was his name, in 'Carmen,' it was--but, I know in 'Carmen Jones,' it was Husky Miller. But, he was a bullfighter in 'Carmen.' And, I'm trying to think of his name. But, anyhow, Husky Miller, and I had that part as an understudy to a guy that was bigger than me. And, I thought I was big. He couldn't sing as well, but his was bigger than me by the name of Sam McCurry [ph.]. And, then I had the part of sergeant, Sergeant Miller [sic. Sergeant Brown], who got in the fight with him and tried to seduce Carmen Jones. And, she ran away with Husky, see. And, then of course, the kid, the guy that played, he was the one that, that actually the one got court-martialed for messing around with Carmen, you know. Left the [U.S.] Army and then later on he killed her. He choked her to death. Escamillo was the name of the, of the bullfighter. And, this--and the guy that fell in love with Carmen, and as we would say in ho--in the hood, she had his nose opened. And wound up being a deserter and then she messed around with Husky and he caught her and killed her, you know. And, then he sang this song about, hang me high on a tree so that I'll be with my Carmen, my baby, my Carmen, and they took him away. In fact, my daughter Stephanie [Stephanie Tolliver], the one that has the cancer, that's recovering, she played the part of Carmen Jones out at the East Cleveland Theatre [Cleveland, Ohio], see. So, she's very musical, sings like a canary. Now, my son [Stanley Tolliver, Jr.] can't sing. But, he's about--he just got his master's in computer. And, his wife got her master's in business from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Can we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, he did, he did like me. He got him a smart woman. Story_ID: 310164 Speaker 1: (Laughter) Can we go back for a little while to that, those Karamu [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio] days? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, you said that's where you met (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver]. Speaker 1: Your future wife. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so, you were high school students at the time-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no. Speaker 1: You met, or? Speaker 2: We were adults. She was-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --finishing school, and I was practicing law. Speaker 1: Oh, all right. Speaker 2: No, no, I wasn't, I was still in law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, because you said she played for you. Speaker 2: Yeah, and when I graduated. Speaker 1: When you sang at the commencement. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Well, we met there and it was a very integrated place. Speaker 1: Karamu? Speaker 2: Yes. And, some great actors came from there. What's his name, with that long name, he played the Butler [Benson]. Speaker 1: Oh, [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume? Speaker 2: Robert Guillaume. Yeah, he came from Karamu. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What's her name? A big woman. She, she came from Karamu. I wish I could think-- Speaker 1: Not, Zelma George [Zelma Watson George]? Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, Velma [sic. Zelma George], yeah. Velma George played a movie, a thing called the 'Medium' ['The Medium,' Gian Carlo Menotti]. And, my wife was, was in there too, in 'The Medium.' Zelma George. She could sing, and could talk, okay. And, I'm trying to think of the one, I know you would know her. Hopefully, it'll come to me. And, the one that, let me see, what was his name that came--there were a lot of people--Howard Roberts, I don't know if you knew him. He came from Karamu. He had an ensemble, he--Howard Roberts came from Karamu. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you knew the Jelliffes [Russell Jelliffe and Rowena Jelliffe]? Speaker 2: Oh, the Jelliffe. Oh, my Lord, yeah. Speaker 1: What can you tell me about Russell and Rowena Jelliffe in Karamu? Speaker 2: They were very dedicated people. They really opened the door for a lot of blacks to get into, in the theatre; very dedicated people. She was a little bitty little dried up woman. And, he was very proper and he was very supportive of her. And, they gave us a chance to show our talent which we never would've had if hadn't been for the Jelliffes, see. And, I wish I could think of the name of that other, that woman. She has appeared on Broadway. I just wish I could think of her name. But, there was a lot of us came from there, and--'cause it was a lot of integration there. I know a lot of white girls would come down there and meet these black men. Some of got pregnant, too, down there, by some of these brothers, you know. So that's (laughter), so it was called up by some of these right wing people, you know, a Communist place, you know, because of all of this mixture. Speaker 1: So, was that in the '50s [1950s] during the McCarthy era? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You would get all this integration in the arts going on? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, I'd never forget it, Harriet Eels [ph.] was one who was very dedicated too. She was a rich widow and she'd donated a lot of money. And, I'm taking my final exam and she's calling down to the law school telling them to hur--tell me to come hurry up--now that did it for me. Now, I'm trying to be a lawyer and she wants me to hurry up and get down there and entertain somebody, and forget about being a lawyer. And, that did it for me. And, I remember Benn-Frank [ph.] was his last name. And, he liked Dorothy, my wife. And, she didn't care anything about him, he was married. Oh, he was crazy about her. "That Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], he's no good, you (unclear), you're wasting your time with him. He's no good." And, he, oh, he was crazy about her. And, was gonna hur--you know me, I was gonna hurt 'em, you know. Now, you're talking to my woman and she doesn't wanna be bothered with you. Now, I'm gonna you--I'm gonna kill you (laugher). So, I broke that up (laughter). Story_ID: 310165 Speaker 1: We went back to that because you were about to tell me about your marriage while you were in the [U.S.] military. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And, you said you met your wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] at Karamu [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio]-- Speaker 2: At Karamu Theatre. Speaker 1: So, I wanted to hear that story. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But, if we can go back to the wedding day. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In the military? Now, tell me about that. You know, guard duty and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually, we got married twice. We got married while I was in the, in the service. The chaplain could pass for Harry Truman's [President Harry S. Truman] brother. Look just like Harry Truman. And, he, he actually had a chance to come to my house on Wade Park [Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio] after I was married and everything. And, he stayed with us. He was so proud of his children. That's what he called us. And, he was Zion, Monz--he was Congregationalist and so was Dorothy. And, I would sing as you know. Now on Sunday I'd sing all these beautiful songs about the Lord, and then Monday, I was calling caters (laughter), what was just the opposite, you know. But, the chaplain was the most powerful guy in the service. You get next to him, boy you, you were into something. And, he helped me to get this transfer that I finally got, see. And, it was kind of pitiful because I was broke, boy, listen, I've never been as broke in my life as I was when I was a private. And, Dorothy was in this hospital at Fort Meade [Maryland] [Perrysburg, Ohio] and I was about, it was about from here to Akron [Ohio]. But, everyday I'd hitchhike to go see her. Speaker 1: Now, tell me why was your, your wife hospitalized? I don't think you said that. Speaker 2: That's when she, no, she had a miscarriage. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And, they took twelve hours to get her to the hospital because of segregation. There--out in Fort Meade. And, that's when I went bananas, you know. I didn't wanna be in the [U.S.] Army in the first place, and I told 'em I said, "Just like you love your little white woman, I love my little black woman." And, I didn't--and if you don't wanna take care of her, you can get me the so-and-so outta here and I'm take care of her. And, by coincidence the--one of the founders of this building, Dr. Joseph Martin, operated on her and brought all three of my kids into this world. And, he's retired from this building; Dr. Joseph P. Martin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Isn't that something? Speaker 1: Yeah. So, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], since you mentioned your children, could you just state their names for the record too so they can be part of this. Speaker 2: All right. Stephanie [Stephanie Tolliver] is the oldest one. She's studying to be a lay minister. She's a graduate of Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]. And, Sherrie [Sherrie Tolliver], whom you just met, she graduated from New York U [New York University, New York, New York] by way of Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio]. She went to Oberlin first. And, they both were members of a group called Women in History [ph.], and they would play the parts of famous black women. Some of 'em I thought--I had never heard of, you know. Like Stephanie would do Marian Anderson, and then a white girl would play the part of Eleanor Roosevelt. You know the story behind that. And, Stephanie would sing Marian Anderson, and this white woman would imitate Mar--Eleanor Roosevelt. Sherrie is still doing that, and she has played all kinds of plays (unclear). And, then she used to have a troop called the 'Women with Big Twieit,' [ph.] T-W-I-E-I-T, you can kind of put metaphors on that. But, none of 'em cuss. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Taking after me. Speaker 1: And, your son's name? Speaker 2: And, my son's Stan, Jr., [Stanley Tolliver, Jr.] who's a great athlete when he was in college, and high school. Lives in Sea--he lives in Boyds, Maryland. Speaker 1: And, you daughters still live here in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: And, my two daughters still live on Wade Park. Story_ID: 313880 Speaker 1: Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], again, you had mentioned that you serviced in the [U.S.] military during the time of the Korean conflict [Korean War]. And, that's just after A. Philip Randolph and some other activist had petition the government to desegregate the [U.S.] Armed Forces. And, that it was a big report, Freedom to Serve [Freedom to Serve: Equality of Treatment and Opportunity in the Armed Services], and then soon after that we had this experiment with integration of troops. So, did you notice that the doors of opportunities were opening up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, because the doors of opportunity particularly for blacks in the military were really beginning to open up. They had--in fact, when I went to Washington [D.C.], they sent me to Washington to talk to, of all people, General Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.]. 'Cause they wanted to have somebody talk to me 'cause they knew I was odd, crazy, whatever. Speaker 1: And, this is Benjamin--? Speaker 2: Benjamin Davis. Speaker 1: O. Davis? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, when I went to Washington and saw that big tall black man with that uniform on, oh boy that was a thrill for me. And, he talked to me and made me understand that the [U.S.] Army was full of rules and regulations. And, told me to pursue what I was doing and be patient. But, always do what they tell you, then complain (laughter). But, don't let them catch you so you can get court-martialed, see. And, he, he, oh, he--that was a great moment for me to see this black man being a general. Speaker 1: Now, was it Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.? Speaker 2: Jr. Speaker 1: Jr. Okay. Speaker 2: And, while I was on the school board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District], I got chance to rename the school that was called the Aviation [Aviation High School] to the Benjamin, General Benjamin O. Davis Aviation School [General Benjamin O. Davis Jr. Aviation High School; Davis Aerospace & Maritime Academy, Cleveland, Ohio]. And, if you go in there now, you'll see him with the Tuskegee Airman. Her, step--her grandson-in-law is the commander of the local chapter. Speaker 1: Of the tusk--? Speaker 2: Of the Tuskegee Airman. I've had him on my radio show a couple times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was a great inspiration for me. Story_ID: 313881 Speaker 1: So you said in the 1950s that, in the [U.S.] military at least, doors of opportunity (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no question. Speaker 1: --were beginning to open? Speaker 2: No, question about it. Speaker 1: Okay, while you were still enlisted? Speaker 2: In fact, when I was at Fort Hayes [Columbus, Ohio] and passed the bar, a lot of the black fellows were angry with me because I didn't wanna go to Washington [D.C.] to become a first lieutenant in there, so they could say they were in there with me. But, my commitment to fight for my people as a civil rights lawyer, I just couldn't stay in the military, 'cause I couldn't take orders, you know. And, it's politics in the military too now, you know. And-- Speaker 1: What's the evidence of that? Speaker 2: Oh, the court-martial, you know. Just like right now, what happened at Abu Ghraib prison [Baghdad Central Prison, Abu Ghraib, Iraq]. The people who really caused that never got charged. Just these little sardines, as I call 'em, while the sharks swam away. And, this little girl, this little hillbilly girl, they tried to put it all on her, but she was just following orders. And, the only reason why she's not in prison 'cause her, the father of her child took the blame for what she did, see. And, there's a lot of politics, you know, in the military. Who you know, and they tickle me, they talking about this homosexual thing. Well, there were homosexuals when I was in there, and some of 'em were out. You know, it was obvious they were homosexual, you know. Many of 'em where chaplain assistants, clerks, cooks. I remember I wasn't in the service that long when this white boy by the name of Snooch [ph.], he caught his-self falling in love with me. I had just come home from leave, you know, being with my wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver]. And, I got in the bed and here he was in there. Man, I, I'd like to broke his neck, you know. I won't play that. Get out of here boy. And, then there was another one in love with a soldier by the name of Mahoney [ph.]; Mahoney is dead now, so I can tell it. He called him Myhoney [ph.]. And was as neat as a pin. I mean, his shoes just shined, you know, and he would do his clothes for him. And, called him Myhoney (laughter). So, it was a lot of that in the military. And, when I was down at Fort Lee [Virginia], and that's where the wife trained, they were a lot of lesbians down there, see. So, I don't know why all of a sudden it's such a big deal. They been in there all the time. Because I was out on patrol, and one of 'em told me, he say, "Ain't no use of you talking to me, 'cause I'm looking for the same thing you look for; a woman, female. And, that's where the WACs [Women's Army Corps] were, see. And I had a special cadence for the WACs. What was it; oh, let me see, what was it; for the WACs. I had a special cadence for the WACs. Oh, God, I can't remember it. But, I know it was so bad, they had to tell us to quit doing it. Oh, we'd say, "Delayed cadence count, you know, one, two three, and I'd use the falsetto. Delayed cadence count, one, a little louder, two, a little loud"--and they be switching, you know. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: "A little louder. One, again, two, again, three, again, four, again; one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four, wee." So, they complained (laughter) and we had to quit doing that, see. Story_ID: 313882 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, you passed the bar then, you know, while you were in the [U.S.] military. Is that '52 [1952]? Speaker 1: Fifty--fifty-three [1953]. Speaker 2: In '53 [1953] you passed the bar (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: And, then so, soon after that, you leave the military? Speaker 1: Well, I was only, I only had about eight--nine more months to go. But, I tried court-martials. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, that was an experience. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I had this white boy, by the name of Helperstein [ph.]. He was a hillbilly, and he stole a, a jeep and went to town and tore it up and got put in jail. And, when he came back, they were gonna court-martial him. Well, me, I'm talking about double jeopardy. Wasn't any double jeopardy. The military had a right to go after him, just like the civilians did. So, he asked me to represent him. And, this is when I would say, only in America. So, I had just passed the bar; had never tried a case or anything. And, he asked me to represent him. And, that was the talk of the, of the post, see. Speaker 2: So, this is a young white man? Speaker 1: A young white-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Kid. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: "By God, I want you to represent me. I don't trust them, I don't trust them white boys. I want you to represent me," see. And, I found out in the [U.S.] Army that the--even when I was in the South, when they found out I was educated, those white boys would come to me. I'd write letters for 'em, and do things for 'em. "Well, what did Stan [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] say, what did Stan say?" You know, they, they had a good respect for me. I was always able to talk to people, you know. So anyway, to make a long story short, I'm assigned to represent this boy. And, to assist me was a first lieutenant and a captain; both white. And, they're assisting me, and I'm a private. As Don King would say, "Only in America," see. Now, then I got a sergeant from the motor pool. I was suspended from all my duties to study. That captain of mine, Valentine [ph.], oh, he was so proud that I was in his unit. So, I didn't have to soldier at all, I had to study to represent this boy. So, anyway, the military, the jury is a bunch of soldiers. This was a special court-martial so the head of the, of the panel was a bird colonel. That means with the eagles. And, a general court-martial it's a general. But, it's all brass, see. And, the trial counsel who is the prosecutor is--was a major, and he was from Mississippi. And, he was told, "Now you can't call him Private Tolliver. You have to call him mister." Oh, that messed his mind up. He--and my boy was guilty as sin. Ain't no question he was guilty. But, I made that guy so angry making him call me mister, he blew the case (laughter). He blew the case. "Now, private." And, I'd look at the panel, I said, "Now, Mr. President of this very distinguished august panel, would you kindly remind trial counsel," I wouldn't call him major, "That in this trial, I am Mr. Tolliver, not Private Tolliver. And, he should be reminded that I am more qualified to be here than he is, 'cause at least I'm a lawyer. He isn't." And, oh, this guy just went nuts and blew the case, see (laughter). And, so, then the guy that was in charge, the legal officer, who was not a lawyer, a major, or was he a major or a colonel; I can't remember. He said, "Tolliver, I'm not a lawyer, you--here." And, he gave me his folks and he went on out and played golf or something, see. So, I was running the whole post as a legal officer, see. So, I tried about three of 'em and I had success in all of 'em. And, as I was getting discharged, there was a kid, nice kid, he was a clerk, and he was guarding a prisoner and he--and the prisoner got away. And, they blamed him. Well, he never should have been guarding the prisoner in the first place, 'cause he didn't have the qualifications, and they were gonna court-martial him. That's politics, you know, to take the blame off them. And, oh, his wife came to me and they cried, you know. And, I told them I said, "Well, what I'll do, I'll come back as a civilian." 'Cause they said, "We're gonna wait 'til Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] gets out and then we gonna get him," see. And, I wrote a letter and told him, I said, "I'll come back and represent you as a civilian." And, they never did court-marital him. Story_ID: 313883 Speaker 1: So, and I saw there be--wonderful opportunities in there. I mean, blacks was doing some things that they had never done before and because of the [U.S.] military. It was a wonderful opportunity for 'em. Not for me. But, for them. That was Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman] who signed that integration order and things have changed in the military. And, even when I was on the school board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District], I had some opposition to them recruiting in the schools, you know. And, these captains and these colonels, all black, came to me, talked to me about the [U.S.] Army and the mil--and then ha--listen, it was tremendous opportunities in the military. It's not as segregated as it was. 'Cause I remember when I went south the first time, my aunt took me south, the black soldiers were on one train, on one, and the blacks, and the whites were on another. And, white people was on the air conditioned, and the blacks was on the ones that you open up the window all the soot came in (laughter). And, the white folks was in air conditioned cars. And, the soldiers were in air conditioned cars. And, black soldiers and white soldiers, even when I was in, they tried to make a prison guard out of me. And, they told me that if any of 'em got out, I would have to serve the time. I said, "Well, put me in there, 'cause I'm not gonna shoot one of these guys. He needs the Army just like I do." And, it was so prejudice down there in Virginia that they had a photographer shop and they even segregated the pictures. That's how bad it was. And, up in Indiana you talk about a prejudice place. Up there in Terre Haute, Indiana. That's where you had to change trains. You had to sit in the buzzards roost; black soldiers, I mean, black folks. My uniform--and I didn't wanna sit up there. But, Dorothy [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver], my wife, said, "Now, if you get put in jail and I'm out here by myself." 'Cause I had a, you know, I was a kind, and I can tell you this real quick about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. I loved that man. But, I'll never forget it, we was at a meeting at St. James Church [St. James Cathedral, Chicago, Illinois] and Martin Luther King was speaking. And, he said in his melodious voice, "Now, what we have the demonstration, it's understood that Attorney Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] is not to participate. Because we do not want the movement compromised. We know how Attorney Tolliver is, and how can he represent us if he's in jail." I said, "You're right, Dr." 'Cause if one of those cops had reached for me, the movement was over. I was not gonna turn the other cheek. So, the fact that I was a lawyer got me off of that. I could stay there and represent everybody else. But, I was not gone--and that's why I say, "That man, I will never be the giant that he was." I just don't see how in the world he could take what he took. I couldn't do it. I just couldn't do it. But, I respected and admired him because the man lived what he preached, and he preached, what he said, he meant. And, I was just fascinated. He and I would have long conversations, okay. Even Ahmed Evans [Fred Ahmed Evans], he, he, now he just capitali--he just captivated Ahmed. Ahmed was just like a little puppy dog around him. You see that picture of him and Ahmed together. But, when they killed Ahmed that's--I mean, when they killed King, Ahmed went berserk. Story_ID: 313884 Speaker 1: Just as you're passing the bar, that's when the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is getting ready to argue Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] before the [U.S.] Supreme Court. And, so, I just wonder, you know, were you aware of the activities of Charles Hamilton Houston in the '40s [1940s] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. I was very aware. Speaker 1: And, Thurgood Marshall in the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause like--as I said, I got a letter from Thurgood. And, what happened I was a lawyer for CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] because some blacks felt that the NAACP was too bourgeois. Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us again what CORE stands for? Speaker 2: Congress of Racial Equality. Speaker 1: Okay, thanks. Speaker 2: And, it was headed by a dynamic black woman by the name Ruth Turner. She had a master's degree, and she was something, boy. And, they were, they were just more radical and I loved that, you know. The NAACP was too, you know, it was kind of bourgeois to me. And, I got a chance to be the lawyer for CORE. And, it was crazy folks in CORE, and that's what I loved. I loved it, see. And, I was the lawyer for CORE. And, we were all behind the movement that put Carl Stokes on the ben--in the mayor's office [in Cleveland, Ohio]. Because his--the person Locher [Ralph S. Locher] had a police chief by the name of Wagner [Richard Wagner]. And, Wagner made the statement that we have to maintain the electric chair because if you don't they would encourage blacks to kill white policemen. So, then we jumped on Locher. He said, "Well, you talk to the chief." I said, "We didn't elect him, we elected you. We wanna talk to you." And, he wouldn't talk to us. And, so, finally a group of preachers went down there and trespass and got put in jail. And, that's when the black folks got mad then. You don't put the preacher in jail now. And, they put the preacher in jail for trespassing. And, that's when Lou Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes], Russ Adrian [ph.], Jimmy Haynes [ph.], and Carl Carrollton [ph.]--now we represented every one of these people who got put in jail for trespassing. And, that made black folks mad. So, they weren't really voting for Carl in the sense, they were voting against Locher. And, that, and it worked. Story_ID: 313885 Speaker 1: So, after you get out of the [U.S.] military then, after completing the legal studies and passing the bar, you came back home to Cleveland [Ohio]. And, did you immediately get involved in the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: My wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] took out, she owned some property and she took out a loan on her property and we used it to open my office that used to be right across the street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were one of the first black lawyers to move in this, what we call the Gold Coast [Lakewood, Ohio]. Everybody else was at 55th [Street] and Woodland [Avenue], and then there was a few of us down at 4th [Street] and Prospect [Avenue]. But, we were probably one of the first that moved out here. And, this building was built by a classmate of mine and his brother, Madison; Julian Madison and Monk Madison [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison], as we called him. Julian was in my class but he was a year younger than me; was a brilliant kid. Speaker 1: So, now this is Robert P. Madison? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The architect? Speaker 2: The archi- and his brother-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Julian. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Julian was killed up in Detroit [Michigan]. But, they had their office right across the street. Right on the corner there, a little black and white building. That's where they started. And, they were the architects for this building. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so I was across the street with a broker by the name of Jay Roy Terry Realty [ph.]. And, I had one side and he had the other side. And, I didn't have but two rooms, you know. And, my wife was my first secretary. And, she got so bossy, you know how women are. They didn't like to come in and, you know, have your wife. So, how was I gonna get her outta there. Well, she got pregnant, so that took care of that. (Laughter) Stephanie [Stephanie Tolliver] came along and that's how I was able to get her out there (laughter). But, much of the stuff that I even have 'til this day, she bought; brilliant woman. She was--she taught me a lot. She could type. Take, you know, smart woman. So, she took leave of absence, she was my secretary. And, I'll tell you one thing, all the bills--I didn't see any of the money. Now, she took all the money. But, I could--and she'd give me an allowance. But, the bills was paid. The credit was number one, see. And, I mean, she was something else. And, she was my first secretary. But, as I said, I was wondering how to get her outta there so I can have my hands on some of my money, you know. (Laughter) So, I couldn't fire her, you know. But, she got pregnant, Stephanie came along and that took care of that (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) So again, you're opening (telephone ringing) your first office in about what year (background noise)? Okay, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], you were talking about the early days of having your own law office, and that your wife was your secretary. I just wondering when did you establish that office here on 105 [Street]? Speaker 2: As I--I was (cough) discharged, let me see, I was discharged in '53 [1953] and I opened my office about a month after I got out the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In '53 [1953]. Story_ID: 313886 Speaker 1: And, and as you said before, involved in the '50s [1950s] in the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: I was up to my eyeballs. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: In it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I would represent people. I remember people would--other lawyers would run from. I was never scared to represent anybody. I remember my first, one of my first cases was this woman, who was a big woman, real masculine looking woman, who went down--and her husband told her if you don't get me a child I'm gonna divorce you. And, she went over to--what was that place on Kinsman [Road, Cleveland, Ohio] where they had these women who would have children and didn't have any husband? It was a hospital over there for woman who was having babies and no husband. And, she actually went over there and stole one of those babies. She had pretended to be pregnant all that time. And, she walked from Kinsman all the way over to Euclid [Avenue] carrying that baby. And, they finally captured her. And, then I was--some people on the Call and Post like Bob Williams for example, and Woody Taylor, they took interest in me. And, another one Frank Handy [ph.] who was a bondsman, he took an interest in me and they would through these cases at me. And, then I started representing the ladies in the night; the girls, the ladies of the evening, girls in the night, pavement prince and princesses. And, I noticed that there was a discrimination against them. The white men would had come into the community and solicit woman and never get charged with anything because the police would sign the affidavit so that he wouldn't be mentioned. Well, they taught me in law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] that you have a right to face your accuser and see who your accuser was. Now, my wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] was living at that time, my fiance at that time, was living at the Phillis Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley Association, Cleveland, Ohio]. And, the Phillis Wheatley, as you know, was for black women because the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], you couldn't stay there. And, Edna Hunter [Jane Edna Hunter], as you know, was the head of it. And, these men, they didn't care. It could you, or her, or any other intelligent black woman, all they saw was a black woman and they'd hit on her. So, I, being the kind of person I am, I wanted to find out--I filed a motion, of what they call a bill of particulars and tell me that Carol Donya Jones [ph.] solicited a male. Well, tell me who this male is? And, they didn't want me to know. So, Ted Williams [ph.], whose picture's up there, granted the motion. He had a right to know who his accuser was. And, soon as I found out who the accuser was, white man, from Pepper Pike [Ohio] or Beachwood [Ohio], I subpoenaed his wife. And, oh, they got angry. Oh, the place just went nuts. "What's the matter, Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], you're trying to break up his home?" I said, "No, officer, I'm protecting white womanhood." "Well, what do you mean by that?" I said, "Well, he could come down here, get some kind of disease and take it home to that sweet lady, and you wouldn't want that, would you?" "Naw, I wouldn't." I said, "Oh--fool." So, he wouldn't, then he wouldn't show up. And, I said, "Well, maybe they don't wanna prosecute us, let's get outta here." And, if I had to try the case, she'd get up there and say, "Yes, I'm prostitute. I was out there for this purpose. But, he solicited me. I didn't solicit him." Well, how could the jury find otherwise. Who solicited who? The policeman didn't know. He was, you know, and that helped to break up that, that mess, see. And, so, I was that kind of radical--and the police couldn't stand me. Story_ID: 313887 Speaker 1: And, I would get these police brutality cases, and try 'em and win 'em and sue the cop, you know. Oh, I was, I was a mess. And, the policemen just couldn't stand me. Boy, they hated my guts. And, I'd tell 'em, I said, "Now, I wanna protect my black woman so she can walk down the street from the--and not be molested by these dogs in heat. That's what I call 'em (laughter). And, then I had some he-she's, and these guys would come down looking for a she-she, and wind up with he-she. So, I represented them too (laughter). Then I had one and named, and they were at the Crosstown Motel [Cleveland, Ohio] over here on 55th [Street] and Central [Avenue]. And, when they became--after he done paid his money and he's figuring to be immersed in this lovers twist, you know, bliss. He finds out, he got a she--a he-she rather than a she-she. "Black so-and-so bitch I wanna get my money back." She said, and she was about five feet tall, less than five feet, Dee Dee [ph.]. She said, "You gonna have to take me to court to get this money." And, he jumped on her, and she pulled out a knife and she cut him (laughter). And, they charged her with armed robbery all--everything else. So, I subpoenaed his, his wife, and she showed up. And, he showed up righteous and indignation. So, we had a judge by the name of Joseph Stiridence [ph.] and he was a Hungarian Jew, a very, very fine judge. And, we were at Old 21st [Street] and Payne [Avenue] at that time. So, I'm standing up there with him, and she's about four foot eight, or four foot nine, and he's about six foot one. So, the questions was, how could somebody way down here, cut somebody way up there on the neck? Well, obvious they were horizontal at the time, see; they weren't vertical. So, I'm looking at this guy and I said, "Well," I said, "You gotta a purple-ish birthmark on your left side." And, he said, "Naw, it's on my right side." So, I look over at Dee Dee, I said, "I thought you told me it was on the right side." She said, "No, I told you it was on the left side," (laughter). So, the judge looked at her, "Wait a minute Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], you putting on a show?" Well certainly that's what I was doing. I said, "No, judge, I'm just representing my client." He said, "That's all right." He said, "Sir, you come here." He says, "Why were you out at 55th and Woodland [Avenue] at four o'clock in the morning, when you live way out in Lakewood [Ohio]?" He said, "I know why you were out there. You got just what you deserve. The case dismissed." Bam. (Laughter) Do you know that women, his wife, hired me to get her divorced (laughter). So, that's why the cops, oh, they couldn't stand me, see. They couldn't--and one of the policemen got killed out here on Euclid [Avenue]. But, what was the name of that bar, the Brass Rail bar. And, he was supposed to been coming across the street or something, and saw something. Now, he lived out in Pepper Pike [Ohio] or somewhere. And, he would be down there messing with these he-she's, see. And, he got serviced from one and didn't pay her, and so he got killed. So, I told the police chief, I say, "You talking about this guy ain't no hero," and I told 'em--"Aww you get outta here, Tolliver." I said, "Okay. I'll see you in court." We won the case, see. And, he, and, but, he was made out to be a hero. And, then I found out the real something about these cops. Now, I don't mean good cops, now don't misunderstand me. But, some of 'em, when you give them a badge and give them a gun and that power, you have created a monster. And, he, and they would come down here and just beat up black folks and jump on black folks, and get their kicks out it, see. Some of 'em are just that freakish. And, I would expose 'em, and that's why they hated me. Story_ID: 313888 Speaker 1: Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] at the end of the last segment you were telling us about some of those cases that helped you establish your reputation as an attorney who would fight for, I don't wanna say the underdog, but perhaps for people who weren't given a lot of respect in the court system. Speaker 2: That's right and half of 'em couldn't pay. I was, for many a time called the unofficial public defender. They didn't have a public defender really in those days. And, I take on a lot of these cases. And, they couldn't pay, but I just felt constrained to try to make the system work. And, so, Ahmed Evans [Fred Ahmed Evans], what happened I found out Ahmed had been a sergeant in the Rangers [U.S. Army Rangers]. They call it the Green Beret [U.S. Army Special Forces Command, U.S. Army Special Operations Command] now. And, he had been behind enemy lines for weeks. And, so, when he came out of the service, dishonorably discharged, he did not like the way that they had treated those other people there. So, he re-upped, as we call it. While he was in there a lieutenant or somebody called him a nigger, and Ahmed dressed him up as we say; laid him out. And, he got court-martialed for it, thrown into Leavenworth [United States Penitentiary, Leavenworth, Leavenworth, Kansas], and got dishonorably discharged. So, when he came to Cleveland [Ohio], he started what was known then as the black nationalist movement. And, he got--he also was an astrologist and he also did numerology. And, he got this following and all of 'em were wearing these African garbs and then he would--they would change their names from a slave name, as they call it, to an African name. And, he was calling himself Fred Ahmed Evans and he had a lot of followers. And, the police really picked on him, see, they really picked on him. And, he was smart. He was tall. He as muscular, and he was very articulate, you see, and, they couldn't stand him. So, one day a black policeman, well as least he called himself, there black folks who think that if they are hard on black folks that that makes white people like 'em better. But, they don't understand that these people don't respect you, when you don't respect yourself or your own people. But, anyway his name was Payne [James Payne] and he broke out all the window out--Ahmed had a shop [Afro Culture Shop and Bookstore, Cleveland, Ohio] right there at 111th [Street] and Superior [Avenue] where he sold tikis and dashikis and things about astrology and numerology. And, this policeman was one of the first blacks to be a motorcycle police officer. And, this guy broke out all the windows in Ahmed's shop. So, Ahmed came up and saw what he did, took his gun away from him, turned him upside down and sat on him (laughter). He was no match for Ahmed. So, the police came along and beat him up and threw him in jail and charged him with attempted murder. Well, at that time, no one would represent Ahmed but me. And, the other fellow that helped--that he's retiring now, is Lyonel Jones [C. Lyonel Jones] who was then and is now the retiring head of the legal aid. He didn't even try criminal cases. His was always civil. Public defenders the one that, you know, defends criminal cases. Well, they didn't have a public defender then, that's right. And, then he of course, volunteered. Well, we tried the case and the jury found him not guilty of attempted murder and all that, but found him guilty of just plain assault which was a misdemeanor. And, Judge Tom Perino [ph.] wouldn't put Ahmed on probation. Even though Ahmed didn't have a criminal record. So, he sent him to jail for six months. In the meantime, Carl Stokes had this thing called Cleveland: Now!. And, he was raising money to give the various groups, you know, to keep things peaceful. So, Ahmed called me and said, "Al-Amin," that was my nationalist name, "I got to get outta here cause there's something I got to do." Well, I had been trying all these cases for CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and another group called the Freedom Fighters and you could see, I'm an emeritus member of all those group, you see all that up there. But, anyway, I looked up the statute and found that if he, if the person is convicted of a misdemeanor and files an appeal, he has to be released on the same bond. So, I looked it up and I filed. And, Ahmed was released on the same bond. Story_ID: 313889 Speaker 1: Now, prior to that, he [Fred Ahmed Evans] had fallen in love with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] 'cause I had introduced him to Dr. King, and he just loved King. And, he--like I say, you see that picture there, he just followed King around like a puppy dog. He loved King. And, so, when he got out he said he had a particular purpose for getting out. And, I didn't know, you know, I'm a lawyer and I'm just doing what my client tells me to do. Well, he got out and one morning about two o'clock in the morning, I get this call from Carl Stokes and I had a few choice ethnic words that I can't use here. "What you calling me this time of morning for?" And, I had a pet name for him, see. And, then he told me about Ahmed and his man was Harllel Jones who was with Ahmed, and how they had shot all these policemen, see. So, a big police officer who worked for homicide at that time--you remember I told you, I can't--Moss, Big Frank Moss, you know he had to take me to the police station. I mean these cops was so scared, they pulled their guns on me. They had never been resisted like that. 'Cause one of them could come in our neighborhood and pick up five or six people and nobody would say a word. And, then I had had a case where some cops had raped a black women up in the park, and they thought nobody would do anything with it. And, a young fellow by the name of Leodis Harris, who later became a judge, came to me and we got those cops charged and they went to prison, okay. But, anyway, they were just bullies, you know, they could just do whatever they wanted to do. And, many of the black cops went along with them. And, of course, we had some really stand up people like Jean Clayton, I wish you could write about her, she was something else, boy. She was the first black woman to be in the detective bureau, and she dead now. But, she would pull my coat on a lot of stuff that was going on, see. When they found out she was the one telling me this stuff, they put her out, see. She was something, boy; Jean Clayton was something. But, anyway, I'd go down there to see Ahmed and his eyes was this big. But, I knew he was high off that marijuana, see. And he said, "I told you Al-Amin, that I was--that the beast had to pay for what he did." Now, his way of getting even with the beast was to shoot these cops. And, three of 'em were killed and about twenty some of 'em were wounded. And-- Speaker 2: Now, is this what they refer to as the Glenville shootout? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, so, Charlie Fleming [Charles Fleming] and I, and I had been representing him all the time in all of his cases, every time they'd pick him up, I'd represent him. And, so, and I was the one that had to introduce him to King. 'Cause King told him, he said--when the preachers didn't like me to, you know, introduce him, he told him, he said, "Now, brethren, I realize you brought me here, but Ahmed Evans is also the cause of my being here." "But, why Dr.?" He said, "Because these racist white people don't care any more about me then they do him." But, they have a choice, and I'm the lessor of the two evils. So, Ahmed didn't have any money. I called him and told him to catch a cab. And, my office at that time was at 80th [Street] and Quincy [Avenue], still in the hood, you know. And, I paid the cab driver and they went to see King. And, that's when King captivated him, see. He loved King. And, when we had this hearing, he was the assistant to--King was the chief justice, we put the, we put the police and everybody--it was a mock grand jury. It was just a thing to keep the peace, you know. And, he was the associate justice, King was the chief justice, I was the prosecutor, and we found everybody guilty, see, up there. But, anyway, but he loved King. King--he would talk to King for hours. And, King would help him, you know, see to it that he got some, some money what not. Story_ID: 313890 Speaker 1: So, when I got him [Fred Ahmed Evans] out of jail, about three, about--early in the morning I get this call from Carl Stokes. And, I'm saying, blank the blank, "What you calling me this time of morning for?" So, when I got down there, Ahmed was high on that--. He said, "I told you the beast had to pay, didn't I, for what he did for King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]." And, I'm saying, "Man, be cool," you know. Speaker 2: So, this is--? Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], '69 [1969]. Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [sic. 1968], okay. Speaker 1: I said, "Be cool, man." I say, "Do you realize you facing the electric chair?" He said, "I don't care." He said, "I'm a revolutionary. I'm a warrior. My fate is in the stars. And, the beast had to pay for what he did to King; for what they did. King is telling us to love the beast and the beast turn around and killed him, then there's no hope for me." So, when we went to trial, we tried that case for six months, seven days a week, six days a week. And, my wife [Dorothy Greeenwood Tolliver] called. Oh, naw, let me--I get ahead of myself. So, Dorothy had gotten this call and she was just as naive, she didn't know nothing about nothing, see. And, this brother, this brother had called, called himself Brother Doodoo or something, I can't remember, and said, "It's on tonight." And, she said, "He said somebody was on and they were going animal hunting." And, then I--I said, "You mean beast?" "Yeah, that's what they said, beast." She didn't know what that meant. That mean shoot white folk, particularly shoot cops. And, said, he's gonna--"They gonna have to pay for what they did to King. No use you talking to us, just tell your husband," and she said, "They called you a funny name." I said, "Al-Amin," that was one of the disciples of, of Ahmet, I mean of Muhammad. "But, it's on tonight, and he told me something about salami." I said, he meant, "You mean salaam, not salami (laughter)." That's how naive she was, see. So, we got into this case and I looked at, and we got the coroner's report and it showed these cops. And, I looked over at Charlie Fleming [Charles Fleming], I said, "Hey, man, do you see these dudes, you know, we ghetto dudes, you know, these cads are drunk, man don't--look at his eyes." And, they had hidden that part of the protocol; that told us what was in the blood and what was in the urine. But, one of the brothers who worked there got it for us. And, these guys, all three of 'em were drunk, on duty. So, when we tried the case that came out. I get this call from my wife, she's frantic. The cops are outside shooting in my house. Almost shot my wife. Scared her to death. Scared my kids to death. And, then when we played the tapes, now Charlie Fleming used to be a prosecutor so he put his former boss on, John T. Carlton [ph.], and made them play those, those tapes, police tapes and every other word was nigger. Now, this is Cleveland, Ohio. This not Cleveland, Mississippi now. Every other word was nigger. And, so somebody said, well, "My house is on fire," in one of those you know in that cracker kind of tone, "Well, tell that nigger mayor to piss on it, hee, hee, hee, hee." Now, that's what we heard here. And, they shot the windows out of my house, almost shot my wife. And, the next thing I know, Ahmed's brother, Bootsy [William R. Evans], was killed and his body was thrown on the doorstep of my office on Quincy [Avenue]. "We got that nigger's brother, we gonna get that nigger's lawyer." And, Ahmed Evans tried to fire us. He said, "You can't save me. My fate is in the stars. And, I don't want you brothers to go down with me." Well, Fleming and I said, "We not gonna be intimidated, we're gonna defend you." Well, we tried the case for six weeks, and he was convicted of seven counts of aggravated, no not, first degree murder, which meant he was supposed to die seven times. Story_ID: 313891 Speaker 1: And, in the meantime, my daughter [Sherrie Tolliver], the one you just saw, was going to Collinwood [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. And, the people out there didn't want blacks in Collinwood, and they were rioting and she was scared to death. So, I had to call Judge McMonagle [George J. McMonagle] and said, "Now, you got to hold up this trail, 'cause I gotta go see about my baby." She was, you know, one of these gifted kids. And, she was scared to death. And, I would tell her, I say, "Now, you go on in there baby," 'cause I was standing outside with my trench coat on with a .45 in each pocket, see (laughter), and I said, "You go on in there honey. Nobody's gonna bother you, daddy is out here." And, I told Judge McMonagle, I said, "Now, I'm a daddy first, you're just gonna have to wait 'cause I got to see about my baby," see. And, she was scared 'cause the--can you image? Now, this is the community now, saying that we don't won't no niggers out here; this is in Cleveland [Ohio], see. So, I had to protect my baby, and so finally when it got under control that's when I came down. Why--you see as I tell people, he respected me for that, see. Because I was a man about my child. Well, the case went on, he [Fred Ahmed Evans] got convicted. And, the (unclear) between the two of 'em was, he was called a murderer and all that. And, Ahmed said, "Listen, better I die a man, than live a dog. Salaam," (laughter). And, every time he would come to court, the brothers would be there before anybody else. And, they had these robes on and they had the pieces up under it. And, I would tell the, the judge I said, "Now, don't mess with those brothers now, let 'em alone. 'Cause if you mess with 'em, we're gonna have hell right down here." 'Cause those guys were ready to die, see. And, these cops had never seen that kind of resistance. Here he's drunk with a pistol, now the brother got a riffle. Now, you know who won that. And, the only persons that got shot or killed were white policemen. One black policeman got shot in the behind by a shotgun and a brother came and said, "Now you get outta here. We ain't after you." Ernie Rowell [Earnest Rowell]. I said, "Well, Ernie what did you do?" He said, "I got the hell out." I said, "Well, what about your fellow cops?" He said, "Hell with them, I'm getting outta here. I don't wanna get killed. They ain't after me," (laughter) so. So, when they convicted Ahmed they put a helicopter on top of the jail and flew him to Columbus [Ohio] (laughter); never seen that before since. And, put him on death row. So, then we began his appeal and that's when I met a lady by the name of Anne Aldridge [ph.], who at that time was a professor of law at the law school. And, she was the one who was the advisory to BALSA, that's the Black American Law Students Associations [National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)]. And, she and her students helped me to appeal this case because she did not believe in capital punishment. And, when it got to the Supreme Court of the United States, they declared that the statute on the way he was convicted was unconstitutional because the same jury would just come back and recommend death. So, they say you have to bifurcate these things. I mean, you have to have to have two trials. And, what--mitigating circumstances can be shown and not just have the same jury do one right after the other. So, that got Ahmed off of death row. And, he became a hero in that penitentiary [Southern Ohio Correctional Facility, Lucasville, Ohio], 'cause they have levels in there, you know. He was a cop killer. Oh, he was a great man in the penitentiary and of course the ones that are rapists and child molesters, they're down on the bottom. And, Ahmed ran that prison, see. And, then later I heard from him. He said, "Now, get a doctor down here because they had given me a disease." I can't remember now, what it was. "And, if you don't get a doctor down here, it's curtains for me." And, I--by the time I got one down there, it was too late. He died in prison. But, he wasn't on death row. And, this lady Aldridge was my recommendation and what not, became a federal judge. And, we're good friends now. She's been on my radio show ['Conversations with Stanley E. Tolliver, Sr.']. And, that's how we met, because she was about Ahmed Evans. So, Ahmed died in prison. And, at his funeral when I was called upon to speak, just what I'm telling you is what I said and the prank--and the press printed it. And, that's what happened with, with Ahmed. Story_ID: 313892 Speaker 1: It was an all-white jury, and they convicted him [Fred Ahmed Evans]. And, of course, one of the questions we raised, were these policemen really police officers when they were drunk and got drunk while they were on duty? Because the coroner talked about it. And, he was a Jewish coroner, well he was a Jewish, he was a pathologist. Dr. Gerber [ph.] was the coroner, but he was not a pathologist. So, this Jewish fellow, I wish I could think of his name. Straight as a string. Told it like it was. And, these guys were drunk and got drunk on duty. So, when it came out in the paper that these heroes and that I was the one, at least they blamed me for it, that's when they shot the windows out of my house. And, I owned the Internal Revenue [Internal Revenue Service (IRS)] some money and I was paying 'em. And, I said, "Well, I won't be able to pay you because I'm in this trial." And, at that time, it was only three thousand dollars you got for representing somebody and we had to split that, and the government took that. And, that's why I said, I had an angel for a wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] because we lived on her teach--what she was making as a teacher. Because, she was, always supported me on what I was doing. She knew that she had a husband that was crazy and she was a saint. And, I always say, "It has to be a place in heaven for her to put up with me for fifty years," 'cause I was crazy, you know. And, I, I'll never be a, oh, a George Forbes [HistoryMaker George Forbes] or, what's his name; the guy that represented O.J. Simpson? Speaker 2: Johnnie Cochran. Speaker 1: Johnnie. I'll never make that kind of money because that's just not what I'm about. I think the Lord spared me and gave me the opportunity to serve my people, and that's what I'm doing. Story_ID: 313893 Speaker 1: And, now a lot of white people come to me 'cause they've heard my, of my reputation. And, I represent 'em out in Palmyra [Ohio]. I represent white folks in Palmyra. I represent black folks in Palmyra. And, they--and she can tell you, they love me out there, see. Takes her to tell, about a case I had her to watch in Palmyra. And, then I had a strange case of what I call a DWB. And, everybody say, "DWB, driving while black?" I say, "No. This is driving while brown." This was a city, an Arab was driving out there and he was brown. He wasn't black. And, they start chasing him because he was an Arab. And, to make a long story short, the guy that arrested him didn't see him drive. But, the guy he was running away from was a police officer. He didn't know it. He was in a black car and bald headed, and he scared him to death. So, by the time he got rid of 'em and got out of his car then the other cops came up and arrested him and jumped on him, and arrested him. But, the trick was they couldn't testify because they didn't see him drive. Then the guy that was following him came up, then he saw it was a police officer in an unmarked car. Well now, that was a, a technicality. He's in an unmarked car, then he can't testify about a traffic--so, when we got through with it--I wanted to try it to a jury 'cause she'd tell you, I love to try cases to a jury. But, we settled it. I think he got a disorderly conduct or something. And, I call it--and I told that Arab, I say, "Now, I'm gonna tell you guys something, you the new niggers here. Don't you be turning your nose up at me, you the new niggers. And, what they used to do to us, they now doing it to you." And, I've been able to get this kind of coalition and so these white folks when they getting, a lot of them get in tro--I file a lawsuit for white women, for example. Because, of what we call the glass ceiling. And, I've had white women who were not given a job because they were female, working on the same job, getting less pay, for being passing the test and not getting promoted because they were women. And, I tell this to people when they talk about affirmative action, and I explain to 'em I say, "Affirmative action didn't just help black folks. It helped women in general and white women in particular." And, then I tell 'em about this glass ceiling. So, you guys don't understand what you're talking about. So, that's the kind of lawyer I've been. I take these unpopular cases, and most of the time I win 'em. I don't always get the money that the other people get, but I get a tremendous satisfaction out of knowing that I made this system work like it's supposed to. And, then this Korean buddy of mine who sponsors my show ['Conversations with Stanley E. Tolliver, Sr.'], Mr. Chicken, he loves what I'm doing, see. And-- Speaker 2: He's the owner of that chain of restaurants? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: The Mr. Chicken Restaurant? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I just don't known if the folks know in Chicago [Illinois] and other place who will watch this tape will know Mr. Chicken. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, I know it's pretty popular here in Northeast, Ohio. Speaker 1: Yeah. He has about twelve stores. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, he a Korean veteran, a very devout Catholic. And, he loves what I'm doing. 'Cause he's anti-Bush [President George Walker Bush] (laughter). And, he's tickled at what I'm doing. And, I say a lot of things that he doesn't say, but he backs me when I say it. Very beautiful guy. And, some of his stores even have my picture hanging up in it, see. So, I enjoy what I'm doing. I don't make a lot of money as a lot of lawyers do. But, I love--I sleep good at night. I think God has blessed me and he has allowed me do to what I'm doing. And, after Dorothy [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] died, of course, then I met her [Artha Woods]. And, she sort of fills in that gap, you know. She a widow, and I'm a widower, and she sort of fills in that gap. And, she has really been a help. Like she's up all this time tonight, and been with me since this morning when I went, you know. And, we complement each other, you know. But, I know I have to feed her, you know, she's--black women you gotta feed 'em, you know, they get an attitude if you don't feed 'em (laughter). Story_ID: 313894 Speaker 1: Well, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], may I ask you about another chapter in your public service here in the City of Cleveland [Ohio]? I know you had spent some time on the school board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District]. Speaker 2: Twelve years. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was the period of your service? Speaker 2: From 19--let's say from, no, from 1981 to 1993. Speaker 1: Okay. So, twelve years on the school board. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now what was that like? I know we used to change superintendence quite often. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Here in Cleveland. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: But, during those twelve years, what was it like? Speaker 2: Well, here's a--one picture over here, the problem was I was on there, I could've run for mayor and won. I could've run for judge and won. And, possibly if I had run for the [U.S.] Congress, 'cause Lou Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] was not as popular as I was. But, I decided I didn't wanna go to Washington [D.C.] and be running and doing all that 'cause I like to stay home and sit out in the yard or go down in the basement and watch TV. So, I gave it up and supported Lou. But, I wanted to be there to fight for these kids. Even now, what I used to complain of, is still going on. Now, the kids about two weeks ago went to Columbus [Ohio] and they won all kinds of track; the Collinwood [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio] girls, Glenville [Glenville High School, Cleveland, Ohio] boy, and they didn't get hardly any coverage for it. Speaker 1: In the newspapers you mean? In the daily paper (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Plain Dealer [The Plain Dealer] gave 'em some scan but the Call Post [Call and Post] is the only one that really gave 'em some real coverage. And, the electronic media didn't do a thing for 'em. And, that was one thing I used to complain about, you know. I said, "A white girl get so-called raped by a black man, and you guys are all over the place. These kids do something great and can't find anything." And, I would always have--and they say, "Doc Tolliver's dog and pony show," because see they wanted to get up and floor show in front of the TV and complain, you know. And, I said, "Well you're gonna have to wait. These are not dogs and not ponies, these are kids. And, that maybe if you was a better parent, maybe we'd have your kid up here doing something." Story_ID: 313895 Speaker 1: Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] at the end of the last segment, you had just started to talk about public education here in the City of Cleveland [Ohio]. And, you're serving from, did you say '81 [1981] to '93 [1983]? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twelve years [on the Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District]. Speaker 1: And, this during the era of busing for desegregation, right? Speaker 2: That's right. See, what had happened the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had to file a lawsuit. And, the reason why, there was segregation in the Cleveland public schools, no question about it. White kids were getting a different and better education than black kids were. They used to have all day kindergarten for white kids, but black kids had to go in relays. And, the good teachers and the good books were always on the west side and the black kids on the east side got the--what was left. So, when they file this lawsuit, the judge, Frank Battisti [Frank J. Battisti], found both the city and the state guilty of de jure and de facto segregation. And, they appealed [the decision in Reed vs. Rhodes, 1976]. They spent three million dollars, that's Squire, Sanders & Dempsey [Squire Patton Boggs] they tried to reverse him and the [U.S.] Supreme Court sustained it. So, when it came back, by that time I was on, I can't remember a committee that Battisti had appointed me to. And, the most hated man in this city, in this--was Battisti. White folks hated him. Black folks loved him. White folks wanted to kill him. He had to have bodyguards and everything else. And, we had a reception for him at the Martin Luther King Plaza [Martin Luther King, Jr. Plaza, Cleveland, Ohio], Fannie Lewis's ward. And, he came there with Nate Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones] who was his buddy from Youngstown [Ohio] who was in on the Appellate Court [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit] and I was the one to introduce him. And, when I got through introducing here, boy, the people were hollering and screaming and that man cried like a baby 'cause he had never seen that kind of respect and appreciation. 'Cause black folks just loved him. So, they said--he said, "Now, I'm taking over the school," and he sent Leftwich [Charles Leftwich], a black man in to be the superintendent. And, we had to make reports to him about how many people we hired, how many promotions, I mean, he was, he was something. And, the white folks hated him. They hated him. And, so, he asked Briggs [Paul W. Briggs], "Now that we've got this problem, how you gonna solve it?" They came up with busing. Speaker 1: And, this Superintendent Briggs? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He didn't come up with busing. He says, "I'm a lawyer, I'm not an educator. You tell me how you gonna solve this problem." And, they came up with busing, and they blamed him for it, see (laughter). And, that's why he was so hated. And, I was--I supported him, and that got me in trouble, see. Because I said, "Do you understand that it wasn't the bus, it was us?" They didn't want us going to school with them. And, we found out that the only way for them to get an education that was equal would be to have busing. And, I said, and I said, "Did you ever notice who drives this--these busses?" In fact, women driving these buses. Making twelve and fifteen thousand dollars a year. And they were sending their kids to school. And, that was another thing they didn't like. And, we always saw to it that any buildings that were built or any contracts that was given that black folks would be included. And, the, and the others didn't like that. Particular, Mike White [Michael White], when he became--he wanted to get rid of me, 'cause he couldn't control me. He wanted to control the school. And, I said, "Mike, you take care of the city. You stay out of the schools." And, he and I got into it, and naturally he lost. He couldn't fool--mess with me, 'cause I had known, I said, "Now, I've been married to the same women," I said, "for forty years, and you been married three times. One of your wives was a junkie, and the other one gave you a baby that wasn't yours. Now, quit fool--messing with me here, 'cause I'll put all your business in the street," (laughter). And, I didn't lie. Because he found out that it was somebody else's baby, and he--and she had to pay back all the money that he paid her. And, I said, "All my kids look like me. I've never had that trouble 'cause she's not a--my wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] didn't cheat on me and she ain't a junkie, so let me alone, Mike." So, he had to get rid of me. And, so, finally he got that slate in where I was in the minority, and I had no voice, see. And, they did everything he wanted him to do, then next time I was defeated. I said, "Well, Lord, if it's time for me to go." And, it was funny for a person that got defeated, those teachers had one of the biggest parties, 'cause they knew I was their friend. 'Cause the teachers knew, my wife being a teacher, you know, they knew if they wanted something, they'd come to me and they'd get it, 'cause I, I loved the teachers. Story_ID: 313896 Speaker 1: But, my main thing was, I'll always will be proud of my record on the school board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District]. The kids that I helped--I-she [Artha Woods] and I can be out, and somebody a come up and say, "Do you know you spoke at my graduation?" Or, somebody that I represented and I give 'em the devil. See, I raise all kind of--with these kids; tell 'em how stupid they are, you know. Compare them with, what's her name; Martha Stewart. You know, you got this little chump change and you're going to prison for twenty-five years for this chump change. That woman stole millions and only got six months in jail. I say, "You see how stupid you are?" You know, that's the way I talk. But, anyway, I worked with these parents and one thing I started and Jean, what's a name; Fannie Lewis, it started in her school each time. I was the one that started having these nurseries put in the schools for these pregnant girls, so they could go to school. And, the preachers and everybody got on me. Oh, man, you--I said, "Now, what do you wanna do? Throw these girls out in the street? They made a mistake. They got pregnant. Men make mistakes, they don't get pregnant." I said, "Now, what do you wanna do, throw these girls away?" And, many a girl came up was pregnant and I give 'em their diploma. And, would tell 'em, I said, "Now, I'm gonna tell you just like I told my daughters [Stephanie Tolliver and Sherrie Tolliver]." I said, "Hold your head up and keep you dress down, here," (laughter). And, for you boys, "It take any male can make a baby, but it takes a man to raise and make something out of 'em. And, if somebody raising your child and you're not there, you have prostituted your manhood." And, they love me. In fact, when they had time to--when they would talk about speakers from the board, everybody wanted me. The other board members would get jealous 'cause I was the one always demanded, see. So, I was always fighting for these kids. I didn't like the way they were being treated. I didn't like the way the media was doing 'em. And, we used to employ more black people in this town than any other in the state, in the state, except for the federal government. That's how many black folks. And, I mean, we enforced that. 'Cause if you didn't live in this district, you didn't--you couldn't get the job. And, if we found out that you were living one place and working here, you lost your job. And, many a black would come to me. I say, "I can't help you brother. I can't help you sister" (laughter). Because this is for people who live here, and you don't live here. And, you lied and said you did. So, you know, people don't--you know, you get a reputation, you know. But, I fought for these kids, see. I remember some parents got on my case, "Oh, Tol--Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], what you gonna do about babies having babies? Yeah, what y'all gonna do?" And, they were just kicking, some of these parents. I said, "Now, first of all, if you stop kicking, I'll answer your questions. Where you get that y'all stuff? These are your children. Where you get that y'all stuff?" I said, "Our job is not to raise 'em. Our job is to teach 'em. You send them with the right attitude and they don't get taught, then we're responsible. But, if they come to school with the wrong attitude and they don't come at all, then that's your fault." And, I said, "I'm gonna leave with something else with you." They say, "What?" I said, "Kids don't get pregnant in school, hear (laughter)." So, they didn't like that. And, unlike Jane Campbell, I always would say, when something happens, "The buck stops here." I don't put it off on somebody. I'm the president. The buck stops here. While I was on the school board; the buck stops here. We're not putting off on somebody else. And, I was elected four times and had no money. Story_ID: 313897 Speaker 1: I just would spend thousands of dollars to get on the school board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District]. They didn't care nothing about the kids. They be on there to get there name out there so they could run for something else. And, that was the problem with the school board. They had people on it that didn't care about the kids. They were only on it to use it was a stepping stone to run for some other office. I never ran for another office. I remember I took out four petitions and I have to admit it was over Charlie Bibb [Charles Bibb], one of my people who helped to draft me. I never asked for the office, they drafted me. And, we had no money. And, I mean, no money. Dr. Jordan [ph.] was my treasurer, see. And, he came up with the idea of taking out four petitions. One for state representative, one for judge, one for mayor, and then one for the school board. And, the media was all there, you know. And, I'm standing there with my big hat on. Well, which one do you think you'll qualify for? I said, "What you mean, which one? I'm qualified for all of 'em. What's your next questions?" "Well, which one are you"--and I'm getting all this free publicity, see. And, I say, I said, "Well, I haven't decided, I have to pray over it. But, whichever one I decide to get--to run for, I'm gonna win." And, people like her [Artha Woods] supported me. The Plain Dealer never did support me 'cause I would never go to them for an interview. I said, "I know you don't like me. I know you're not going to indulge me, so I'm not gonna even bother to talk to you." And, then I'd win without 'em. And, they couldn't stand that (laughter). That arrogant so-and-so. I said, "Yes, that's what I am." Story_ID: 313898 Speaker 1: Well, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], having served [on the Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District] during that period of crosstown busing for desegregation, do you think that any good came out of busing itself? Or, did--are there good things that happened in the era (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. For example-- Speaker 1: --because busing was there? Speaker 2: Let me tell ya', some of these kids would not have known what a zoo was if it hadn't been for these busses taking them there. I wrote a piece on that. They took 'em out of this ghetto where all they could see was pimps and prostitution and drugs, and took 'em out--in fact, the highest rate of attendance were the kids who rode the bus. The parents had to get up and put 'em on the bus. So, they had to, to learn to be prompt and on time. And, I know what it did for me, when I was on the track team. I would, I would get a chance, I didn't never go out of town until I got on that track team and I saw how other people lived. We would run in Lakewood [Ohio]. We'd run in Rocky River [Ohio]. We would run out of town, and I could see how other people lived. That's what it did. It exposed me, see. And these kids would not have known where--like they would go to over here, what's the name of the place, the music company-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The Health Museum [Health Museum of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Well, the Health Museum, but that's not the one I'm thinking of. Speaker 1: Oh, Severance Hall [Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Severance Hall. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: They would've known what Severance Hall was if it hadn't been for busing. They're down in that ghetto, and to me it was just like a prison. It was a trap. That was all they could see. And, they got a chance to get on the bus and go to these different places and get some exposure, which they would have never seen if they had stayed where they were. And, the parents had to get up and get 'em on the bus, 'cause they had to get up and be on time, 'cause the bus would be on time. And, they had--and as I said, the greatest, the best attendance of the kids that was going to school were those that rode the bus. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 313899 Speaker 1: May I ask you another question, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], about the children who were bussed from the west side of the Cuyahoga River and maybe leaving certain privileges or a certain, better quality books and better teachers behind. Now, how did you answer their parents when they said, "Why should my child have to be bussed into a black ghetto?" Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Did you get a lot of that? Speaker 2: Yeah. But, then of course, our solution was, we had to see to it that they got the same education on the east side that they used to get on the west side [of Cleveland, Ohio]. It was inexcusable for there to be any difference. And, then it learned--it taught children that there were other kids who looked different from them, to be integrated. And, a lot of friendships came out of those transactions because kids learned that there were other kids. And, of course, one of the things I say on the show ['Conversations with Stanley E. Tolliver, Sr.'] when people call I say, "Now, I wanna tell you something, It's obvious you're a racist. They don't shoot black and white bullets overseas here," (laughter), see. And, these kids, I know some of the greatest friends I've had were white kids that I went to school with, ran against, and we got to be friends, see. And, I remember one fella, I was captain of the track team, and we had won with track meet over at, I guess it was at Rhodes High school [James Ford Rhodes High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and this kid was running for, he was running for Rhodes, that's was it was. His name was Harrison Johnson [ph.], and his daddy came up, and they just couldn't beat us, we were just too good, see. And, he came over to me and I was captain of the team, and he said, "Now, I've been feeding my son black eyed peas and cornbread, and greens and collard greens, and fat back and all that, and he still can't outrun you guys." Well, some of the kids got angry, you know. But, me being the captain, I said, "Well, Mr. Johnson, you started too late," (laughter). And, he though a minute, he laughed, you see. And, I've always found that a sense of humor helps, that you don't be so thin skinned about some things. And, that's always been my salvation. I remember when--in East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio], we had a Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] at 105th [Street] and Euclid [Avenue]. The Circle Y [University Circle YMCA], it was called. And, we had a dance there with Johnny, with John Hays [John Hay High School, Cleveland, Ohio], and they would let the white kids in and wouldn't let the black kids in. This was in 1944. And, I was, I had--I showed my draft card, that I was 1A, and I said, "I'm getting ready to get drafted and maybe give my life for a redneck like you." And, they complained over at the school about the one with the mustache, that was me. I got all the kids who ran, not to run; basketball players not to play basketball, and white kids had came to us, said, "But, I'm with my girlfriend." I said, "Well, I'm with mine, so what?" So, that was, that was always my kind of leadership, see. And, I have found with that busing, that it was economic for these women to drive these buses and make that money. Many of 'em would've been on welfare if it hadn't been for that. And, the whole thing of deseg [desegregation], we got blacks in jobs. Story_ID: 313900 Speaker 1: We got blacks in positions that they never had. The first time we had a black superintendent [for the Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District], I was involved with that. Speaker 2: Now, was that Dr. Holliday? Speaker 1: Dr. Holliday. Speaker 2: Frederick Holliday [Frederick D. Holliday]? Speaker 1: Now, I really didn't want him. He was not my choice. There was another black fellow from Virginia, from what's the city; Richmond, Virginia, because he was single and I would tell he was a playboy. And, I didn't like him. But, Joe-- Speaker 2: Dr. Holliday? Speaker 1: Yeah, He, he-- Speaker 2: Was a playboy? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a widower, and he flew an airplane. I could tell he was a playboy, see. And, me being solidly married and what not. The other one was married and had kids and was gonna put his kids in school. That was the one that I liked. That was the one from Richmond, Virginia. Then, you had another one, and they all started with H; Dr. Harris [ph.] was from New York. So, we knew whichever one we got was black. So, since Tegreene [Joseph G. Tegreene] and Bonda [Ted Bonda] who was president at that time, they liked Holliday. Well, how can I holler, you know, we're getting our first black. And, Holliday was qualified, now no questions about that. But, I knew he was a playboy, see. And, that's what he was, see. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, now, he and I, he would come up in this office and we'd sit and talk for hours, 'cause he and I were the same age, you know. So, finally, I said "Now, look," I said, "somebody thinks you're gay." He says, "I'm not gay." I said, "Well, get you a girlfriend, you know, so people will know who you are," you know, I would talk to him. And, he wound up with this Sandra Johnson, the girl from Channel 5 [WEWS-TV, Cleveland, Ohio], a beautiful sister, okay. But, he loved Bonda. And, then it came to a point that who was gonna renew his contract. Well, Ed Young said he wasn't gonna renew his contract, and [HistoryMaker] George Forbes killed him. So, when he, when he committed suicide, they blames it on Ed Young. Do you know Ed had to have bodyguards? I said, "Now, that's the silliest thing I ever heard. There's a difference between you killing yourself, and somebody else killing--how can you blame somebody else for a suicide." But, he left a note in which he implicated Ed Young. And, that boy had to have bodyguards. And, George Forbes is the one that killed him. Now, I said, "I was gonna give him a year." I said, "But, you gonna belong to me, now. You gonna stop belonging to these white folks now, you gonna belong to me." And, I said, "I'm gonna give you a year." And, so he killed himself. Dorothy [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] never believed that he killed himself. She always thought he was murdered. But, that was the official version. And, what made me think that he wasn't murdered 'cause he didn't shoot himself in the face. He was very particular about his face. He shot himself--he didn't wanna disfigure himself. And, his wife had committed suicide because we found out he was playing on her, and that was what caused her to commit suicide. So, that was his, that was his fault. But, he was a good superintendent, very smart, very brilliant. And, then of course, we had another one that came from California. Now, you talking about a playboy, he saw your [Artha Woods] girlfriend and almost made me had an accident, Cheryl Wills [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 1: He wanted to know who that fox was, you know (laughter). And, I had to turn around in the middle of the streets, and introduce him to her; Cheryl Wil--oh, she was a fox, now. And, so, I told him, I said, "You better get your wife here," she was a teacher, 'cause people talking about you. 'Cause he had his girlfriend on, one of the administrators that we found out was his girlfriend. I said, "You better get your wife here." Story_ID: 313901 Speaker 1: Well (laughter), Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], we're here now in 2005 in post-busing era, and did you have any regrets when it was announced that busing would come to an end, or? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: No. Was it time for it to end (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was time for it, not really. I wasn't--didn't have any regrets. Speaker 1: Now, who was the judge again, who made that? Speaker 2: Battisti. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Frank Battisti [Frank J. Battisti]. Speaker 1: I know it was Judge Battisti who, who found-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was Judge Krupansky [Robert B. Krupansky]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who was the one that ended busing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was Judge Krupansky, and then later Judge White [George W. White]. But, it was Judge Krupansky. But, but see people didn't really understand it wasn't busing, it was racism. I said, "Do you realize that the school board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District] and the state board were convicted of racism?" I said, "That's what the whole thing--it was racism." That's what they were convicted of; de jure and de facto racism. I said, "That's what the official term is." And, I remember the state was so dirty. They didn't wanna pay for busing. They refused to pay. So, I was chairman of a committee called the legal, the legal, what was it, the legal committee of some kind. Bonda [Ted Bonda] had created that for me. And, oh, we refused, and the state had to pay half of everything now, see. 'Cause they, we were both convicted. They wouldn't pay it. So, I commanded them to go and get a figure of how much they owed us. And, the judge--we figured it out, they owed us about three and a half million dollars. They wouldn't pay it. They don't wanna support busing. That was that attitude. So, when they did that, I had them to take it to the common pleas court and get a judgment. And, I garnished every bank that the state had money in, and we got our three and a half million dollars. So, that Tolliver, boy, he was a terrible dude. Nobody had ever done that. Garnishing the state. That's what we did, and got our money. And, Bonda wasn't for it, and then the other think I did, I got Harrison Dillard a job of being the first--I'm the one did that. Harrison was too shy, too modest to ask for it, and I made him ask for it. And, got him the job of being the first black business chief in the history of this district. 'Cause the fellow that preceded him only had a high school educations, and here Harrison was a college graduate with a degree in business. And, I made them hire him. So, and then Harrison, and then of course, Mark--Mike White [Michael White] turned against him. Story_ID: 313902 Speaker 1: I gotta say something good about George [HistoryMaker George Forbes]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, although he and I--'cause see I'm the one that made George. When George lost the race to Mike White [Michael White], he didn't have a job. Speaker 2: And, that was when they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause he had run for mayor. Speaker 2: Which campaign was that? Oh, they were running for mayor. Speaker 1: They were running for mayor, and he lost. So, he didn't have a job. He was no longer council president he was--and I made them hire him and train him to be--for contract. 'Cause we had this thing--oh, yeah, bond commissioner, that's right. 'Cause George didn't know anything about bond commission, and he was then my lawyer for the--as president of the school board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District]. I made them hire him to be a bond commissioner. That's how he got to be one. But, George did do this one thing. He told Joe Tegreene [Joseph G. Tegreene], he said, "Now, look Joe, you ain't on this board because you like," and he would use some different language, "you wanna run for something else. Now, if you don't vote for Harrison Dillard you ain't gonna run for nothing 'cause I'm gonna tell black folks not to vote for you." And, that's when he split with Ted Bonda, and that's how Harrison got the job. Story_ID: 313903 Speaker 1: Well, Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] here in the 21st century, Cleveland [Ohio] schools are having a lot of problems. I'm sure that the current CEO of the schools would to welcome anybody from the community who could get money from the state or millions, or we could probably use several billion (laughter) at this point, to fix the problems of the schools. So, although we're coming to the end of this tape, could you just start to sell us, you know, what are some of the things in your opinion? Speaker 2: Well, now, first of all, Mike White [Michael White] convinced the state to give him the schools. Mike White did that, of course, he denied it. But, the republicans told on him. And, then there were people said the school board was so bad that we give it to the mayor; big mistake. Because--now Jane Campbell has it, and her kids don't even go to the public school. They go to schools in Shaker [Shaker Heights, Ohio]. Now, Barbara Byrd-Bennett has become a lightning rod, unfortunately. And, the [U.S.] Supreme Court has four times told the state, "You cannot support or cause financing of public education on the back of homeowners." That's illegal. Told them that four times. But, this republican right-wing state refuse to obey the Supreme Court's order. Story_ID: 313904 Speaker 1: Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] we just started to talk about some of the challenges-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --facing public school educators in the City of Cleveland [Ohio] in 2005. Speaker 2: Why? It's all over the state. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. And, funding, yes, was one of the issues that you introduced (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. It's all over the state. And, I don't understand as I keep saying, how we got all these billions of dollars to spend in Iraq, but we don't have money to educate our kids. And, it's because this legislature refuses to do what the [U.S.] Supreme Court told 'em to do. And, find another way to educate kids without putting it on property owners. And, so, people feel that they can't afford it. The many on fixed income, and many of 'em don't see where the money is going. And, then Barbara Byrd-Bennett comes up with all these big salaries and these people she hires like her son-in-law and, you know, and people just, you know, now she's not gonna be renewed. So, and the mayor [Jane Campbell] doesn't care anything about public education, she's only interested in casinos and cops and cameras. She didn't care anything about the kids either, see. And so, I had a man on my show ['Conversations with Stanley E. Tolliver, Sr.'] by the name of Flannery [ph.] who has a petition, if he gets it on the ballot, that would say to the public, put it on the ballot statewide. And, make the state do something. And, he's having problems getting it on there. Speaker 1: That's about school funding? Speaker 2: That's about school funding. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, it's inexcusable that this country can spend those billions of dollars on Iraq [Iraq War] and don't have the money to spend our kids. And, that's what I say on my show all the time. But, we parents outta be raising all kinds of hell about what they're doing to our kids. And, it's not just Cleveland, it's statewide. They closing schools all over the state 'cause they don't have the money. But, what we got the money--and now this Coingate is coming up now, see. And, somebody said now if it'll had that Coingate during the time of the election maybe Bush [President George Walker Bush] would not have been elected, 'cause Ohio would've not gone Republican like it did, see. But, it's a matter, to me, that there is no commitment for kids. And, this administration, starting with the governor, some legislatures from, I had on my show from Lake County [Ohio], they organized a bust about--and along with Mike Trumbull [ph.] who's with WTAM [WTAM Radio, Cleveland, Ohio], the sports, and they went to Columbus [Ohio] along with Annie Keye [ph.] and some others. They had people from Ashtabula County [Ohio] and some other countries to get on the Republicans and when they got there they were stubbed. They didn't even show up to talk to 'em, including Taft [Robert Taft III]. So, the problem is, we don't have a commitment from this government and from this state to, to educate kids. They got money for everything else, but not for our kids. And, to me our parents' ought to be outraged. Story_ID: 313905 Speaker 1: How do you think we, if it wasn't for the Civil Rights Movement, I tell 'em about, what's her name, the Mississippi Freedom Party [Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Fannie Lou Hamer. Speaker 1: Fannie Lou Hamer. I'm sick and tired of being sick and tired. I said, "Do you realize you're not gonna get anything if you don't raise some hell. And, you just sitting back not saying anything." I said, "If you don't care anything about yourself, you ought to care about your kids. And, you're not saying a word." And, you got this e--selected board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District] rather than an elected board. We're the only school district in the state that does not elect a school, and we the largest one. You don't have a say. The mayor [Jane Campbell] puts on there whoever she wants to put on, and they rubber stamp everything. Whatever Barbara Bennett [Barbara Byrd-Bennett] wants, she gets. I was shocked that they voted, Frank Jackson was the one who suggested that we have a levy in August, and Jane Campbell wasn't for it. Her selected board said they were for it. But, I don't see any plans that she put out to get the thing passed. And, I've called, I always support the levy 'cause it's the only way to--I said, "I realize it's illegal. But, you tell me how else we're gonna get the money to help our kids." So, I have to be for it. And, I've called in there, I said, "Now you know mayor I'm not for you." You know, I'm not a hypocrite, I do--I was for you the first time you ran 'cause I saw through you. I saw how you--we had a brilliant woman that's a police chief, Barbara Bond, not Barbara Bond, what's her name, Mary Bounds, who's working on her Ph.D. And, they made a deal with Bob Becken [ph.] in the police union that if she was not reappointed and they got a white person that they would support it. So, they wouldn't reappoint Bond [sic. Bounds], and they got this dingbat that they put in there for a chief. And, I wound up representing Lieutenant Miller [ph.] and his people who went down there and said that they were not promoting blacks. And, he threatened to fire 'em and put all that in the bank, and put that in the portfolio if--and with the help of the Civil Liberty Union [American Civil Liberties Union] and she--the judge let her [Artha Woods] in so she could hear. He made--he told 'em, "You can't do that." These men have their constitutional rights. You can't do that." And, made them take it out. And, this guy Lone [ph.], that was the, who couldn't carry Mary Bounds tennis shoes with a hole in it. That's how dumb he is. I could tell. I said, I told her, at (unclear), I said, "You see how dumb that son of a gun is; and that's the police chief." Now, he's in this mess about the overtime, and then he had to resign and become a captain. And, I said, "Now, you see I told you that guy was stupid, and that's who you hired." And, you rather so-and-so, what's his name, Draper [James Draper], you the one that hired him. And, you running for mayor. Now, you know I ain't gonna support you. And, then when they did get a new chief, he doesn't even live in the City of Cleveland [Ohio]. And, all--and hierarchy in that police department everything was white, male. And, we live in a town that's 55 percent black; the chief, the deputy chief, the deputy deputy, and the deputy dep--all were white males. No females and no minorities. I said, "Can't you fools see what this woman is doing?" Then, the law director who is the deputy, is the one that takes the mayor place, is the vice mayor, was an Asian Indian, Shongburg [ph.]. I said, "How many Indians you think live in the center--city?" She didn't want no black person in that pos--I said, "And still you fools are out here champion her call." So, now they beginning to see. "Oh, Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] we shall would--we should have listened to you." I said, "Well." And, we even took it to court. Judge Harper [Sara J. Harper], what's his name, Roy [ph.], and another lawyer, we took it to court. And, said it was unconstitutional to put it in the hands of the mayor. And, in the Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the 8th Circuit], we won. But, the [U.S.] Supreme Court revered it. And, now, they're saying--now, they look real pitiful now. I said, "I don't see why you looking pitiful, we tried to tell you." And, many of them ministers were pull--giving it to the mayor. McMickle [Marvin A. McMickle] was one of the ones that helped us campaign against it. And, now they're pitiful. So, you're gonna have to get people in office in Columbus [Ohio] that's gonna do what the Supreme Court say. We got billions of dollars in this cit--in this state. And, if the people don't get off their southern comforts and raise some hell, our kids are gonna--education is going down the tubes. And, being a criminal lawyer, you know what I said, "It's either Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or jail." Because if they don't get educated, that's where they're going. And, it seems to me that the powers that be, that's what they want. Story_ID: 313906 Speaker 1: You were talking about the importance of education. I just wanna get your opinion in this, the fiftieth anniversary year of Brown II [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. What happened? Moving from the 1950s when people, a lot of people; black and white were convinced that education was a fundamental right, to 2005 when people were just so of ho-hum about the schools and nobody's make much noise about public schooling. What happened in the last half century? Speaker 2: I think that blacks folks have become just like, what's that; carnation, contended cows. Just go along to get along. And, let's face it, there are insecure people in this country that don't want to see competition. Back in the years when blacks couldn't play sports, that was the reason. Because they knew if they did, they'd take it over (laughter). And, they keep 'em out. And, you got these insecure people who do not want competition. And, the way to prevent competition, the way to prevent competition is to see to it that the coming generations are ab--not able to compete. And, that's what's happening. And, then those who do come out, the lawyers made me, even though I'm no longer the president, to chairman of the legal redress committee of the Norman Minor Bar [Norman S. Minor Bar Association]. Because many of them too scared to say anything for fear they're gonna hurt their livelihood. What? I've been surfing all my fifty-two years. But, it's just something that I have to do. I just can't sit back and see evil being perpetrated and not say anything. So, what has happened since Brown is that those that can afford it, move to the suburbs, go to suburban schools or private school and forget about those they left behind. I got mine and gone. You get yours and come on. So, there's really no insistence on following what Brown dictated. Too many teachers for example, have become comfortable. One thing I used to admire about teacher, they were over worked and under paid. And, now that black women can be hired in other professions, they don't go to teaching anymore. Because there are other avenues. There was a time, like when she came along, my wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] came along, the only thing that black women particularly could do was either nursing, or teaching, or social work. That was it. Now, they can become heads of corporations. They're into computer. They're doing some of everything now; running for public office, becoming judges, congress people, you know. And, these avenues have opened up so that some people who are really not qualified to be teachers are teaching. And, they just don't have the same kind of lust, as we say, fire in their belly for kids. Because women now, black women in general, don't have to be teachers. They have other openings for 'em. And, we're not training our kids to be teacher, and a lot of 'em don't wanna be teachers 'cause it doesn't pay enough money. And, that's what's happened. So, we're sliding backwards. So, now we have to import teachers from India to teach kids. Now can you image some ghetto kids being taught by an Indian who he can't half understand what they're talking about. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, that happened in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: It's happening in Cleveland now. And, the reason why they have to import people is because we don't have trained people here. And, they're actually brought teachers from India. Now, how can they relate to some ghetto kid? Because the other, the ones that could teach, they have, they have better opportunities and they go somewhere else. And, we do have teachers in Cleveland that come from India and other places. And, there's no way that they can relate to these kids. And, that's unfortunate. But, that's where it is. Story_ID: 313907 Speaker 1: And, this country is becoming a second rate country because in a few years, you'll see China--I mean, they make stuff in China that's cheaper than what we make it and it ain't as good. And, then of course, you've got this influx from Mexico taking these jobs. Why they--ain't nothing patriotic about these people who--they know they can hire 'em, work 'em to death, just like they did the slave, don't have to pay any social security or medical rights or minimum wage. That's how these guys come, these Mexicans come in and get these jobs. And, then there's the president of Mexico [Vicente Fox] said that they're taking jobs that even black folks won't take. Well, we were the original slave. Why should we work for free now? But, these people don't care. They come fr--and I don't blame them really. They come from a culture whatever they get is better than what they had. And, these people are being exploited. A couple of people that have been nominated by Bush [President George Walker Bush], remember, had to resign because they had these people. Well, you ain't got to worry about no minimum wage, and medical assistance and all these other things for this Mexican. He's glad to work for whatever he can get. And, look at the money she's saving. Look at the work she got. So, now, that's a constant thing in this country. The ones that have money wanna keep it and don't wanna share it, and gonna give you a problem if you try to compete with 'em. And, if you don't force 'em to recognize you, that's what the demonstrations were all about. People didn't give black people these things because they wanted to. When we registered to vote in '65 [1965], I was in Mississippi. And, I was one of the one's that explain, in fact her friend, Pat Blackmon [Patricia Ann Blackmon], who's on the bench now, was a little girl in Mississippi and saw me on TV. And, the black folks' voted so well down in Mississippi, they got more public official in Mississippi than they have in any other state in the country. And, you have to make black folk understand--you have to even make them vote. Some of 'em too lazy to go to the polls. And, I, and I tell 'em, I say, "Now, look, you can't blame white folks for everything. There're something we have to do, and we're not doing it." And, so, when you look in the Free Times [Cleveland Free Times] and talk about black leadership and how they criticize 'em, I don't blame 'em. You go up and down 105th Street [Cleveland, Ohio], you go right around here, and you don't see black folks working; building these buildings and doing this work. You see white men doing it. Now, how--what does a black kids think that he's out here trying to get a job and see all these white folks in his community doing the work? And, even the minister's down here, got a valet service and you see white valet's parking cars for this black church. I said, "Well, what you expect from them? How do you think they gonna react? Why do you think they selling drugs and what not? They don't see any future here. And, when I was on the school board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District], this is a picture here, we had a thing that nobody else in the country had. We had a--called a scholarship in escrow. For every child, if he graduated, he had money to go to college. He didn't have to be an athlete, he didn't have to have straight, the one that got straight A's, got say maybe, I'm just using an illustration, fifty dollars and the ones who had less got maybe twenty-five dollars. But if you graduated, all of you had money to go to college. And, the college would then say, "Well, now they got some money, we'll match that." And, now during that time, we had more black kids going to college than in the history of this district. But, Mike White [Michael White] killed it. Story_ID: 313908 Speaker 1: I wonder what your hope is for this generation of young people, that the future will be for them. Speaker 2: Well, being a religious person, I always pray for America. That somehow we learn that we can't have peace through guns but only through God. And, it's my country, I fought for it, my grandfather--my father [Eugene Tolliver] fought it, my brother-in-laws, between all of us we're from the First World War [World War I, WWI] through the Second World War [World War II, WWII], the Korean War, Vietnam [Vietnam War], I have all kinds of relatives that had fought for this country. And, if you start with George Washington, the five thousand blacks that fought with him, Crispus Attucks who was the first to die. So, we've always fought for this country and we've never been guilty of the most heinous crime that I think you could be guilt of, and that's treason. Black folks have never committed treason, and they have never been disloyal. So, being an old Baptist, I continue to pray for my country. But, the problem is as I had when I talked to Bishop Pilla [Anthony Pilla] on my show ['Conversations with Stanley E. Tolliver, Sr.'], we put on this dollar bill, "In God We Trust" and that's the God that we trust. And, our kids are taught--and we don't teach black history. A Jew goes to the synagogue, he knows his history and can speak two languages when he comes out. And, we don't teach history to our kids. We don't teach 'em to be proud of being black, see. Because when a kid really gets to the point that he's proud of who he is, he acts different, see. And, he doesn't understand that the drugs that are out here are a tool of Satan. Because you can't serve two masters. Now, when you get messed up on those drugs, you don't serve your people, you don't serve your family, you don't serve your community. You don't even serve yourself. And, the chump change that he makes for selling these drugs pales in insignificants to those who bring it here. For example, I always talk about the difference between Betty Ford and Bessie Mae Ford [ph.]. They're both junkies (laughter), but Betty doesn't have to sell her body. Bessie has to. Betty is a hero. Bessie is a zero. They're both junkies. They named a hospital after Betty. And, that's all she was, was a junkie. And, people, oh, they get angry when I talk about the first lady. I said, "Well, that's what she was, a junkie." And, I said, "The laws in this country are so evil into some sense that that's the reason why we stay in trouble." Because these kids, see how--like for example, I told you about the Frank Wills, and how he was treated and how (unclear) is being treated. Martha Stewart did six months. Some brother with a drug problem gets six years. And, our prisons are not built for rehabilitation, they're built for prison, I mean, for punishment, that's it. And, I tell some of these boys, I say, "Now, you think you so slick, you're so smart, when they get your buns in the penitentiary," I say "What is your name?" "Paul." I say, "You're name will be Pauline when they get through with you." And, that's what happens in prison. And, these prisons are designed to keep these males, particularly black males, out of the system of competition. And, I say, "You fools are fall"--nobody, I say, "Your choice is what you made." Nobody--when then, they--I say, "The devil didn't make you do it." My dad wouldn't go for that. He say, "You look in the mirror, you're find what's wrong with you," and look in the mirror. Now, when the pointed, that the devil, did they come up and say, "Now, look, if you don't smoke this joint or take this drug, I'm gonna blow your brains out." You made a choice didn't you? Now, you can't blame the white man for that choice. You made that choice. And, you made the wrong one. And, now you wanna blame somebody else. I said, "That's what your problem is." Story_ID: 313909 Speaker 1: And, I don't think enough black people take the time to talk to these kids. Because, you'd be surprise what a, what the change it makes when somebody like me or her [Artha Woods] or somebody that they can look up to. 'Cause they don't know who their daddy's are or where they are. And, then a lot of these girls allow themselves to be used by these pimps and you know. On Mother's Day, these dude some around, you know, to collect the welfare check. So, there not enough pride among our people. There're just some things, I tell white men when they talk. I say, "Now, listen man, I'm just too black to do that. My black background won't allow me to do that. I can't do it." I remember when my wife [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] was living, we went out to, what's that place; not Rocky River [Ohio], past Rocky River, oh, what is that? It's just before you get to Lake County [Ohio] line. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Euclid Beach [Euclid Beach Park, Cleveland, Ohio]. Euclid Beach. Speaker 1: No. No, this is--well, Euclid Beach after some time ago, but I'm talking 'bout right now. Well, anyhow, this was a big white suburb. And, my wife and I were invited to a party out there, and so we went. And next thing I know everybody was saying, "Hey, Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], don't you wanna go to the powder room?" I said, "Powder room, do I look like a woman to you? Want do you mean powder room?" So, finally, I went around to see, and these kids was just snorting that coke, boy. I mean, lawyers now. Just sniffing that coke, see. I grab my wife, I said, "We getting outta here." I said, "Woman don't you argue with me. We getting outta here." 'Cause I know if the police come, I know who they gonna blame it on, me. And, they don't get arrested. They don't get busted. And, if their kids get caught, they never get to juvenile court down there on the 22nd [Street, Cleveland, Ohio]--you see? So, I know how this law operates. Now, watch what I tell ya', this doctor that was killed and his wife was messing around with that black fellow, watch and see don't they blame him for that. Watch and see. And, I've had so many of these cases, where white women stalked and solicit black men and then when they get caught, they holler rape. I see this all the time. I won many a case on that. I see the double standard that exist in this country. Like, what's that place; Abu Ghraib [Baghdad Central Prison, Abu Ghraib, Iraq]. Now people like Cheney [Dick Cheney] and them should be charged with those crimes. But, they not gonna charge them. The woman Karpinski [Janis Karpinski], the general, they put her, made her a colonel. But, they never put her--but they didn't court marital her. And, all these people, like I called them sardines are the ones getting court-martialed. Now, ain't no way in the world they could--they came up with that. How would they know what--how what would humiliate a Muslim. Somebody taught 'em that. Who took the pictures? Who ordered the pictures taken? This little dumb hillbilly girl from West by God, Virginia. You see. Now, that's an example of the double standard. And, even in the federal court, if you're messing with cocaine, you get one sentence. If you're messing with crack, you get a stiffer sentence. And, what is crack? Nothing but grounded up cocaine. And, I see this double standard. I see it daily, how the law works for some and against others. And, that's why I'm always in this fight. And, until we get a point--and see these kids, a lot of 'em just give up. I'm gonna--and they'll tell 'em, say, "Well, I'll die. If I die, I'll be--I'll die rich." And, then these rap songs. How they call their mother--how they call black women bitches and whores. And, like I tell 'em, I said, "You hate your momma? You must hate her, you're talking about black women are bitches. You're talking about your momma." I mean, and, this is the kind of thing that we have to start doing with these kids. And, I'll tell you, most of 'em will listen to you, if we take time to talk to 'em. But, many of our ministers on Sunday, all they wanna do is get the people high on the Lord, as they call it, and get that collection and gone on back to the suburbs about they business. And, don't give a so in so about what's happening to these people in the community. Beautiful churches, squalor all around. Talking about they don't come to church. Well, they don't have any reason to come. You, do you go out there in the community and try to get 'em to come? Now, one thing I can say about the Catholic, and I'm not a Catholic. I learned when I was on that board about Parmadale [Parmadale Children's Village of St. Vincent de Paul, Parma, Ohio], one of the members, what was his name? Sindator [ph.], whose brother is out there. When I went out there, I didn't--I saw over half of 'em were black-- Story_ID: 309554 Speaker 1: Mr. Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], at the end of the last segment, you were just starting to talk about the institutions within the inner city or you referred to a couple times as the ghetto, and what black people might be able to do to sort of transform. Speaker 2: Well, one thing I was impressed when I went to Parmadale [Parmadale Children's Village of St. Vincent de Paul, Parma, Ohio] and I saw all these black kids in there. And, the difference in Parmadale and what happens in Cleveland [Ohio] with these so called houses they send kids to; what do they call 'em? I hope they--what do they call 'em? Speaker 1: The halfway houses, or? Speaker 2: No, no, no. When they put 'em in these private homes. Speaker 1: Oh, Foster? Speaker 2: Foster homes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Foster care? Speaker 2: In foster care. The Parmadale when they come out of there, they have a high school education and if they're eighteen or more, they're registered to vote. Foster homes, many of these people don't care about these kids. They just taking 'em in to get the money. And, when they get eighteen, they just throw 'em out in the street. And, a good example of that is 'Antwone Fisher,' if you see that movie. They just throw 'em in the street. And, I don't understand why the black community, we have all these people graduated from college, they got degrees, nurses, and what not. Why we don't have some black Parmadales? Because the system, the juvenile system is almost murder for these kids. They're down there at that detention home, they're overcrowded. They're supposed to be getting an education and it's not the best. And, they're treated like criminals. And, these homes that they go to, many of them are just there to get the extra income, or they make servants out of 'em. And, you're not in the family. You're outside the family. And, they, you know, just exploit 'em. And, I get in trouble with the preachers when I say that because I'm talking about a Catholic. I said, "I don't care what the denomination is. You mean to tell me that Baptist can't build a home like that?" They're throwing our kids out in the street. And, of course, [HistoryMaker] Antwone Fisher--they say, "But they get raped in the Catholic--in this place." I said, "Oh, they don't rape 'em in the foster homes?" I said, "Did you see the movie 'Antwone Fisher,' how he was raped? And, I have represented girls and boys who are in these foster homes and ran away because they were being raped. I said, "I'm talking about the Republican Party and Bush [President George Walker Bush] don't care." I said, "We don't care anything about our kids either." I mean, what provisions are we making for 'em? We should have the kind of homes that train our kids. We have the educators. We have the social workers. We have everything at our disposal. I said, "Don't you know that millionaire white folks will give you the money because that would be a way to solve their conscience." They would be glad to give you the money to do that. But, we always were thinking who gonna be in charge, you see. And, that's an opportunity that we're losing. These kids need us, and we are not there for 'em. Now, don't give me that stuff about Catholic something. I said, "I wouldn't care if it was Buddhist or what it is." We need--now, for example, the guy who is the chaplain there, I tried to get him to come on my show ['Conversations with Stanley E. Tolliver, Sr.']. We had a girl that tried to commit suicide. She drank some cleaning fluid or something. That was a call for help. And, nobody said a word. The only people that came in there and was interested was the legal women voters, under Miss Tallerico [ph.]. And, I tried to get the mes--I said, "Don't you see what's happening? That girl is calling for help, trying to commit suicide." Now the chaplain, a black preacher, he won't even come on my show. I can't get him on there. Speaker 1: That's from the juvenile detention center? Speaker 2: Yes. That is a hell hole down there for these kids. And, we, we sit around and don't do it. I said, "I'm tired of you always blaming white folks." Yes, there's racism, I fight it every day. Yes, there's sexism, I fight it every day. But, there's some things, as my dad [Eugene Tolliver] used to say, "When you get through praying, you have to get off your knees and go to work." Story_ID: 309555 Speaker 1: And, I said, "God don't--expect something out of you." You just expect there, and just sit there--now, in slavery days, we used to pay for the Lord to come down, because we was slaves. And, even they had sense enough to try to run away (laughter), and try to do something for themselves, you see. I said, "But, we sit back and got all this education, kids graduating from college, all of this." And, what are we doing for our kids? Nothing. And, I mention Parmadale [Parmadale Children's Village of St. Vincent de Paul, Parma, Ohio], you get mad 'cause it's Catholic. I said, "Well, go down there on 65th [Street] and Hough [Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio] and look at the difference between that Hough--that Catholic Center [Fatima Family Center, Cleveland, Ohio] and League Park [Cleveland, Ohio]." One is right across the street from the other. You can't make a comparison between those two places. I remember when I was at Olivet [Olivet Institutional Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio], I had to leave there. I tried to get a, a window that would show a black Jesus. Man, they didn't want that. So, I did finally get a window in there, but it was a sphinx. That's the best I could get. And, in many black churches right now, they still have a white Jesus. And, I, and it's, and some of my white clients, like I told you, they come up and look at it and they say, "Well, oh, you mean the black Jesus." I say, "Well, why you call him a black Jesus? Do you call the other one white Jesus?" They say, "He didn't look like that." I said, "Oh, no." I say, "Well, then tell me what he look like last time you saw him?" We'll even scare, you know, we had this thing, if it's a little lie, it a white lie. If it's a big lie, or bodacious lie as we say, it's a black lie. The heroes during the time when I was a kid, rode a white horse, and the villain rode the black horse. I said, "That's self-hate." We went to a place to eat at a church and they had a real light skinned kid and the called him Tarzan. I said, "Why are you calling that black kid Tarzan (laughter)?" I said, "Do you know who Tarzan was?" Some dude, white dude with a diaper on swinging through the trees called himself Tarzan, could kill bears and lions. I said, "Don't you see that's propaganda?" Name him Muhammad Ali. Name him Joe Louis. Why you naming him Tarzan? And, I remember when I was a kid, I used to be able to imitate Tarzan, "Ahouwah! [ph.]" And, then I realized well, how dumb I was (laughter), you know. I should be imitating one of these African kings. And, then I said, "Well, name him Nelson Mandela." I said, "Name him something that he can be." I was in the doctor's office and this women had this little black girl with this blonde doll. And, I didn't have a lot of money, and I had an audience, you know, and I gave her--I said twenty-five, I said, "Get something that looks like her. Do you understand what you're doing? Get something that looks like her." And, that's why I used to talk about a lot of people criticize him but Bill Cosby was the first one that showed some middleclass black people who had kids, that had humor with it. But, you realize what a whole like of white people never thought that you could see--now, the other one where they had J.J. [James Evans, Jr.] in the ghetto, you remember? Dynamite. Speaker 2: 'Good Times.' Speaker 1: Now, 'Good'--now they like that, you see. And, it had its point. 'Cause at least a man was the head of the household, you see. But, they were living in the projects, see. I said, "You don't know, image means a lot to these kids." And, what they think of themselves, is gonna be the difference. And, I'm one that try to teach us pride, and who you are, you know. I got thick lips, I got a flat nose, and I got black skin. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, you don't black-- Speaker 1: And, my hair is not kinky. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I got the flat nose. Speaker 1: And, my hair is not kinky. My dad [Eugene Tolliver] said my hair was curly. Not kinky. And, he taught me, he said, "It's not what's on top of your head, it's what's in your head." And, all that grease you're putting on it trying to conk it, slick it down ain't gonna help you pass the examination (laughter). So, I'm proud of who I am, and I'm not trying to be like somebody else. You know, monkey see, monkey do. And, what is this that Dr. Jones [ph.] used to teach us about; the Stockholm syndrome? Oh, we suffer from that. How the people say, the oppressed are taking on the ways of the oppressor. Story_ID: 309556 Speaker 1: Rocky River [Ohio], that's what I was trying to think of. That's where I was. Speaker 2: That's where the powder room was? Speaker 1: Where the powder room was. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, the first thing they gonna say, I'm--he brought it, you know. And, they just sniffing that stuff. And, I tell 'em, I say, I say, "Do you fools know that you're doing? You ain't making no money." The one's that seeing it over here and put up a million dollars bond and then split. I said, "That's was the one making some money." And, you think they don't get high on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]? They don't ever get busted. Bush's [President George Walker Bush] kids are drunks. He's a drunk. Mamma is a drunk. But, you see, I got degrees. I can say that. They can get mad but it ain't nothing they can do about it. His, his niece [Noelle Bush], by that Mexican woman [Columba Gallo Bush] that his brother [Jeb Bush] is married to, she actually went to jail because she violated her probation for drugs. I said, "Who are you imitating? (Laughter) You mean, you don't see some black people that you can emulate? Why you got to act a fool like them?" And, they angry. Oh, they get upset with me. And, the white folks get mad. I said, "Well," as my grandma [Henrietta Davis] said, "They laugh but they ain't tickled," (laughter). And, I could care less what--and if you can get kids to be proud. That's why Jews are so arrogant. They are proud of being a Jew. They've been taught to be proud to being a Jew. They come out of that synagogue, they can speak two languages, and they know their history. And, I said, "That's our example." There's nothing like a proud, arrogant, intelligent black person. Story_ID: 309557 Speaker 1: When I was in the South when they took me to this place where this man was charged with--Noxcurry [ph.] was his name. He was down in a little town called; I'm trying to think, Newton, Mississippi. And, you know what his crime was, the high sheriff done come on his property and was looking around with his flashlight and thangs, and goes up the sheriff and said, "Mr. Sheriff," says, "Is I done anything?" "No." "Does you have a warrant for my arrest?" "No." "And I ain't did nothing." He said, "Well, then get the hell off my property." "Boy, you don't talk that way to me." And, reached for his gun. And, the brother put that knife right up in his throat. Said, "White boy you better get me with the first shot otherwise you head is gone." So, they charged him with attempted murder and everything. And, in the South at that time, they wouldn't allow bondsman like we do. You had to put up property. And, those brothers and sisters got together and put mortgages on their farm to get him out. And, then I'm assigned to go down there. And, when I went down there, they were scar--they had never seen a black lawyer. And, I went--when I went to court, the court was a--this cracker had a shoe repair store, and the court was in back of the shoe repair store, and he was the judge. And, so, when I came down there, they--I had to drive this little bitty, oh, what was it? It was a Chrysler product, a little bitty little, Valiant, that was the name of it. 'Cause I couldn't go down there and drive that Cadillac, you know, and I had to be very inconspicuous, see. I couldn't be wearing my stingy brim or whatever, you know. I had to dress real inconspicuous and driving down there so they wouldn't know that I was from up north, see. So, when I drove down there and the people said, "They done sent us a colored lawyer. Lord have mercy. Can we go with you? Well, I don't wanna go down there by myself, you know (laughter). So, when I go in there, I see the judge, and I reach out to shake his hand, and he put his hand behind him; old redneck. I said, "That's right judge, don't shake my hand 'cause the black might rub off and kill ya', (laughter), and give you (unclear)." "Oh, did you hear how he talked to that white man?" And, the Jewish fella that would assign us told us, he said, "Now, Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.], ask just like you do in the North. 'Cause these people aren't used to seeing your kind of black, including your own people." So, when I walk in there and after I said that, oh, they really got (unclear). "Did you hear what he said to that white man?" So, I go up to the jud--what's his name, the supposed prosecutor and the charges are written in pencil, been erased and everything. So they say--and they got him charged with all of that. So, and he said, "What 'bout your name be?" I said, "I'm Attorney Tolliver." "But, down here we goes by the first name and we know everybody by their first name." I said, "My first name if Mister." And, oh, your people "Oh, Lord, look what they done sent us." So, we start the trial and they put the high sheriff up there, and he talking, but, and he talk, and I would say, "Objection." "Over ruled". "Objection." "Over ruled." I said, "That's compounded hearsay judge." "Over ruled," (laughter). So, when he got through, I say, "May I interrogate the witness." "Hm?" I say, "May I question?" "Oh, you wanna ask him some questions, go on, go on, go on." I say, "Now Sheriff Tate [ph.], how can you get up there in front of this court, under oath, and tell those prodigious, barefaced lies? And, oh, then--black folks like, "You see, Oh." "You don't talk to the sheriff that a way." "You don't talk to the high--." I said, "Now, judge, I'm an officer of the court, am I not? Every lawyer is an officer of the court, and I've been here long enough to see how you dispense justice and you're fair. And, I know that if you get all of the facts, you will find this man not guilty. And, the only way he can convince you to find him guilty is to tell a lie." And, I said, "Nothing," I said, "irritates my propensities to the quick to see, to see somebody take advantage of a court, of a judge, and I just can't stand by and watch him use you like that." And, he looked at me, he said, "Well, don't get so carried away. 'Cause I'll hold you in contempt." I said, "Judge, my only contempt is of this witness not telling you the truth." Then, he thought a minute, "All right, I'm gonna let you go this time Mr. Tolliver, but don't get so rambunctious." And, do you know when I got through, he actually dismissed that case. And, black folks went crazy down there, see. Now, they hadn't, he hadn't never seen anything like me. And, they hadn't never seen anything like me. They had about three black lawyers in the whole state, and they was scared to practice. Story_ID: 309558 Speaker 1: So, that's the thing that we're going through. We just got an apology--you saw that, what they got that, you know. Isn't that something; gonna apologize? Speaker 2: For lynching? Speaker 1: Yeah. Now the Jews get compensated. And, the Japanese got, what they call that? Speaker 2: Reparations. Speaker 1: Reparations. But, they apologize to them and that's supposed to be enough. I said, "Damn, why do we take that kind of crap, you know? Apologize! And, I was almost killed! What do you mean apologize? How come I can't get some money?" And, soon as you talk about reparations, that's when the thing starts. And, I say, I tell 'em I say, "Do you understand that the repa--that the kids are gonna have some privileges that we don't have." And, they said, "What?" I said, "All of 'em can vote. Do you realize there're people in this country that can't vote?" Simply because they got--now, in Ohio if you got a criminal record, doesn't make any difference, as long as you are not incarcerated. But, there are states, when you get a record, you can't vote. You can pay taxes, but you can't vote simply because--now, you may have gone to prison and served you time, been on probation or what not. Doesn't make any difference. In some states as long as you got a felony record, you can't vote. And then what about the people in Washington, D.C.? They can't vote for anybody but a mayor. They can't vote for a congressman, or the senator because they don't have home rule. And, states that are smaller than that district, like South Dakota or something, they can elect senators and congressmen, and they can't do it. Because it's ruled by that, as I call, cracker attitude. I said, I said, "Why do you think that I just continue to fight?" And, you said, "It doesn't do any good." I say, "Well, one thing about it, you ain't doing any good 'cause you ain't doing nothing, and if I'm trying to do something I might do some good, here." Now, you point, my point is, you have a right to do nothing, but you don't have a right to try to interfere with me when I'm trying to do something. Story_ID: 309559 Speaker 1: Now, that's my, the picture of my radio show ['Conversations with Stanley E. Tolliver, Sr.'] where I'm sponsored by Mr. Chicken. I first was introduced to radio by the late Sid Freedman [ph.], who died. And, he was the first one that got me on the radio. And, before that I was on with Mary Rose Oakar former congresswoman, and we had a television show. And, it was, the name of that show was, something about talk, 'What's on Your Mind' [sic. 'Speak Your Mind']. And, we had that on a, on a local television show. And, Sid Freedman was the one that got me interested in radio and when he died although he was Jewish, he left a request for me to sing 'Ol' Man River.' And, he was buried at a Catholic church, although he was Jewish. And, his son-in-law is now a judge, Russo [ph.]. And, he asked me to sing, 'Ol' Man River.' She [Artha Woods] was with me. And, I got a standing ovation. Okay. So, the back of it says, "Dedicated to the memory of the late Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] who gave his life for love, freedom and brotherhood." And, this is the quote, "Except for the Native American, we all came over on different ships. But, since 9/11/01 [September 11, 2001] we're all in the same boat now. We must learn to turn toward each other in love, and not on each other in hate. Hate is terrorism." Speaker 2: I was the president of the school board [Board of Education, Cleveland Metropolitan School District]. The one next to me is Jim Carney [James Carney], who was vice president. And, the man next to me is Ralph Perk who later became president and became a judge. And, the one to my left, I guess that would be, or to my right, is Wesley Dumas, an attorney who also became vice president. And, this was taken back in, well, let me see, I was president in '87 [1987], in '90 [1990], in 1990. Speaker 1: Round table [Carnegie Roundtable]. We used to meet and discuss issues. Many of us still alive. In front is Dr. Jordan [ph.], and Bill Mack [ph.]. Bill Mack is no longer with us. To the right is Reverend William Crockett. And, this one I can't remember who she is. And, the next one I can't remember his full name, but it was Obie [ph.]. The next one, I have to come back 'cause I can't--her name is Dumas. She used to be a reporter with the Call and Post, Carol Dumas [ph.]. The next on is Larry Mack [ph.], the brother of the Mack that I, that I just mentioned. That was his brother, a truck driver. The next one is Eleanor Montgomery, who was an Olympic champion in the high jump, who graduated from John Adams [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] but he was an Olympic champion in the high jump, Eleanor Montgomery. The next one is Jim Hill [ph.]. The next one is Charles Biv [ph.]. The next one is, she's a lawyer; was one of the first black women to be a prosecutor in the prosecutor's office. And, she's still practicing law, and she--and I gotta think of her name. I just got to think of her name. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that Almeta? Speaker 1: Almeta Johnson. Thank you (laughter). All right. The next one is me, and that's when I had a belly. I don't have that kind, much of a belly now. And, that's Harrison Dillard, the Olympic champion. And, that was called a Carnegie Roundtable. We used to meet that the Carnegie Hotel [Cleveland, Ohio], and sit around for a couple hours, solve all of the problems. And, then after that was over, go back to business as usual (laughter). That gave--that had debates, just like the City Club [The City Club of Cleveland]. Well, we were the black version of the City Club, and we would set up debates between the candidates who were running for mayor. One of the first persons was Dennis Kucinich when he running for mayor and we had others that would come through. If they were running for any office, they would come through and want our support. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Muhammad Ali and me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is, that's Muhammad Ali and me. We had given a--that was president then of what we called the Cleveland Lawyers Association [ph.], and we invited Muhammad Ali to speak. And, then I had the privilege--and he bought a place for the Muslims at Miles Harvard and Lee [Lee Harvard Miles, Cleveland, Ohio] it was then. And, they didn't take care of it, then it went to Silverman's. But, he, I was involved in the process of having that property bought. He bought it for the Muslims and they didn't use it and then it went to Silverman. And, I think it's still Silverman's to this day. But, he was a great guy. And, I loved him for his guts and loved him for his courage. Because he refuse to bow as we say, to (unclear). It was unconscionable for him to go and fight a war. It was against his religion. He lost a lot of money and could've gone to the penitentiary. But, the [U.S.] Supreme Court said that he was right. And, ruled in his favor. He lost a lot of money and a lot of time. But, it shows guts. And, then if a person names a child Muhammad Ali, he is, he is naming him after a giant. Because, float like a butterfly, sting like a butterfly and float like a bee. I loved him because he was intelligent. He was ain--he was arrogant. He said, "Anybody you want me to whoop, bam, and I'll whoop 'em." He was not like Jack Dempsey, who wouldn't fight anybody black. You had to try to call him a great champion. Muhammad Ali fought everybody, didn't duck anybody, and he stuck to his religion. And, I love him. And, I praise him 'til this day. Story_ID: 309560 Speaker 1: 440 yard dash in the Senior Olympics [National Senior Games] in 1985. I was sixty years old. And, I still ran, and I was over two hundred pounds and running against these--couple of these guys were younger than me. And, that's why I tell Harrison Dillard, my good friend, he's the greatest and I'm the latest. 'Cause he hasn't run since 19--, I guess about 1953. No not that--wait '48 [1948], '52 [1952], yeah, probably '53 [1953]. He hadn't run any more since then. You know, he would workout but he has not competed. And, that's one of 'em. And, a lot of other pictures I have running what we call the 10k, and that was (unclear). And, then the 10k, I would run, the 6.2 miles for the black college, we would have a run, you know, knowledge of, what is it? Something is a terrible thing-- Speaker 2: Oh, a mind. Speaker 1: A mind is a terrible thing to waste. And, we would run the 10k and I would run in it. I would sing the National Ant--the Black National Anthem ['Lift Every Voice and Sing'] and then retreat to the back where--and not get in the way of the young people. And, my best time was under an hour, which was good time for somebody my age and my weight; good genes. Thank you dad [Eugene Tolliver]. Thank you mom (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Now, that's a picture with Governor Celeste [Richard F. Celeste]. Speaker 2: What's his first name again? I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Richard. And, I was given a citation, the board was given a citation because we were the first school district that outlawed corporal punishment. And, we--and I got that certificate from him for that. He later appointed me to a prison committee. And, caused me to go to several prisons to see what actually went--and what was going on in prison. And, I remember one of the trips I took Dorothy [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver]. She had never been inside of a prison. And, she was amazed at the intelligence of some of the prisoners, and what a waste it was for them to be in prison. He was a great governor. He was a great governor. And, I was really sorry when he didn't run any more. Because he was great governor, and I'm satisfied that if he was governor, we would not have this crisis that we have now in reference to public education. Speaker 2: Now, that's a picture of my late wife, Dorothy, whom I call a saint even though she was not a Catholic, 'cause she had to be a saint to put up with me for fifty years (laughter). She was a great musician. Used to accompany me in many places we would go. They would say, "Attorney Tolliver [HistoryMaker Stanley Tolliver, Sr.] and his orchestra." She graduated from Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], got her master's degree when she was sixty, and it gave me the opportunity to brag that I put all three of my girls through college (laughter). My two daughters [Stephanie Tolliver and Sherrie Tolliver], her two daughters, our two daughters, and her. 'Cause while she was going to college, I was paying some of the bills. And, I'm very proud to say that we were very proud of her. And, when she graduated she used her whole name, Dorothy Olivia Greenwood Tolliver (laughter). And, you'll notice her hair; now, that's not dyed. That's natural. Speaker 1: Now, that's a picture of my, my mother. My angel mother who gave me the love and attention, and really spoiled me 'cause I was their only child. But, she was the one that taught me to love God, and love music, and to love myself. And, to love other people. And, to be good, to be kind, and to try to be a person that helped people. And, she was the one that always taught me that if I was gonna buy something or something, try to get it from black people first. And, then if they didn't have it, then go somewhere else. She was the one that stopped me from boxing when she found out that I was boxing. 'Cause she told me her high voice. She was only about five feet tall, and she told me, "Your brain will last longer than your jaw, you go going to school." And, my father who was sneaking me around with the boxing, when she found out that ended that. She didn't want her baby hurt (laughter). And, I used to get a kick out of her calling me her baby (laughter) as big as I was. And, she was the one that got me into music, her favorite composer was Chopin [Frederic Chopin]. And, that's why I had such a varied life because I loved the classics because of her, and she exposed me. Can you image me playing the violin? But, she was the one that had me playing the violin. And, I broke the violin over some dudes head when he called me a sissy (laughter), and that was the end of my violin playing (laughter). And, if my dad, my dad told her, said, "Ed," Edna [Edna Riles Tolliver] was her name, "You know that boy don't wanna play that violin" (laughter). My mother lived to be ninety, I was blessed. She and my father were married fifty-four years and she never worked a day. Her job was to raise me, and I'm grateful. That when the coach called and said, "Where is he?" She said, "He's in the bed, coach. I'm not letting him out." So, thank you mom for keeping me in the bed and letting me out where I could've gotten in some trouble. Thank you mom (laughter) for not letting me out, 'cause I might've gotten into something if you had (laughter). Story_ID: 309561 Speaker 1: Now, that was my son [Stanley Tolliver, Jr.]. I guess he was about five years old. He's about six foot three now, weighs about two hundred and fifty pounds. And, is a college graduate from Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] and got his master's [degree] from Maryland, Maryland State University [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland]. Lives in Boyds, Maryland now; married, has two children. And, his wife is also a college graduate from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And, she works for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], is a supervisor for NASA. They build about a three hundred thousand dollar home and they're doing very well. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's Stephanie [Stephanie Tolliver], my oldest daughter, who is a graduate of Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]. And, when she graduated from Lutheran East High School [Lutheran High School East, Cleveland Heights, Ohio] she was the president of the class. She has a beautiful singing voice, and is into music, into drama, and is now studying to be a lay minister, she is. And, she wants to go to theology college because she feels that her work is with the Lord and she's now recovering from cancer. And, keep telling me not to cry, not to worry, that the Lord was gonna bring her through. And, she really encouraged me, 'cause I really got scared when I found out how sick she really was. But, she's recuperating now, recovering. And, plans to go to school to be a minister. She has--and as I said, sings like a canary, got a beautiful singing voice. She and my other daughter Sherrie [Sherrie Tolliver], whom you'll see, are part of this group called Women in History [ph.], where they do plays about famous women. She did Marian Anderson because she could sing-- Speaker 1: Stephanie did? Speaker 2: Stephanie did. And, the other one is my youngest daughter, that you saw, and she's a graduate of New York University [New York, New York] by way of Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio]. She went to Oberlin West, Eleanor Hayes [ph.], and then went to--and, she does comedy. She's--we call her crazy 'cause she's got such a sense of humor, you know. But, she's a very serious actor, actress and belongs to that group and she does plays about women that I've never heard of. Like for example, Alice Coachman, who was first the aviatrix, black aviatrix [sic.], and I didn't know that. And, then she did the one about the woman who went to Oberlin, I wish I could think of the name of it now, and then she-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And, she was charged with, at Oberlin, she was charged with a crime. Speaker 1: That was Edmonia Lewis. Speaker 2: Edmonia Lewis, thank you. Speaker 1: I think. Speaker 2: And, she went to Italy where she played her too; Edmonia Lewis, thank you. Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And, of course, that's their mother, Dorothy [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver], the angel, who made something out of all of us, including me (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Well, now that's a picture of David Rabbi Hill [Rabbi David Hill], and me, Carl Stokes, as a result of the boycott of McDonald's. And, Carl Stokes and the last picture is, his last name is Davis. He was the managing partner of Squire, Sanders & Dempsey [Squire Patton Boggs]. And, that was a result of our successful boycott of McDonald's which caused black to have all over the country owning franchises. And, we met with Carl as his request because he was running for re-election and redneck, racist people were blaming him for the boycott (noise) excuse me. But, we called a halt to it because we was successful in doing what we were doing so it was not necessary but, to continued it and gave him the credit for calling off the boycott so he could be re-elected. And, that was in 1969. Speaker 1: Now, this is a picture of Reverend Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], me, and Fred Ahmed Evans. Fred Ahmed Evans loved Dr. King. He worshipped him because he turned him from violence to nonviolence. And, then of course, Ahmed really went berserk after they killed King. His revenge was to kill white policemen and avenge his death. If King hadn't have never, had never been killed there would have never been the riot called the Glenville riot [Glenville shootout] in 1969 [sic. 1968]. And, you will note the black deputies because Sheriff McGettrick [James McGettrick] whom I later represented when he himself was charged with bribery and I represented the sheriff who became a judge. And, he was my good friend. And, I told him--this was a church down on, on Hough [Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio]. And, I told him, this is what we call the ghetto grand jury. And, King was the presiding justice, Ahmed was the associate justice, and I was the prosecutor. And, you will note all of the black deputies, 'cause I told the sheriff we didn't want any white deputies, we wanted to make this black. And, he said, "Well, can I come?" I said, "Well, you're the boss, we can't keep you away." But, he stayed out of the picture and got his own separate pictures with King. But, he didn't wanna, shall we say, desecrate what we were trying to do. He was very cooperative. One of the reason why I think that they tried to frame him because of the fact that he was so good to us as judge as well as a sheriff. He's dead now, too. And, of course, Ahmed Evans died in prison. And, of course, King was assassinated. And, I'm guess I'm still one of the few that's still here, by the grace of God. Story_ID: 309562 Speaker 1: This is a picture--these young people--and I'd always believed in lifting up young people, they won national recognition-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: They won national recognition for robots, for robotics, and they didn't get the recognition that I thought they should get. Somehow I got 'em in my, in the studio and had 'em on my radio show ['Conversations with Stanley E. Tolliver, Sr.']. And, they was so impressed, they wanted to take a picture whom--with whom they thought were the two outstanding people left alive from East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. And, that was Harrison Dillard, and me. And, when I was sworn in as president of the Norman S. Minor Bar [Norman S. Minor Bar Association], we got this young lady that's sitting between us, she was the head of the cooking; what do you call that? And, we had her and all these kids was part of my initiation as a president. And, we had it in the Carl Stokes Federal Building [Carl B. Stokes U.S. Courthouse, Cleveland, Ohio] in the courtroom of judge, the only black judge, Solomon Oliver [Solomon Oliver, Jr.]. And, we had, out in the hallway, we had playing music, what--your man, what, what's his name? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I can't think of it. Speaker 1: The one that we-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The blind musician. Speaker 1: Yeah, the blind musician. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Baccus? Baccus? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: He was out in the hall. Speaker 2: Eddie Baccus [Eddie Baccus, Sr.]? Speaker 1: Eddie Baccus. They'd never had anything that black in that courtroom. And, they had the kids who were in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] to be the escorts and we had even had black balloons (laughter). And, she was the mistress of ceremony who helped to put it together. And, they've never gotten over that. But, these kids, and the one in the back, I thought he was standing on something. He wasn't standing on anything, he was just that big. And, they--and some of the suburban schools tried to steal him. Because not only was he a football player but he also played the horn. And, these robotics showed the dexterity and the intelligent of, intelligence of these kids. And, they had all kind of robots running around. And, of course, these are--the one in the back was a, I can't think of this name now, he was the person that was in charge of the kids and the one over here, Boris Morris [ph.], he was the principal. And, all of these kids are holding their trophies that they got from being champion robotic people. And, Harrison Dillard, of course, was there and it was a great honor that these kids chose me to be one of the people that they wanted to be seen with. Speaker 2: Okay. This was the last one. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And, that's a picture-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And, that's a picture of Artha Woods and me, on two separate occasions. She was a widow and I was a widower and I was a lonely person when Dorothy [Dorothy Greenwood Tolliver] died. And, we knew each other and we, we, so we said--starting dating. And, she has been a real light onto my pathway. And, has really brightened my life 'cause it was really in bad shape after Dorothy passed. So, I've had the privilege of having in my life three great women; my mother [Edna Riles Tolliver], my wife, and now Artha. And, she has really been a blessing to me. In a way, she spoils me (laughter). She does it on purpose. She says that way she won't have any competition...