 Story_ID: 637627 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Okay, full name, Dinizulu Gene Sinclair Tinnie [HistoryMaker Dinizulu Gene Tinnie]. Dinizulu, my African name, is D, as in dog, I-N, as in Nancy, I-Z, as in zebra, U-L-U, G-E-N-E, T-I-N-N-I-E. Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name Dinizulu? Speaker 2: The story behind that is that some of us who are old enough to remember the African Liberation Support Committee back in the 1970s, that was group operating out of several cities supporting what was then the liberation struggle in Southern African mostly, Angola, Mozambique, also Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde, Zimbabwe, and South Africa. And I was in Boston [Massachusetts], and there was a South African exile community there. So as kind of a way to honor my contribution to the liberation struggle, they decided I needed an African name and the name of the last of the great Zulu kings, Dinizulu, which means, as they explained it to me, it was a sacred name. Zulu means thunder, and Dinizulu is the one who makes the thunder happen. So (laughter), that's, that's how that came about. And although I still use my birth name, I kind of use that as--I, I call it my artist name, you know, just so that anything I do creative honors the ancestors and that kind of thing, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story behind the name Tinnie by any chance-- Speaker 2: The name--there's, there's a story. It's a, it's a variant of, T-I-N-N-I-E is a variant of the Anglo-Irish name Tinney, T-I-N-N-E-Y, which is the more common spelling, and you'll see that name around. And the, the Gaelic origin is Mac An tSionnaigh, which meant son of the fox. I, I think I've been called worse, but (laughter) you know. And-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Son of a fox, huh? Speaker 2: And so somehow that came into English as Tinnie. And my father [Albert Tinnie] was born in Guyana. At the time it was then still called British Guiana. And it seems that when his father [Almanus Tinnie] was born, there was a minister, Reverend Shirley [ph.], who somehow took it upon himself to, on the birth certificate, to change the name of the spelling. Our speculation is that that was a way to distinguish the colored offspring of these British officers (laughter). And so, and-- Speaker 1: That's the story, what is told a lot in these interviews, families get changed to-- Speaker 2: Ah. Speaker 1: --(unclear) to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --differentiate. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. But it serves us well because being an unusual spelling, it, it makes--it's a, it's easier to connect up with other descendants. And, and in fact, we've been doing that in recent years and with some, you know, interesting results and reunions and, and discoveries and all that, yeah. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is February 25th, 1942, Lincoln Hospital [Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center], South Bronx, New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Visual artist, sometimes a writer. I guess I could say semi-retired educator. My formal training is in language arts, literature, linguistics. But since I've been in Miami [Florida], which is now over forty years, I've--my primary occupation has been in visual art, graphic design, but that kind of morphs, and then, of course, this community activism, historic preservation, like historic--like the one time called (unclear) a few other places. So I'm--in other words, I, I, I wear a lot of hats. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: And well, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January 23rd, 2016 [sic. January 23, 2017]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at historic Virginia Key Beach Park in Miami, Florida. Story_ID: 637628 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up. The first one is--they only require a short answer. First one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Hm, do I? I'm sure I do if I think about it. I say yes, and I'll (laughter) I don't know what that is. Well, let's see, being in Miami [Florida], I've, I've become a conch lover in, in its various-- Speaker 1: C-O-N-C-H--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: --C-O-N-C-H, yes, the-- Speaker 1: That's a shell-- Speaker 2: Exactly-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the, the, the, the shell people put up to their ear. They hear the sea roar. It's a variety of sea snails, and they could sound less-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --appetizing to some people. But that's, and that's, well, very much part of this Bahamian heritage here in Miami. And I do like cooking, so yeah, you know, a number of various, you know, dishes I guess would kind of qualify. And maybe if I think about it more I'll--it'll come down to one single one that's the, the one. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I thought about that when I looked at--a blue-green. I'll put that down--I'll, I'll say that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Usually summer in general. For whatever reason, August has been when the biggest changes have occurred in my life. And the period between roughly Christmastime and my birthday time in, toward the end of February has often been the most productive time in terms of coming up with art and new ideas and so forth, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: We have I guess there, there too, no, no, no particular place, although we do like to travel and do, wherever we travel, try to get into the African heritage, the local history, that kind of thing; the Caribbean I think in general, because my roots are there. So, but to say that there's like a, a particular place that, you know, we'd love to go back there, we haven't really, you know, done that. Speaker 1: But wherever you go, it's to go-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --live in the culture. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Yeah, it's always--I mean, that's much--you know, the idea of vacations being this place, you just to there to be idle, that's, that's--I, no, I-- Speaker 1: I hear you, I hear you-- Speaker 2: --(laughter) I haven't been able to do that yet. Speaker 1: And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: That one is easy. There are a few. I would say the one that probably rises right to the top is that it is better to light a lamp than to curse the darkness, okay. That, I'm, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I'm not one for complaining. If you can't solve the problem, don't talk about it. Do some, do (laughter) something that you can-- Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: --solve, yeah. Story_ID: 637629 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Albert Tinnie] side. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Okay, her name was Johanna Leonie [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie], maiden name, Wittingham, J-O-H-A-N-N-A, L-E-O-N-I-E, Wittingham with only one h, W-I-T-T-I-N-G-H-A-M. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 2nd, 1909, at a place called Riverhead in Jamaica, in the West Indies. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? What was-- Speaker 2: Not-- Speaker 1: --the word about them? What were they doing? Speaker 2: Not, not, not very far, unfortunately. We--let me see. I'm not even sure if we know those--somewhere we--there's an, there's an Agnes [ph.] in there and a Thomas [ph.] in there somewhere. And her grandfather--one of the stories got passed down is that her grandfather was half Portuguese, whatever, you know. And her family was I, I guess you could say the Malcolm [ph.] clan. I think her mom--her, on her mom's side was, were the Malcolms, you know. But, yeah, we don't have much or any information to speak of, very little going beyond grandparents. You know, we just kind of know a little about them. Her grandmother had twelve children, so that was--and I think--so her mom I think was the oldest of the twelve. And with that many kids, the youngest was almost about her age, and so they were more like sisters than, you know, aunt and, and, and niece. Speaker 1: Now where is Riverhead and-- Speaker 2: Riverhead, I believe it's in Westmoreland [Westmoreland Parish, Jamaica]. Now, there, there's, there's a place in Jamaica near Ocho Rios [Jamaica] called Riverhead because Ocho Rios has eight rivers, and, and it's apparently this area where those rivers all start. But this would be--she, she grew up in Savanna-la-Mar [Jamaica]. So, and, and that's Westmoreland, what they call parish. And the family has land in Petersfield [Jamaica]. And believe or not, I actually ran into some people from Petersfield a couple of time. So that's as much as we know. The one time I got to go to Jamaica, we were not in that part of the island. So I haven't done that pilgrimage to go back and see if I can, you know, get to the old family homestead or anything like that. Story_ID: 637630 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] have a chance to go to school and, or--? Speaker 2: She did. She came here at age twelve, she and the aunt I mentioned, who is the, the youngest one. So they were like a couple of years apart in age. The story goes that, you know, her mom, my grandmother, left Jamaica, lived for five years in Cuba (unclear) that's one of those that I really would like to know more about, you know, learn to speak Spanish and everything--and then migrated to New York [New York]. And as a child my mom was always, you know, looking forward to this day when her, her mother was gonna come and get her and take her to the promise land, so to speak. And that day finally did come. And so, really her coming of age was more in New York than in Jamaica, although, you know, she had certainly her, her share of, of Jamaica stories too, you know, from her childhood. Speaker 1: Okay, so her--was it her mother or her grandmother who was in New York, or-- Speaker 2: Her mother. Speaker 1: Her mother, okay. Speaker 2: Her mother, right. Speaker 1: All right. All right, so she, she rejoined her mother in New York. Speaker 2: Right, her mom came-- Speaker 1: This would have been, yeah, what about 1921 or so? Speaker 2: Thereabouts, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were they, were they part of the Garvey movement at all? Are there-- Speaker 2: They-- Speaker 1: --any stories? Speaker 2: They were not, that, that I know of, except in a very oblique way. The ship that they traveled on from Jamaica to come here was the Santa Marta. Santa Marta was part of the United Fruit Company's great white fleet of what some people would call banana boats. The way they were set up was that they were freighters, but they had these nice--I mean people--passengers did travel, and, and, and the, you know, the, the amenities were evidently pretty, pretty good. The Santa Marta, when Marcus Garvey was deported, that was the ship that took him from United States to Guatemala. And then he, from Guatemala, he got another ship that took him back home to Jamaica. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: He, he worked--he was a--he worked for United Fruit Company at one time as a statistician or something-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Central America (laughter). Speaker 2: Right (laughter), yeah, yeah. So-- Speaker 1: But it's hard not to be around United Fruit-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I guess if you're in, in the Caribbean and Central America. Speaker 2: Right. And, and I, I think my mom was, she was one of those people who was, yeah, I think like, like a lot of people of, of her generation. Whether they joined things or not, they were very aware, you know. So, 'cause, 'cause this is the time when we had Marcus Garvey; we had Father Divine [Reverend Major Jealous Divine]; you had--and, and then she was right in Harlem [New York, New York]. So, you know, she was kind of right in the, the, the mix of seeing this and seeing the people, you know, Father Divine's disciples dressed in white and had names like Patience and Prudence and (laughter) and all that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's why I asked, 'cause 1920 is the heart of the Garvey movement--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: He's from Jamaica, and she's coming, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Now we, we, we didn't know folks--interestingly enough, here, here, Miami [Florida] was one of the real strongholds of, of, of the Garvey movement. And a lot of that was linked to the Bahamian heritage. As one of the elders explained it to me--'cause I did ask--the fact that the Bahamians, most of them were literate, so, I mean, 'cause, you know, the Garvey movement, as you know, was this remarkable--and what is this, like twenty countries and millions of members. And this is--and there's no radio, TV, Internet. I mean, this is--but as Garvey was, had come up in the printing tradition--profession I should say--you know, the word got out, the black world, or Negro World I guess was the name of the, the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] publication. And one lady--I'm flashing forward--as we were coming up in the Bronx [New York], she was actually Bahamian. And it took us awhile to kind of put two and two together and realize that she, she was a Garveyite and was--when Ghana became independent she made her move there. Story_ID: 637631 Speaker 1: And then I got to meet other people who were my generation whose parents, elders that they knew, were in the Garvey [Marcus Garvey] movement. And what, and what, what strikes me about all of those stories were that the people--nowadays, you know, folks belong to different organizations. You go to a meeting here and there and so forth, and it's almost like a, a social activity. The Garvey movement was--this, this was no playacting. This was--the people who were involved with that were seriously engaged in building global black independence. The Black Cross Nurses were about being real nurses. The, the, the Black Legion [sic. African Legion] were doing military training to be the defenders of the, you know, the nation. We haven't seen anything quite like that. I mean, there are the spinoffs, of course, from the Garvey movement, you know, Nation of Islam and you know, Moorish Science Temple [Moorish Science Temple of America], the Coptic church, all of those that have their variations. But as we kind of look back and even look at the parades and demonstrations, you just see that that Garvey movement had a, an animating spirit, 'cause you know, you had the anti-lynching movement and you know, that, the, that, to see the position, that, that placard, you know, the new negro has no fear, you know, and that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --this-- Speaker 2: I, I just, I'm just asking you-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --'cause your mother [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] comes in, and this is the heart of the Harlem--the so-called Harlem Renaissance. I don't know if it, it ever died. It had to be reborn really-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --'cause we were steadily building things. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But, yeah, Har- this is when Harlem [New York, New York] is jumping off-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --as the, as the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --primary focus-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --of the black world in a lot of-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 637632 Speaker 1: So she [Tinnie's mother, Johanna Wittingham Tinnie], of course she's a twelve-year-old, so she's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know. But you know, she attends Wadleigh High School [Wadleigh High School for Girls, New York, New York], which was this--I believe the history of the school was that it was, it was established as this--the school for young women that would--I, I think it was sort of accidental that it happened to be located in Harlem [New York, New York] and served the Harlem community. But it was clear just from, you know, hearing her stories, that while in, at that school she just made lifelong friendships. And it was a very--school for her was not drudgery at all. And she--and there again, it showed across the, the, the generation, because I think of--folks she grew up with, people in her age group, some finished high school; some did not. But these were women, some of them became godmothers of myself and siblings. And even into their elder years, I was--even though we were always struck with how savvy and how insightful these, these women were, I mean the, the political scene, they, they could--I mean they were seeing through the facades. They were able to just analyze, and, and, and, and, and you just realize that that was that, that was that generation that came up when high school diploma actually meant something because folks could--you could write complete sentences; you could do--and there was a respect for education, for teachers, for knowledge, for, for self, you know, that, I mean, every generation, you know--rhapsodizes about the good old days, when things were better, and how bad things have got. But, and I, I don't always buy into that. But that is one of those things that you, you do notice that--you know, we're not turn out those eloquent people who, who, you know, knew stuff. And we could--as kids, you know, those jungle movies and all like that, I mean, people just commented on it, oh yeah, that's, you know--so, we grew up know, knowing that that's not Africa. That's, you know, that's propaganda, that's this, that's that, it's--and, and here again, I'm just kind of rambling through another digression. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: As--go ahead. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: No, I just--did your mother, like, did, did she have her eye on a profession when she was in high school, I mean-- Speaker 1: You know, if she did, she never told us about that. But I think in a, in a kind of de facto way, both she and, and, and, and, and my dad [Albert Tinnie] were, you can almost say, say they were born to be in some form of hospitality, innkeepers or restaurateurs or something of that, of that nature because, well, you know, we saw that they had children fairly, you know, relatively late in life. And you know, the story was that, particularly in Harlem, if you weren't at their New Year's Eve party, you really weren't, you weren't stepping. I mean, yeah, oh yeah, there were others that might have been bigger and all that, but the real one that the real people are at, that was (laughter), you know. And-- Speaker 2: So they were--did they hosted a lot of social events and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah. That, that, that's, that, that, that's, you know, a lot of that happened before we came along but also after we came along, so we got to see that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay now, now-- Story_ID: 637633 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side, then I'll try to put them together and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --take them from there. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it? Speaker 2: Okay, now, his full name, Albert Theodore Tinnie [Albert Tinnie], A-L-B-E-R-T, T-H-E-O-D-O-R-E, T-I-N-N-I-E. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: And he was born August 29th, 1895. And he was born in a place called Fyrish, F-Y-R-I-S-H, in Guyana [Fyrish, British Guiana; Fyrish, Guyana]. That's the east side of Guyana, so that would be the area called Berbice [Guyana], B-E-R-B-I-C-E. Berbice was at one point historical. It was actually a, a separate colony from the rest of Guyana, and then they, they sort of merged. Speaker 1: Now Guyana is, is just above Venezuela, and, and it's an island--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Just east of-- Speaker 1: Just east. Speaker 2: --east of Venezuela, west of Suriname, yeah, British Guiana, Dutch Guiana, French Guiana-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and north of Brazil. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so, once again, like, what are the stories from that side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: There again, we can go back to his grandfather--that'll be my great-grandfather--who was only known as Captain Tinnie. Now, was, was that army captain or navy captain or ship captain, we don't know. Speaker 1: But was he-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --a real captain, I mean of something? Speaker 2: He, he, he was captain of something. Well, he, well, he was known that--we knew that--all we know is he was Captain Tinnie. His-- Speaker 1: Now was he a black man? Was he a black man? Speaker 2: We don't even know that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Somewhere along the line, the situation in, in, in, in the colonies were, was such that British political and military officers would go there, spend six months, have six months paid vacation when they return to, to England. And while during the six months that they're in the colonies, well, there are no English women there, so they take up with the local women and buy whatever arrangements, you know. I've heard the word concubine bandied about and so forth. It sounds like something at least a little less uncivilized than just this rude rape and so forth that we associate with the experience here. So one of Captain Tinnie's sons was the, what, what we, the one we kind of look at it as the grand patriarch, Manicini [ph.], who was, his name was Almanus Alexander [ph.] Tinnie [Almanus Tinnie], A-L-M-A-N-U-S, middle name Alexander, and Tinnie. It was at his birth that the name that spelled it--change of the spelling of the name took place. And consequently when he--since he is the first with that spelling, that becomes our kind of networking mechanism to track down who all are our, our, our descendants. Story_ID: 637634 Speaker 1: He, Manicini [Almanus Tinnie] was--but from what we can gather as we, in recent years, started putting together the family tree, yeah, he was I guess something of a man's man and a woman's man 'cause he had, he had kids over here and over here, and okay (laughter). He was an, what was called an engineer, which was I--what, I think what that actually would have meant was something more like what we'd, today we'd call a mechanic on the sugar, in the sugar industry and apparently was very good at it, so he was in demand. He was the troubleshooter, the guy they called, and he traveled like all over Guiana [British Guiana; Guyana], you know, doing that. And the woman he married, my grandmother on my father's [Albert Tinnie] side--her name was Katherine Waddy [Katherine Waddy Tinnie (ph.)], Katherine with a K, W-A-D-D--W-A-D-D-Y. And she we are told was an excellent, outstanding seamstress. That was her--and I should know this. There were four children, my father and three sisters. Right, I think I got that right. And my father was the oldest. And he basically grew up as--nearly everybody in the Caribbean is, is--Eric Williams has this whole thing about--to understand the West Indies, it's one word, sugar. I mean, this just (laughter) you know, kind of ruled everything and everybody. And my father kind of came up in that trade. So, my father was seventeen years old when his father passed, so he now became the man of the family, if you will. But through an, a family friend--this is right around the time that the British built this brand new state of the art sugar refinery on the island of St. Kitts. And this family friend was able to work it out where my father could go there. As we put the pieces together, he was like one of these whiz kids. And, you know, you know, you hear about these kids who go to start college at age fifteen and all like that. Well, he, at a relatively young age, when he got to St. Kitts--I mean his peers were guys in their thirties, and these were veterans who really, you know, knew this, but by my time my father just knew, he knew every aspect of sugar production, from putting the stock in the ground or putting the crystals in the bag (laughter) that--and so he rose real quickly in the, you know, in that, in that profession. And you know, St. Kitts was kind of where he came of age. That's where his first daughter would be born. And that's one of those Caribbean stories that, well, did he know before he left that he--that this lady had his child (laughter), whatever? But that daughter we, we, in later life, we were able to reunite with her, and, and you know, it was, loved her dearly and all that. (Laughter) So that turned out to be just a gift to the family. Story_ID: 637635 Speaker 1: So your father [Albert Tinnie], like, he comes to the U.S. He leaves a daughter behind he didn't ne- he didn't necessarily know he had one, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. That one we don't, yeah, we don't know what-- Speaker 1: And so, so-- Speaker 2: --the story was there. Speaker 1: --why did he come to the U.S.? 'Cause he, he was, he's working in the sugar business. He seemed to be-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a valuable employee. Speaker 2: And he had the American dream like everybody else in the, es- especially Guiana [British Guiana; Guyana]. I mean, the whole idea of there and so many islands was this is not where we belong, you know, the, the, the whole idea is to get to the United States. He figured with is expertise--he had done his research. He knew about Jack Frost sugar in New York and of course, all of--you know how sugar is a fungible commodity. I mean, it's like, you know, these brands don't mean much, but--so Jack Frost, Domino [Domino Sugar], all of those were that same American Sugar Company [American Sugar Refining Company, New York, New York]. And he, he decided that, that he, he would, you know, take his skills there and, and, and make his way. He got a reference letter from his supervisor in St. Kitts. Supervisor said you know, you know, "I hate to lose you. What I'm gonna do, I'm gonna keep your contract open for a year. So if you change your mind, you know, you, you'll, you'll, you'll still have your job here." Speaker 1: What, what year is this when he comes to New York [New York]? Speaker 2: This is, I believe it's 1923. I'm almost sure it's 1923. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] had been here a couple of years before (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly. So she, she, right, she would have been here, yeah, it's just a couple of years, you know, but whole different experience. I mean, she's younger. She's, you know-- Story_ID: 637636 Speaker 1: So does he [Tinnie's father, Albert Tinnie] work for Jack Frost sugar? Speaker 2: Well, that, that, that's, that becomes this, this, this legend in the family, where he goes there. He asked to see, you know, a foreman. You know, he's well-dressed. Foreman comes out. He looks around. You know, he was told that, that somebody was here to see him, you know. Sees my father and he says, "Well what do you want?" "Are you Mr. So and So?" "Well, yeah, you know, what's that to you? What do you want?" "Well, you know, I'm, I'm a sugar boiler." "You, a sugar boiler, what are you talking about?" He says, "Well, you know, I--here, I have a letter of, you know." And the guy kind of skims through the letter, and then when he gets to the end he sees that it's signed by Eugene Misteier [ph.]. Well, his whole demeanor--, "Oh, my God Misteier, you know Misteier. He and I, we were in school together in Louisiana, do-do-do-do. How's he doing?" And so the whole thing changes now to what looks kind of hopeful. And so the guy says to him, "Look, there's no job for you as any sugar boiler here. You can't--you know, the only jobs you can do here is you can be a porter--," my father didn't even know what that was--, "or, or run elevators. Okay, if I were you, my advice would be, you know, go back and get your old job and you know." And my father said, "Ah, that's why the guy said he was gonna keep the contract open. He knew, you know." But he said, "Look, I, I made the commitment, and you know, people helped me get here, you know. I'll make it here." So he-- Speaker 1: He didn't anticipate racism in the U.S. being-- Speaker 2: No, no. I mean, that, that was a total--I mean, you talk about this, you know, I call it, you know, your, your, your dream just shipwrecked on the sharp rocks of racism, you know. And so he tried the porter thing. He didn't know. You know, this is, okay, this is cleaning up buildings at night. And you know, they gave him a mop and bucket, and he's like, this is--he never, this is stuff he'd never seen in his life. Kind of looked across the street and saw this woman working and kind of looked at what she was doing. And he said ah, okay, he just left and walked off the job. Story_ID: 637637 Speaker 1: So fortunately, he [Tinnie's father, Albert Tinnie] was able to get a job running elevators, which was the other option. And that proved to work out very well for him. He ended up working at this--those who are old enough to remember the Nash car--Warren-Nash dealership [Warren-Nash Motor Corporation]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in downtown New York [New York]. And-- Speaker 2: American Motors [American Motors Corporation] they had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Speaker 2: --Nash [Nash-Kelvinator Corporation] and Rambler. Speaker 1: Right, and, and, and, right with Nash and Hudson [Hudson Motor Car Company] merged. And, and he, he--you know, because he was always, you know, carried himself well and you know, polite and dignified way, I mean, he, you know, got the basic respect. And then an incident happened where--you know, in those days you got a pay envelope at the end of the week--the guy delivering the payroll dropped and lost the bag with all the cash. And I mean, it was a huge crisis, you know. My father found the bag and was able to take it up to the head office and say, you know, "I know this guy must be, you know, he can't sleep, but here's the bag that you know, this was here, you know. Hopefully everything's in it." And it was. So that was Friday, a Friday. And when he came to work on Monday, the ritual was that you started at the elevator, you took it up to the top floor; and you know, you just check. And when you open the door at the top floor, facing the elevator was this sign they put on the wall that spelled out, you know, thank you, you know, a T for this, H was this, A, you know, each thing. And that was as much as they--'cause you know, he's colored. You don't get into all these things, and it was as, as much as they could do as a formal recognition of appreciation. Story_ID: 637638 Speaker 1: And then, you know, his--he, he, he had a charmed existence in some ways. His next job was at J.C. Penney [J.C. Penney Company], you know, at the main store. James Cash Penney, himself, he, he knew him (laughter), you know. And he was running elevators there, helped my, my aunt's, the same baby sister aunt that was around my mother's [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] age her husband, he helped him get, got, get a job at J.C. Penney, good job as a receptionist, 'cause you were the one who kind of screened all the people, and you know, so people did favors for you and all. And when it was time--this would have been like in the '40s [1940s]--my father [Albert Tinnie] then decided to take the postal exam, and you know, passed it. And Mr. Penney just was saying, "Look, I can, I can give you a raise. I mean, like, you know, I really don't want to lose you." And you know, he and my mom talked about, yeah, but it's good, but government work is steady. It's gonna be--you know, so from there he went to the post office. And in the post office he was at the Lennox Hill Station [United States Post Office Lenox Hill Station, New York, New York]. That's, I guess they call that the Silk Stocking District in that, that area, Upper East Side [New York]. And he, although he was a clerk, he would periodically do, like, special deliveries. So some of these special deliveries he would get to meet David Sarnoff, the RCA [Radio Corporation of America; RCA Corporation] guy. (Laughter) One time he had to go-- Speaker 2: Oh, he did have a charmed-- Speaker 1: Oh, well, listen, so he had, he had a, a letter for J. Paul Getty. And he went to the door, and the lady says, "Oh, you walked--how did you miss him? You must have just--there's no way you couldn't have seen him." And he said well, yeah, he saw this guy at the bottom of the stairs as he went in. But the guy looked like, like somebody who was, you know, like mentally deranged. You know, he was just looking around looking very paranoid. And he said, "Oh, that was J. Paul Getty (laughter), you know?" So, yeah, so those, those, those were some of the, the, you know, you know, the family stories from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Sarnoff and-- Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: --Getty are two of the richest men in the U.S. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: Sarnoff of NBC-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --and RCA (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --Getty of Getty Oil-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, just-- Speaker 1: Right. And how, how I knew that was I was riding with him. We were right by Rockefeller Center [New York, New York]. And at the red light the limo pulls up. And father looks over: "Oh, yeah, yeah, that's Sarnoff." "Oh, that's Sarnoff? You know, what, you guys are tight. You know, you know, Sarnoff on the street. You guys hang out, you know." But, and so, oh, yeah, well, you know, we just--met him a few times. Story_ID: 637639 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he [Tinnie's father, Albert Tinnie] ever have a problem with his, his naturalization or anything? You know, all the talk today, as President Trump [President Donald John Trump] ascends to office, is about what he's gonna do with immigrants and that sort of thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Was there a problem with it? Speaker 2: As far as I know, neither parent--I think my mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie], it took her awhile. I think it was almost in the 1940s that she actually form- formally got citizenship. But I think both of them, like, when it was, when it was time, 'cause they were that kind that, you know, they would study the test, go take the test, and, and, and you pass it. You know, why, why would you not study? Why would you not pass? You know, that was their kind of attitude. And so they were--and, and of course, you know, their experience, I mean, was like, like a lot of immigrants, and certain West Indian immigrants, they, they, they--you know how immigrants come with what the, the Catholics call it, the, the fervor of the convert. You know, you, you, you, you know, you believe in this place that you've come to. You, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're really here to make this, make it your home, make it work, work for it, and, and you know, which was not always the common attitude with everybody certainly it wasn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah that-- Speaker 2: --those born here, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, that delineates the difference between peop- black folks from the Caribbeans, those from southern United States that immigrate to New York [New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: I mean that I've heard debates about this at conferences-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --and all kind, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --the common-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And, and, and it, it was, you know, it went both ways. You had this animosity on the one hand, and then this absolute solidarity on the other, and it was just simultaneous, you know. Story_ID: 637640 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. That's one of those, those, those family legends. I call it timing is everything. There were a few Caribbean immigrants at the time, so, and you know, like everybody else that formed, you know, communities and so forth. There was this one couple older than most who were kind of benefactors, if you will. They, they helped look out for people and so forth, George [George Cox (ph.)] and Florence Cox [ph.]. And I remember going to their apartment in Harlem [New York, New York] a couple of times. And you know, we'd always be fascinated going to these people's houses, 'cause you know, you have to put your, your, your clothes in the bedroom, and you got to see. And, and it always struck me that these had the, you know, Old Spice. You know, and that would be on their, the (laughter), their dressers and--well, it turns out that in their way of being sort of social directors and the like, they'd have kind of just to bring people together. So they tell my father they're having a party on this Friday night, and he should come 'cause there is somebody that's gonna be there that, that he thinks--they think that he should meet. And so, dutifully and full of expectation he goes. Now, the person that they want him to meet is my Aunt Rose [Rose Wittingham]. That's that baby sister who was around the same age as my mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie], came on the same boat. And okay, and you know, Rose being the kind of person she is, "Well, if I'm invited to this party, let me take my young cousin there too." And so the way the story goes, my father gets to the party. The way some of those apartments were set up, as you came in, the first room you'd come by is the kitchen, and you know, how that work 'cause of the plumbing of the--when you build the building, if you have plumbing down the hallway, then, you know, all that. So, as he walks in, he sees some friends of his in the kitchen. They call him. He goes in. He greets them. They hand him a drink and so forth. And not too long after, Mr. Cox, the host, comes, "Oh, Albert [Albert Tinnie], you're here. Ah, let me introduce you. There's someone, you know." So they're exiting the kitchen into the hallway to go to the living room where my aunt is. But by some fluke of circumstance, her niece, my mom, is in the hallway. And as they're walking by, my father says, "Oh, that's okay, George, I think I met who I came to see." And that's how (laughter), that was how that happened. I--he knew, and from there it's all history, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 637641 Speaker 1: Now, when you consider your par- your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their political views, how they walk, talk, what they look like, I mean, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: There is a real mix, probably more of my mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie], but I guess it depends on what pieces we're talking about. They, both of them--I mean, we, we, we absolutely grew up with this tradition of activism. I mean if something needs to be done, we, we--you, you, you do it. The streetlight is burned out, and they're not fixing it, well, find out who to call and get it fixed. You don't just live with problems and you know, oh, that's theirs. No, it's, it, it, it's that, that--and, and both of them really were I think kind of made for each other when it came to that. They were very active in the Jackson Democratic Club in, in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] but always behind the scenes. They, they, they did not go for, like, you could know, you know, you could be a committeeman and you know, all this kind of patronage and favoritism. They didn't accept any of that. They, they were there, and you know, in some cases they had a hand in being kingmakers and, and some--you know, they were advisors. And so they had had that, you know, that in common. Because they were--let's see now, when I was born my father [Albert Tinnie] would have been forty-seven, my mom thirty--what--okay what was it--okay thirty-three or thereabouts, 'cause they, yeah, they were about fifteen years apart. So we didn't really get to see them as young people, you know. We, we kind of knew them, you know, grew up with them in their more-- Speaker 1: Especially your father, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Many people have a mother that's in their thirties, but-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but you had-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a father that's in his--almost fifty when he had you. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah. So, in fact, when my baby sister [Dana Tinnie Walcott] was born he was fifty-five, so you know, this is like really (laughter), you know. And but, let me see, in terms of--you know, I, I don't know if I ever really--you know how a lot of times even like when, when we get to be the age of our parents we start kind of recognizing them more like okay, yeah, yeah, they were just regular folk like us. Somehow or another I never quite got there. It was like they always were like parents. They were like these, these, just they just--I mean, to some extent, yeah, I, I can--you know, my--yeah, I can dig what you were (laughter) going through kind of thing. But the, the--they had the pioneering spirit kind of, you know, that, that, that, that sort of thing-- Story_ID: 637642 Speaker 1: We, that's how we ended up kind of doing this--what was the group? War had a song called 'City Country City,' where we kind of--that was us. When what people called the plague hit, the Bronx [New York] in the around the mid-'50s [1950s], the heroin epidemic, and it was, I mean, absolutely just a, a--you could not be indifferent, because what happened was in very short order the whole neighborhood went from, you could be playing in the street at the sa- in the summertime. People had their front doors open. You know, you went in the neighbor's house to get a drink of what (laughter) and run out then to needing to have four and five locks on your doors because--and family members would steal from--I mean, just this whole--and that was when you had the mass exodus. So you had one contingent went north to Mount Vernon [New York], you know. You know, Diddy [Sean Combs; P. Diddy] and Denzel [Denzel Washington] and all that, they're part of that, that--some went kind of into the other parts of Westchester [Westchester County, New York], Connecticut. We went east to Long Island [New York]. And-- Speaker 2: How old, how old were you then? Speaker 1: That would have--I would have been about twelve, eleven, twelve when we, when, when my folks [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie and Albert Tinnie] went out there and, and bought land. And, and they were really kind of the trailblazers, because they subsequently told friends, neighbors, and, and, and, and then so others, you know, there ended up being a whole Bronx contingent that, that, that-- Speaker 2: So, so what, what-- Speaker 1: --started with that. Speaker 2: --part of Long Island did you move to? Speaker 1: The place was called Middle Island [New York], is called Middle Island. It's, it's the geographic middle of the island, Suffolk County [New York], sixty miles out from New York [New York]. In those days, only sixty miles from New York you could find wooded land on an unpaved road, no electricity, no water. You had to drill a well and hand pump your water out the ground. Well, for us, I mean, it's--we were kind of right at that age, especially my older brother [Roy Tinnie] and I. He was like a year older than I. The other siblings were like four, six, and eight years younger. Story_ID: 637643 Speaker 1: Since we're on it-- can you name them from the oldest to the youngest (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Siblings, oldest-- Speaker 1: --and give us where you are in the lineup? Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, oldest-- Speaker 1: Tell, tell us a little bit about them too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oldest was Roy [Roy Tinnie]. He was born January of '41 [1941], so he was like thirteen months ahead of me. He--and he, he's the only one of us that's now deceased of the siblings. But most of his life he worked in the, at the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] as a male nurse, as you say, absolute--he, he never got to kind of fulfill his kind of dream he had of--I mean, we were all car guys, you know. But he was--I mean, he knew like auto mechanics and how just, you know. I mean, I could have a car with a problem that no mechanic could fix. And I could call him up and say this car is doing this, and he said oh, yeah, you know that is (laughter), you know, and problem solved. He was like, he was a, from, from what I could gather, even from his peers, he was kind of a wise man, you know, 'cause he could give people advice about parenting and all kinds of, you know--yet, you know, very quiet, not, you know--all of us--that too was part of the Caribbean experience. There were things that, that the children of Caribbean parents all had in common, and one of them was that you were supposed to be, you know, comport yourself in a reserved way. You don't be loud, don't call attention to yourself, don't (laughter), you know, because you are in a hostile environment, and don't, don't, you know. And, and so that's what he did. And he married a lady from Kansas City who had a son, and then they had a daughter [Lauren Tinnie Gray]. Then there's me, then, well, my baby brother, younger brother, Glenn [Glenn Tinnie], Glenn with two ns, he was born in '46 [1946]. And he, he used to like the computers from the old 'Bonanza' TV show was on. He, he just thought that, that us three brothers should--that, you know. My brother Roy was Hoss [Eric "Hoss" Cartwright]. I was Adam [Adam Cartwright], and he was Little Joe [Joseph "Little Joe" Cartwright] (laughter), you know. And there was some viddle--validity to that, the way our personalities went. And he--we tease him a lot because he, he, he ended up working in this sort of, these kind of corporate personnel kind of jobs where, you know, this corporate speak (laughter) kind of things. And, but at the same time, especially in later years, he's really kind of gotten more and more serious with his photography, and so he's showing his work. And his wife has kind of gotten the photography bug, so they've done, you know, shows together and so forth. And they have one daughter. Story_ID: 637644 Speaker 1: And then after that came the two girls, Jo-Ann [Jo-Ann Tinnie Mitchell], J-O, hyphen A-N-N. She was born in '48 [1948] and very creative, very spiritual, kindly. She, she would have, you know, psychic experiences and all that kind of, you know, thing. And she was I think the first of us to actually return to the Caribbean. She had, had--after she got out of high school and all, you know, did some works, went to the Virgin Islands. And she took it, it took to her, met her husband there, and, and they had a daughter. And then the youngest, Dana [Dana Tinnie Walcott], she was born in 1950. And I guess she's the one that's been the closest to the mainstream of all of us, you know. And so she ended up having five kids and really kind of being a lot like my mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] was, you know, with the, the hospitality and all that. And now both of those sisters are very active in their church. And the church they're active in is really, it's, it's in that same town of Middle Island, Long Island [New York], one of those really interesting churches where it's not--it's such a community where, I mean, that it--the way the, all the people in the congregation just help each other out. They share their skills there. And you know, all that, you know, the showbiz kind of thing that we get to associate with churches nowadays, at least some churches, this is like totally absent. So both of them actually work for the church. You know, my sister does a lot of the clerical stuff, the older one and the younger one, and runs the daycare center. So, so I'm the only one who left Long Island, and so, you know-- Speaker 2: What denomination is the church? What's the name of it? Speaker 1: It's called, it's called--it, it was, it used to be called Middle Island Christian Fellowship [Middle Island, New York]. Now it's called City on a Hill [City on a Hill Community Church, Middle Island, New York]. If--I could not actually say what specific denomination it is. It's almost--it looks to me to be, for what little I know, like in that uni- Unitarian mode, where, you know, you just come (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like a nondenominational kind of-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that kind of thing. Story_ID: 637645 Speaker 1: You had to be close to 7'0" tall. I don't know if you are but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Close. I think when I had hair on my head, I might have been 7'0", you know. But (laughter), I'm, I'm, I'm-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what's Bing-- Speaker 2: 6'10". Speaker 1: --told me. I, I know you're tall. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I, I, I've-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --seen you over the years at concerts. I didn't know who you were. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: That's a, that's a tall brother, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But is, is your family tall in general, or you're only one? Speaker 2: In general, yeah. My parents were not extraordinarily tall, but you know, I think my father [Albert Tinnie] was like 6'0", my mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] like 5'9", which for a woman is taller than average. But apparently, there was a history of tall people on both sides. So my older brother [Roy Tinnie] 6'7". I'm 6'10". My younger brother [Glenn Tinnie] is 6'5". The older of the two sisters [Jo-Ann Tinnie Mitchell] is around 6'0", and then the younger one [Dana Tinnie Walcott] is closer to average, like 5'8", you know. So, yeah, height, height is in the family. And then and some of the--our cousins were--didn't have our height, but you know, you could see that, that, that was--it's, it's in the, the, the tree there. Story_ID: 637646 Speaker 1: You were raised in the Bronx [New York] in, in the beginning, right-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --before you moved out [to Long Island, New York]. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I was looking at that on the questionnaire. I thought about this. I think the earliest memory I have, and, and it, and it still just a, not, not a memory of any incident. But I can remember in the house in the Bronx, in one of the rooms, the, the bedrooms, there was, there were two cribs, and I guess I was sleeping in one and my brother in the other one. One was a little more like a baby crib, and the other was kind of like maybe an older baby kind of crib. And somehow, just that remembering that scene and that, you know, my brother and I were wearing these shorts or something like that. And I think it, when I was much younger and maybe even in high school [Bishop Dubois High School, New York, New York], I remember trying to remember what is the earliest thing I could possibly remember, and I think that's about it (laughter), you know. So it's just like a scene. You know, specific incidents, you know, not, not, not so much. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: And that scene goes back I would say I, I might have been two or three. I do--well, now that we're talking about it, I'm just remembering, I think I do remember my, one of my first birthday cards, four years old. And it came from my godparents, you know. Story_ID: 637647 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did your neighborhood have a, a name? Speaker 2: Not, not, not officially. I should say not, not a name that we used, but technically it would be the Morrisania section of the Bronx [New York]. And within Morrisania, I guess there was an area called Foxhurst [Bronx, New York], which kind of maybe bordered where we are. New Yorkers would know them, saying if I, when I say Freeman Street, if they know the number 2 subway line, then, 'cause I, I that's where we grew up, was right on, right on Freeman Street, between Prospect at (clears throat) excuse me between Prospect Avenue and Chisholm Street. We would learn years later, in fact, in some cases just recently, we had, okay, Milt Hinton, the bass, bassist, the dean of jazz bassist. He lived like two blocks away. Oh, when Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] came, he was living about a block away, but that was after we moved out to Long Island [New York]. The family we know right around the corner, Thelonious Monk used to come on that street regularly and walk on our street regularly. I'm sure I've seen him may--numerous times without having a clue. Speaker 1: Yeah, there are stories about him just walking around the neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --sitting in the parks and that-- Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: --sort of thing. Speaker 2: Well, Maxine Sullivan lived like not even two blocks away. So it was, well, what it was, and my brother, my older brother [Roy Glenn], he, he really liked doing research on the Bronx, and, and you know, he was into, you know, studying the trolley cars and all that. And I think one of the books he found was called 'The Beautiful Bronx' ['The Beautiful Bronx: 1920-1950,' Lloyd Ultan]. And it gives you this picture of the Bronx, particularly the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], in the post-war years as being this, this was the place where you could raise your, your kids and your--and our neighborhood, our block had, I mean, it was like everybody. It was, you had West Indians; you had African Americans from the South; you had white people from the South; you had Italian; you had Irish; you had Jewish. Who am I leaving out? I think that was, you know, the people across the street were West Ind- oh, Puerto Ricans. Yeah (unclear) saying (laughter) I'm leaving out somebody. And you know, you know, when you think about these things so later, but that, I think that was part of our formation was coming in a, in a place that that was that diverse without even thinking about the fact that it was diverse. You just played with the kids who were there. Speaker 1: So the kids played with different groups and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. You, you--I mean, and like the idea that, like the, the little--like the two white families on the block, you know, they had, like, kids our age. We didn't (laughter), wouldn't even have thought that there was any kind of difference I mean. We showed them stuff; they showed us stuff; we, you know--and, and one of the families, it turns up was from, from the South, from I think Memphis [Tennessee] or someplace. And my, my mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] was talking to the, the wife, you know, the mother of the kid we were, we knew. And these two kids were messing around on the street, and you know. And the woman says to my mom, "Oh, you know, I hate to see a colored child hit a white child like that, you know." And (laughter) well, kind of like, you know, surprised; I think more surprised that the lady thought that it was okay to say something like that at all, you know. But the thing was, that aspect of this kid's upbringing was like alien to us, you know. As I think back on it, even other neighborhoods in and around that part of the Bronx, I don't know if there was any one block that had that kind of experience that, you know, that we had, that we considered to be perfectly normal, you know. Story_ID: 637648 Speaker 1: I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now were you close to Yankee Stadium [New York, New York]? Speaker 1: Not close-close but on the--when I was going to high school [Bishop Dubois High School, New York, New York], I had rode past Yankee Stadium every day, yeah. And we, I think we went to a couple of Yankee [New York Yankees] games. I was the only Yankee fan of the family. I mean, everybody was a Dodgers' [Brooklyn Dodgers] fan. My older brother was a Dodger fan. Speaker 2: That-- Speaker 1: I couldn't be the same as him, I mean, you know. Speaker 2: That's because of-- Speaker 1: Ah (laughter), no. The only reason was, like I said, "You know, Roy [Roy Tinnie], you're a Dodger fan. Well, you got your team; I gotta have mine." We, we're not, you know (laughter)-- Speaker 2: You don't know what I'm getting--I'm getting at Jackie Robinson, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, Jackie, right. Speaker 2: That's why you would be a Dodger fan if you were black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. And the Yankees were this lily white team. And people would say, "You a Yankee?" "What's, what's wrong you?" You--I'd say, hey, you know. So I had one cousin, he and I, we had that in common. But it was like we're Yankee fans 'cause we're, you know, like, you know, we, we, like we claimed--you know, my, my older brother, he, he--the Empire State Building [New York, New York] was his, so the Chrysler Building [New York, New York] was mine, you know (laughter), those kind of things that kids do, yeah. And yeah, so, but my, my route, bus route to high school took me past Yankee Stadium and the old Polo Grounds [Polo Grounds, New York, New York], the Yankee Stadium and the Giants stadium. Speaker 2: But you had a block that everybody was, everybody got along-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. It was--yeah. And like I say, we, we, we didn't even know or think it was unusual, you know. My mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] was active in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association]. She was the treasurer. The president was a Jewish lady. The secretary was an African American lady. The vice president might have been another Jewish lady. But, you know, with all these--I mean, these are the kids we created comic books with. You know, you went in and out of-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, so, you know, you know, just being in and out of people's houses. So, yeah, so that, that was, that was kind of--I said we, we thought nothing of it at the time. It'd be like years later, like even as we're talking about it now that it's kind of hitting me that, hm, that was, that was different (laughter). Story_ID: 637649 Speaker 1: Now where did you start school? What, what, what was your first school? Did, did you go to kindergarten? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: P.S. 54 [Bronx, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And now, now speaking of that, that neighborhood and the, the blocks around it where the musicians were, that was the same neighborhood where some people say hip hop was born. That was, that, that whole thing of Afrika Bambaataa and the turntables, it was right there in that same--some of those kids went to P.S. 54, you know. And then-- Speaker 1: In those days, there was no--in, in 1940, you, you would have started school in what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the '40s [1940s], yeah, in the '40s [1940s], forty-- Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946] or '47 [1947]? Speaker 2: I was--yeah, right '46 [1946]-- Speaker 1: Four--forty-seven [1947], yeah, four-- Speaker 2: --forty-six [1946], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah you would've been five in-- Speaker 2: I was like four and a half. Speaker 1: --forty-seven [1947]. Speaker 2: I was four and a half when I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --started kindergarten. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So either '46 [1946] or '47 [1947]-- Speaker 2: So, yes-- Speaker 1: So, P.S. 54-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and--okay. Speaker 2: And then, and then interestingly enough, when I, as I was coming out of sixth grade, a friend of my mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie]--these things that happen in life. This is an old, old friend of my mom who, they knew each other before either of them had met their husbands. They had their reunion. And this lady took us. You know, we wanna go to--you know. Oh yeah, I'm gonna take you to the stations. The stations? What's that? Well, we'll, we'll find out. And it turned out that it was the Stations of the Cross at the Catholic church. She was Catholic. And somehow or another that segued into us taking religious instructions and converting to Catholicism (laughter) and as a family (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you--was your mother Catholic as a kid? Was she-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I mean, so we, we all kind of converted as a, as a result of Ms. B [ph.] introducing to us to that. I, I, I suspect my parents might have thought that that was a, would be a good thing for us 'cause we were getting at that age when, you know, we, we, we--likely get to be rambunctious and (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Oh, this is when you're in the sixth grade? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, um-hm. Speaker 1: 'Cause you're about eleven then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were you still at P.S. 54? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and then, of course, you know, the kids, you could get off early from school on whatever day of the week that was they follow religious instructions. So that was kind of cool too, you know, like and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I know I've it heard another interviews. In fact, we, we interviewed DMC [HistoryMaker Darryl "DMC" McDaniels] of Run-D.M.C., Darryl McDaniels. He, he was talking about it. He mentioned it, and another sister mentioned the Knights of St. Peter Claver [Knights of Peter Claver], St. Peter Claver society (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, right. Speaker 1: --St. Peter Claver being the patron saint of slaves and the head of this black Caribbean and South American connection-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was that-- Speaker 2: No, we didn't, we didn't have that at all. At the, the church we were at was St. Anthony of Padua [Bronx, New York] on, on Prospect Avenue. Yeah, that's something like you hear like New Orleans [Louisiana] and those places where I mean you really have a black Catholic constituency or even, even here. Like the, the, the two Catholic churches I know have St. Peter, Peter Claver and--but we did learn about, you know, St. Martin de Porres, who was, you know--certainly the black Latin Catholics all know well. Story_ID: 637650 Speaker 1: We went to a summer day camp that the Catholic school had in this--well, I liked it enough to say well, I, I think I'd like to go to this school. The, the regular junior high school was, it was okay, I mean, and you know, and you had all these--you can't say it had the best reputation, but it wasn't, you know, anything to be scared of, you know. But at--I was, I was, I was I think just, by that time, mindful of wanting to know more about what this Catholic thing had to off- offer and what the school had to offer. And my parents [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie and Albert Tinnie], to their eternal credit, found a way to come on up and, you know, pay the tuition. And then as a result of establishing that the younger siblings, when they came along, they started at the Catholic school as well. But then they only did, like, a few years because then we moved out to Long Island [New York] and yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so you went Catholic school from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventh and, seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 2: Seventh and eighth, okay-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to St., St. Anthony [St. Anthony's School, Bronx, New York]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then I went to Catholic high school for three years. That was Bishop Dubois High School right in Harlem [New York, New York], right in--well, not--wa, Washington Heights [New York, New York], that north of Harlem. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Bishop Dubois [John Dubois], as in, as in Du Bois? Speaker 1: Yes, exactly. Speaker 2: As we say [pronunciation] Dubois but it's Dubois-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Dubois, okay. Speaker 1: Dubois with a small B, one word. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the first [sic.], I think the first Catholic bishop of New York or something, that's how. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, now, now what were you like growing up? Speaker 1: Nerdy (laughter). I, I wasn't one of those, you know, fast street kids and you know, doing a whole lot like that. Speaker 2: Now were you always the tallest person at Claver [sic.]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I would imagine. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, right, always. Speaker 2: There was no place to hide, 'cause you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, no, no, no. And, and then, of course, yeah, I had that whole issue of, you know, some of the older kids thinking I was older like. So I'm, I'm in first grade, and you know, this guy wants to get into a whole thing. Like, you, you want to beat me up for what? (Laughter) I, I don't even know you. What's going on? You know, you know, few little strange experiences like that-- Speaker 2: So people actually thought that you were an older kid in a, in a younger class because something was wrong with you or something? Speaker 1: Well, no, just seeing that I was taller, they just thought I was, I was, you know--I mean like, you know, the, the, the, the, the, the bully, 'cause he don't know--he just sees me. He doesn't know that I'm--what grade (laughter) I'm in, you know. But that was--and, and you know, there, there are those things when you get these moments of, you know, social justice where, you know, this kid, you know, he's, he wants to dog me out and you know. And then I remember one day there was hailstorms. And I mean, this kid was, I mean (unclear) like he's just, just, just suffering with the hail. And you know, I just kind of just walked by, hm, hm, like oh, guy, you know, like that hurts you, huh, you know (laughter). And I had no, no more (laughter) problems with him, you know, you know, just kind of how outside forces can kind of (laughter) intervene in your life and change things around, you know. Story_ID: 637651 Speaker 1: Yeah, school was--you know, I'd be active in, you know, some of the activities. Art, of course, the drawing was my, my, my, my love, and that's what-- Speaker 2: So you always would, would draw (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, I mean, and yeah, yeah. I mean, it was just a matter of time before (laughter), you know, I, I, I, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What were you interested in drawing when you, you-- Speaker 1: We drew, well, cars of course. That was our, you know--designing our own and all that, I mean, that was--and there was a, a, a TV show, once we got TV, on Sunday mornings. John Gnagy was--where he would do like these landscape scenes, and you know, he did the step-by-step. And I mean, we would just, you know, rush home to see that and you know, produce those things. And then, you know, I'd, I'd be the, you know, the class artist, you know, where Thanksgiving is coming, so you gotta draw--need a picture of pilgrim and the Mayflower and all that, you know, the Viking ship. And I think one time I had to do an army truck delivering care packages, you know, just, just, just and, but then I was, you know, interested, interested in a lot of things. But like, geography, science, all that kind of stuff was just fascinating. And you know, I'd find other kids who'd kind of share the interest and-- Speaker 2: And did you have a chance to visit museums and that sort of thing and see artworks-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --artifacts and-- Speaker 1: Well, the, the museum we knew, got to know the best, was--hit it right there--American, American Museum of Natural History [New York, New York], the, you know, because we had numerous school field trips, plus the couple of times my dad [Albert Tinnie] took us there. You know, I think the most famous artifact in there was this whale hanging up in (laughter), in this great hall. And you know, they had dinosaur skeletons would be constructed and dioramas and--kind of place that, you know, as, as young people you could get into, you know. And then you know--what else did we--oh (coughs) excuse me--hobbies, model-making, all that kind of stuff, model airplanes, model ships, model cars, model, models, I mean, you know. And, and you know, and that, that's something--you know, we'd have--you know, I did the, you know, social thing. And then if you had toy trains, well, you know, that was something, you know, you wouldn't leave your house with it, but as you went to other kids' houses you see what they had, you know. Story_ID: 637652 Speaker 1: Another name to come out of that neighborhood, 'cause he was really one of our peers, a classmate of my brother's, was this Jerry Jackson [sic. John Jackson]. He's, he, he went by J.J. Jackson. And he was kind of like a one-hit wonder. He had a hit back in, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh, J.J. Jackson, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I remember-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --a 45 with his name on it. Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right. Speaker 2: I can't of which one it was now though. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did this--I can almost, almost hear the melody. Speaker 2: I always get him mixed up with Syl, Syl Johnson for some reason. I don't know. I guess they had a record out about the same time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) (Cough) Right. Speaker 2: J.J. Jackson. Speaker 1: But he was one of those guys that, as, as a kid, he, he, he always had this, you know, this dream that he was gonna be kind of prominent or famous or, you know, you know, somebody that folk will, you know, talk about. So he got to live that, that dream, you know. Story_ID: 637653 Speaker 1: As you're growing up, you're--let's see, when you come out of middle school [St. Anthony's School, Bronx, New York], that's the year of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, I think, and a year after that's the Little Rock Nine is hitting. And, and did your fa- did your family follow, fa- fa- follow the Civil Rights Movement on the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, we, we, we, we, we followed it. I, I think they were very concerned about, you know, us getting, as parents might, you know, getting too involved with it, but, which--I mean, it would be years before I would actually go, you know, go participate in demonstrations and things like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, there were things going on in New York [New York] then with Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and other leaders-- Speaker 2: Right, but I do remember, by the time I got to high school [Bishop Dubois High School, New York, New York], paying a lot of attention to the Little Rock [Arkansas] situation. And that was one where it, it, it, it, it, it--I think what, what, what made it resonate is, by having a young person's perspective, so on the one hand, you're kind of in the same age group as these kids who are going to have to go through this. And the things that really jumped out were Governor Orval Faubus and his, like--how can I put it? Like, what made him--what motivates him to think it's cool to fight this? What, what, what--why, why, why--what is--I guess that's the reason I can't--what's your trip, man? (Laughter) I mean, what, what, what--why, why is this? And then I, I think part of the answer came, because this was the part that was I think the most striking and the most memorable, and these were the images that went around the world, was to see these white people, I mean, you know, the, these faces just contorted with just hate, just, just this, you know, like almost like, it was like surreal, I mean, almost as if the humanity had gone out of them. And, and you know, I'm saying what you're--okay, what is this about? And one woman said we have, we have a, something like a God-given duty. We have to preserve the sacred white race of Jesus. And (laughter) you--okay, now this is, this is deep. Okay, this is, this is a grown, intelligent person actually believing something like this. Okay, you know, we, we, we, we got a problem. You know, I say yeah, it, it was, it was-- Story_ID: 637654 Speaker 1: Because, again, you know, coming out of that neighborhood experience that we had [in the Bronx, New York]--I, I was like in fifth grade the first time I heard these kids talking about--I mean, it was--you always heard about kids going home, you know, home for the summer, you know, like Emmett Till did. And you know, these kids are coming (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah down South-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And these kids just come back. I mean, you know, my uncle let me drive his car and all like. What? Ten years old you drove a car? You know-- Speaker 2: In places that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, yeah, but out in the country, you know, they could do that. And so that was our, our image of the South. And then, you know, I'm in fifth grade, and I'm hearing these kids talking about these experiences with segregation and prejudice. And, and I'm saying what? And I remember I came home at lunchtime. I said you know what these kids were talking about? And so my parents [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie and Albert Tinnie] kind of looked at each other, well, okay, well (laughter), yeah (laughter), yeah, okay, yeah, this kind of like a loss of innocence moment or something. But yeah, the, the--yeah, I was kind of, yeah, right in that time period where you could kind of understand the significance of the Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and then the, you know, the, you know, the bus boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott] and, and the fact that okay, here's this whole part of the country, but then, yeah, this is the part of the country that had slavery. These people, they, they, they, they, you know, they still don't get it, that (laughter), well, yeah--no, that, that, you know, that ain't happening. We don't (laughter)--you know. And it would be, it, it--how can I put it? At just, at, at that age, I mean, I, I was still kind of a spectator. You know, you're kind of like, you seeing the newspaper; you're seeing the pictures; you're, you know--you know, what a shame that this is going on and--but then, at the same time, you're just--it's like, you know, what, what is going on? And, and one of the things that, you know, I was, even as a kid, not ever able to just really buy into is just going ahead--just demonizing the people, like oh, these are horrible people; the world would be better off if they were all dead. And it, it was, it was always kind of in the back of mind that, no, this is--whatever is going on here is something that people have to solve. These are people (laughter), you know-- Speaker 2: There was a misunderstanding-- Speaker 1: --being people, yeah. Speaker 2: Well the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. I guess I still pretty much have that same outlook, although I tell you it gets more and more puzzling. It's like so, oh, so, you really don't have any intent of, of (laughter), you know getting better, doing better, being better (simultaneous). Story_ID: 637655 Speaker 1: So in school, now, now, what would be, would you guess would be the percent of African American students in school I guess with, with you when you--in grade school [P.S. 54, Bronx, New York] and later on in high school [Bishop Dubois High School, New York, New York]? Were they always in, in the minority or-- Speaker 2: In, in-- Speaker 1: --what? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say in elementary school maybe a third, maybe as high as a half, but not, not, not a majority. In what I call middle school, the Catholic school [St. Anthony's School, Bronx, New York], that was maybe 90 percent black and, and, and mostly West Indians, as, as I, I didn't, never thought of it at-- Speaker 1: What about-- Speaker 2: --much at the time. Speaker 1: --the teachers? Was the teachers black in high school? I mean-- Speaker 2: Oh no. They were, the, the Catholic school, they were the, they were nuns. So, yeah, they were--none, none were black, you know, none of the priests, none of the nuns. And that was also something that, you know, we, we, we, we processed, I mean. It's like, you know, we--you're in an elementary school, and you look at National Geographic and all this, and, and you knew that you had to filter that, okay, this isn't just--this is somebody else telling us a story that fits their, you know--with the, with the Catholic school, because they had this religious, you know, cache, you, you, you, you--at least I was kind of more willing to just think of, well, these are Catholics. They're you know--and the fact that they happen to be white is just, you know, like, what, what, what we're learning is, is Catholicism. And you know, I, I, I didn't--but talking to some other students, they did kind of make that--they, they did sort of notice that, you know, in, in ways that, that, that I didn't. By the time I got to high school, I think I kind of was more aware of it, because you had a lot of these white Irish students. Story_ID: 637656 Speaker 1: This is worth saying probably about this. You said this area of Long Island [New York], now you moved out there when you were twelve, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you're going into, you know, high school [Earl L. Vandermeulen High School, Port Jefferson, New York] in Long Island. And you're living in a kind of rural setting, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: You men--mentioned off camera that there was, as a, it's a weird history out there, serial killers and Amityville [New York]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --pet cemeteries-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and all kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause Suffolk County [New York] is long. You know, it's, it's, it's like, you know--but yeah, that, and that area just has--well, there's a lake, Lake Ronkonkoma, that most non-Long Islanders don't pronounce right. And I believe the story with that lake is that it's fed by a spring so that you hear the story that nobody has ever found the bottom of the lake. And one of the Long Island stories is that there was on some kind of regular basis a virgin girl was sacrificed to the lake, you know. And the one who was selected didn't feel victimized. This was like a source of pride and courage. You--she's the one that would be the emissary to the ancestors to--you know. And, but it's a kind of story that, that, you know, conjures up all sorts of, you know, imagination as fact. There's a, there was a publication that one of the newspapers put out, this compilation of Long Island stories. And one was this love story of Lake Ronkonkoma, where this young man was in love with a girl and was going to prevent her from being sacrificed. And the elders said, "Well, you know, you, you, you should not mess with this, but if your love is as strong enough and as real as you say, you--you know, the deities will forgive you," (laughter), you know, that kind of thing. But it, it, it goes back to, you know, what you were saying. I think that whole area, you feel it up as you go into like Massachusetts and all like that. Like, you--there's so much history that is so much older. And even when you get into the early history of the European settlement and how did people interact with the native people, the I--the fact of bringing slavery into those places was (unclear) the guy in, not far from us, one of the east/west highways. It's called Floyd Bennett Parkway. Is it, is that Floyd Bennett? No, it's another name. William Floyd, William Floyd Parkway [County Route 46]. Well, William Floyd was one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence, one of the forty-one out of the fifty-six signers who were slaveholders, you know. Speaker 1: Right in Long Island. Speaker 2: Long I- Long Island. And, and there are-- Speaker 1: People don't think about it. Speaker 2: Exactly. And there are some slavery stories right there on Long Island. And like I said, you have the, the, the, this, the Shinnecock story; you have the, the, the, the black whalers, the--so, it's a-- Speaker 1: In Sag Harbor [Long Island, New York] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Cold Spring Harbor [New York] had a--that's on the north shore in, in Nassau County [New York], closer into, to, to New York. It seems to me--I don't want to speak incorrectly, but it seems that there was a, a black shipbuilder had his, his shipyard there. And some kind of way, out of that same port slave ships went out of there. I mean, people don't think of slave ships leaving Long Island, but you sort of get--well, in fact, the, the, the note--the last ship that, you know--I don't know if it's accurate. You know, it's called the Wanderer. It was supposed to be the last ship to bring, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah 1856-- Speaker 2: --Africans into the-- Speaker 1: That's the one where the, the trough is at Jekyll Island, Georgia, the-- Speaker 2: Ah. Speaker 1: --hotel. You can see it's a-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --it's a cast iron trough from the water with a name on it and a-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --and a little plaque that talk about the date. Speaker 2: Ah. Speaker 1: Yeah, Jekyll Island, yeah. Speaker 2: Jekyll Island. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Jekyll, the same place where the-- Speaker 1: The Wanderer, right. Speaker 2: Right. Jekyll Island is where the Federal Reserve--in fact they call it the Federal Reserve Room [at the Jekyll Island Club Hotel, Jekyll Island, Georgia] where those guys met to kind of have established the Federal Reserve bank [Federal Reserve System] and all that. Yeah, Wanderer came out of Long Island and built in Setauket [New York], which is right near, you know--the, the, my final year of high school I went to Port Jefferson High School [Earl L. Vandermeulen High School, Port Jefferson, New York]. And that was basically the home fort of, of the Wanderer. Speaker 1: Now that is interesting. Speaker 2: And she was surveyed there. Story_ID: 637657 Speaker 1: You came out of high school, what in--this is Port--what was the name of the high (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Port, Port Jefferson [Earl L. Vandermeulen High School, Port Jefferson, New York]. Speaker 1: Port Jefferson. This is, this is 1960 I guess, right, is that? Speaker 2: That's '59 [1959]-- Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], okay. Speaker 2: --nineteen fifty-nine [1959], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay '59 [1959]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Any rate, I--we should probably catch up with your--did you have any favorite teachers in high school? Speaker 2: Let's see, there was--I wasn't sentimental enough to have favorite teachers in that way (laughter), but, but-- Speaker 1: Name your teachers-- Speaker 2: --in a way-- Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: --I was so bad in math. But there was one math teacher, a lady named Ms. Terry [ph.]--Mrs. Terry, who she would just take us, us bad students and at lunchtime--I mean, she just went the extra mile to, you know, help us get it, you know. And there were--if I think hard enough, I think--there weren't-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, I think it was more by the time I got to-- Speaker 1: What about art instructors? Anybody take interest in your artwork at all? Speaker 2: Not in high school at, at, at all. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause this is one of the mysteries of looking at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --your resume. Story_ID: 637658 Speaker 1: --You are primarily known as an artist, though you are certainly a talented linguist and teacher, you know, and have your credential in that, those areas-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know. You're a Fulbright Scholar-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, in French, I mean. So, that fascinated Bing Davis [HistoryMaker Willis Bing Davis] in Dayton [Ohio] when I told him that. I said you know, he's a Fulbright Scholar. He studied in France and stuff. He said what? And he, he knows you, but he didn't know that. He sees you as an artist, primarily. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He thought that you had an art degree, so. Speaker 2: Right, because when I--by the time I got to Miami [Florida], that's what, you know, I decided I would do. And, and, and, and-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah. Speaker 2: --and, and, and basically, the, the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the, the, the, the turning point came--what was it? Twenty thirteen [2013] I was honored to get that African American Achievers Award from JM Family [JM Family Enterprises, Inc., Deerfield Beach, Florida] that they do. And that was where I got to share this whole story about being in France. I had gone there on a Fulbright grant, tried to get it renewed, and that didn't happen. But I knew that I wanted to, since that was my field, do my graduate work there and actually go, go for a degree. So in the summer I did some traveling, went to Spain, so, you know, and Vigo [Spain] and got all the way to Morocco. And that was one of those where I could step off the gangplank and hold up the whole procession as I just stood there and said this is Africa. From here I can walk. I'm, I'm--this is, you know--but on the way back to France to really pick up serious studying again, hitchhiking, a salesman--or I don't know he's a salesman when he picks me up, but he tells me this on the way. We're riding along, he asks me, "So what do you do?" I said, "Well, I'm, you know, a student." He said, "Well, no, no, I mean what, what, what do you do?" I said, "Oh, well, you know, I teach, you know, in the United States and over here, you know, doing more studies and all that for when I get back." And he says, "No, no, I mean what, what, what, what do you, what do you do?" He says, "Look, let, let me explain." He says, "You see all this stuff on the backseat, like this school supplies? You know, I sell that. That's what I do, you know, for a living. Well, what I do is I write music and songs. Now, you know, it'll probably never get published, but you know, me and the family, you know, you get around the piano, and we play, and we sing, and we have fun, you know. And so I mean, like, you know, what do you do like that?" I said, "Oh." Then I says, "Well, I don't know. I, I used to do art at one time." Well, the guy almost runs off the road, you know. "Wait, are you telling me you have the talent to do art, and you're not doing it?" And I'm saying oh, okay, this is (laughter), this is one of these moments in life I'm a captive audience here. Okay, this is--so, he kind of gives me a little lecture about, you know, if you have talent, I mean, you gotta use it and so forth. And I--well, when we got to the place where our paths diverged, you know, I, I got out of the car, and I said well, being--how did I put it--something like, well, it may not be what you do, but you, you, you are a hell of a salesman, because this conversation was life-changing, you know. Story_ID: 637659 Speaker 1: So we're saying we'll, we'll get back to that. But, but when did you start--when, when did your art production start to wane, when you stopped doing, kind of stopped doing art? Was this in high school, or-- Speaker 2: I, I would say probably in high school, you know. Speaker 1: 'Cause it doesn't seem like you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, no, no, no, let me take that back. No, no, no, no, I'm--yeah--no, no, 'cause I--yeah, right, no. Yeah, I, yeah, I was still doing--drawing informally and you know, even in early college years. In fact, well, a couple of us--a buddy of mine got into a whole conversation about the, the challenge of how can you, you know, portray like the ultimate inhuman agony (laughter), you know, and all those kind of things. And-- Speaker 1: Were, were, were you interested in comic books and all that, with literature and the art, and the, you know-- Speaker 2: I was--my, my brother had a little more of a--leaning toward that kind of cartooning kind of thing. I wasn't. I was more interested in, was just you know, drawing and depicting and how do you get, you know, like these--it's supposed to look like bundles of something on the dot to look like it's actually, you know, burlap or-- Speaker 1: Was artwork in your family considered something that everybody could just do? And you, you mentioned so many. And your brothers all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, we-- Speaker 1: I mean, was it not considered special or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of, kind of not. I mean, we, we, certainly my older brother [Roy Tinnie] and I, we just came up doing it, I mean, scribbling on the walls, much to our parents' [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie and Albert Tinnie] chagrin and all that. And you know, you know, in those days you could--if, if you sent your shirts to the laundry, they would fold them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, white cardb-- Speaker 2: --with that cardboard. And that, that cardboard was like, that was precious, you know. So yeah, yeah, no, we, we did that. I, I would say probably by the time I went from community college into--'cause I went to Suffolk County Community College [Selden, New York], actually, went there the year it opened and got my picture in the paper 'cause I was one of the first six students to enroll. And within transferring to Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York] from there, I think the studies got to be more demanding and, and just more stuff happening. And you know, it wasn't like art was gonna be a career. It was just a, an interest. Speaker 1: Yeah, so your parents never saw that as a career? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh. Speaker 1: They, they saw like a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --your academic pursuits--and, and I take it you were a good student? Speaker 2: Yeah, decent, you know, better in some things than others, you know (simultaneous). Story_ID: 637660 Speaker 1: Now, considering that you're almost 7'0" tall, was, was there an attempt to make you a basketball player at some point-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh yes, oh yeah, of course, of course, of course. Actually, you know, from failure early on, strangely enough, as you were coming up, our interest was much more in baseball, softball. You know, we were--and basketball, I obviously had the height for it, but I didn't have the, like the same interest in it, the same connection to it. But from, you know, starting off with intramural bask- you're saying okay, okay, this is, you know, you know, I'm learning this, and you know, it's getting, you know, better. The thing about it was, I was just on a basic, what, emotional, primal level, I think where I was, I was just much more interested in the great quest- questions of the world and learning. It was like, part of me was like, well, I can play basketball on the school yard. I mean, it, it, it just--I just didn't have the, the mindset--although I'm sure my coaches were trying to get me there--that, you know, this is something to really-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --dedicate myself to-- Speaker 1: Now did your brothers play or someone (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they didn't-- Speaker 1: --other words-- Speaker 2: They didn't; they didn't. The, the, the younger one [Glenn Tinnie], of course, he had, he had a bicycle accident while he was in high school, broke his leg. So that kind of hampered his, you know. And the older one [Roy Tinnie]--we--it was kind of interesting because I think part of--the move from the city to the country, it was gradual but very, very real. I think in a way, it, it kind of made us country bumpkins, (laughter) in a way. Speaker 1: Well, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --that's a good point 'cause you, you think about it, even the opportunity to be coached, basketball players usually the, that are accomplished, they spend a lot of time in a gym somewhere, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Boys Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] or a Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] or somewhere-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and around someplace where even no matter what height they are, they spend a lot of time at the gym-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know. So if you're not in a gym, you're not gonna-- Speaker 2: True. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: True, true. And, and it was like--I mean, I'm sure all kind of people thought I might--you know, this, this is a, a huge waste. I mean, you had the, the, the, the height to be doing this, and you're doing something else. You're reading, and you're (laughter) I mean. But I think it was--part of it was I, I was seeing like the whole world of sport as being very exploitative also and like, you know--well, jump ahead, the--after I graduated, there were, you know, there were all these spinoff teams from knockoffs of the Harlem Globetrotters. You know, you had the Harlem Diplomats up in Canada, the Harlem, sort of the Harlem Wizards. Speaker 1: This is after high school [Earl L. Vandermeulen High School, Port Jefferson, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, after college. Speaker 1: After college, okay. Did you play at all in college or high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, I played intramural in high school. I, I didn't really play s- org- serious organized ball 'til I got to college, you know. Story_ID: 637661 Speaker 1: Okay, so you played ball in college, and for the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. And, and, and, and, and then it was just really, just learning the game-- Speaker 1: Suffolk County Community College [Selden, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah at the community college and then at Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York]. And when--after graduating, my coach, he had some connections, and he connected me up. It was a team out in Long Island [New York] called the Harlem Wizards, and they were doing all the Globetrotter [Harlem Globetrotters] routines. And I, I kind of, you know, I, I liked the opportunity, 'cause these guys were, I mean, extremely talented, you know, some more than others. But I mean, and I was saying this, this, this could really be an opportunity to really learn the game and kind of, you know--I mean, I was okay at it, but I wasn't, you know, as, as--and, but then, you know, you had this, okay, the, the routine was they had these old, you know, like, torn-up tuxedos and broken top hats. And that's how you were supposed come out onto the court, you know, like this. Speaker 1: Showmanship. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I'm kind of like, well, I just kind of worked my way through school and did all this. Now I don't think, you know, after all that, in this day and age, talking 1965, you're gonna go back to this old minstrel clown stuff, and I'm supposed to participate in this. So I would compromise and well, find the least torn up jacket to put on and you know, come out with the hat and throw it aside (laughter), and just kind of minimize--but it was kind of like--it was not, you know, no big money, but it was--and, and you know, meeting the guys, talking to them, and seeing that, you know, for a lot of those guys who, I mean, this was a golden opportunity, 'cause you know, they--and you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Probably their dream I guess-- Speaker 2: Exactly. And they were, you know, they talking about going down to Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil]. And I said oh, that's nice, you know. And then I think one night the audience wasn't that big. When it came, came time to be paid it was--the guy hands me this little pittance. I said, "What, what is it, you, you owe me something or what?" "Oh, no, that's for tonight." "That's, that's for tonight?" "What--well, you know, you saw there wasn't many people there, you know. This goes by the gate." "Well, no, well, it seems to me that my job was to go out and play the game. Your job was to bring people through the gate. You didn't do your job," (laughter). You know, I said, "Let me tell you what: you better hold this; you're gonna need this more than I do," and kind of left that, you know. Story_ID: 637662 Speaker 1: And it was, you know, I mean, it was that, that, that, that, that time in history like, come on, this is, this is--people are out here getting their skulls fractured on, in civil rights-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah this is the verge of the-- Speaker 1: --demonstrations and, and, and, and-- Speaker 2: --black power movement-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and all that, yeah so. Speaker 1: I mean, like-- Speaker 2: This was about like '64 [1964], '65 [1965]? Speaker 1: Yeah, we're '65 [1965], about-- Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965] Yeah, yeah, this is when black (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And so I'm saying, like, look (laughter)--but he--there again, I mean, it, it was like, basketball I, I guess--I mean, I, I--you know, youth is wasted on the young. I mean, I, I never saw it as the kind of opportunity that people see it as now, where, you know, you can be a start. This would make you a millionaire. You could be--it was always like, well it's a sport. It's something to be good at and maybe even be great at. But what my, my, you know, inner urge is, is about, you know, just something, you know, more than that. Speaker 2: And, and to be--to tell the truth, in those days, NBA [National Basketball Association] sal- salaries even weren't-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --as great as they--nowhere near what they are today. Speaker 1: Right. And, and, and, and, and, and even there, I mean, the question that was--I said okay, it's nice that somebody could make a million dollars. But who are these people who have millions of dollars supposed to pay somebody to play basketball? How would they--what do they know? What--where, where are they-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they don't play basketball, do they? Speaker 1: Right, exactly. What, what, what--how is this system working? What, what is, what is--I mean, I, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm a participant. I'm not a spectator. I, I need to know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. I don't wanna take-- Story_ID: 637663 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I wanna take, take, take-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --back to when you graduate from high school [Earl L. Vandermeulen High School, Port Jefferson, New York], now you said you were a good student. You weren't like the best student necessarily. So when you graduated, it wasn't with the honors or anything like that right or was it? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. And you went to the--you went to, well, the first few weeks at Suffolk County-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Community College [Suffolk County Community College, Selden, New York]. Speaker 2: And so I worked a year, did a were--a year of factory work, so I got to know the world of work at minimum wage. And it, it was kind of easy to determine well, this may not what--be what I want to do for the rest of my life (laughter), you know. Speaker 1: You weren't sure at that--so at the time that you graduated from high school, you weren't sure what your--you wanted to do. Speaker 2: No, no, 'cause I had, you know, had applied--where did I apply? I applied at what would become Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York]--it was at another location then--and didn't get accepted. And so it was just--and, and, and actually, I was content to take the time to reflect and do, you know, whatever. But I mean, I--yeah, at that point, I mean, I think I was open to anything. I mean, if somebody said here's an opportunity to get on a merchant freighter and go around the world, I would have jumped at that (laughter) just as easily as anything else. Speaker 1: How did you end up going to college I mean-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Had, had your brother [Roy Tinnie] gone to college? Speaker 2: No, no, he hadn't. I think when the, the, the news article came out that this community was opening up in Suffolk County [New York]--'cause the community colleges back then, if you remember, was this great concept that was opening up the opportunity to regular folk who, you know--you, you can't--you know, you're not going to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] or Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or--although New York City [New York, New York], of course, had that very enlightened--no--CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York] was like one of the best places in the country. It was free tuition and, you know. But, so my mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] was always usually knowing such things, you know. "Hey, you know they've got this college opening up. I think you want to apply." Why not, you know? And so I did, and everything kind of, you know, you know, went from, from there. Story_ID: 637664 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now had you studied French in high school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is interesting. Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was, and, and that was--right, I--my first exposure to it--and in fact, I, I think I, I had actually wanted to take Spanish, but the Spanish classes I think were filled up or whatever. And so I thought I'd take French. And then my stated long-term objective was I'm thinking about going into dentistry, you know, and okay, so, college, dental school. And so, by majoring--what was it? Well, in community college they called it emphasis rather than majors, but you know, biology, science, and all that. They determined well, French is the, you know, better language for that. Fine. And then, found when I took it that I just had such a, an affinity for it, and just it was coming so naturally. And, and it was, it was, it was, well, you know how a foreign language has this way of just opening up this whole other world, you know, culture and stories. And so, what then happened was as I transferred and was pursuing the pre-dental program, I started realizing well, wait a minute, this bringing in all kinds of things that I wasn't really prepared for, organic chemistry and these things that have--I, I would think nothing to do with the craft of dentistry. But they were kind of ruining my grades there. And I said you know what why don't I really just switch over to something that I know I can excel at and just really do this language thing, thing and, you know, look at what opportunities that could present, 'cause that could be, you know, teaching; it could be diplomatic corps; it could be all kinds of--and, and then, I mean, I just really found that I had a very, you know, genuine organic interest in it, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, this is 1963--'62 [1962], '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962] is when I came out of community college [Suffolk County Community College, Selden, New York], right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 637665 Speaker 1: Suffolk County, County Comm- Community College [Suffolk County Community College, Selden, New York], if I can get it out of my mouth. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Was there a mentor there in French? Was there--I, I imagine that the French teacher had to be special for you to take that kind of-- Speaker 2: He was, he wasn't, but the, the, the subject was. I'll, I'll put it that way. And as mentors go, I had not so much instructors, but there were--okay, the college was new, and I was one of very few African Americans there. And in fact, in the first year, the first semester, I think I--was it any, be- besides me? I don't know. But among the administrators, among the--I got like a, you know, a lot of help in the way like on weekends they would administer civil service exams on the campus. They needed people to proctor the exam. You can make a few dollars that way. They, you know, they'd hook me up with things like that and, and, and just kind of basically try to get me connected with, you know, folks. And there was a--if I'm remembering now, because I was a little rough time with the chemistry, I think one of, the, the chemistry instructor kind of said okay, look, you know, we, we, we're gonna get you through this. You're gonna (laughter)--and you know, had me come on over to his house, had a six pack, you know, and you know, and you know, that, that, that kind of--having those kinds of professors who really do kind of go that extra mile, you know, you know. It wasn't regular, but it, you know, it, it, you know, it, it, it, it happened. And, and then, of course, you there's, there's, there's ways, there's so many ways that instructors touch and inspire you that you're not even aware of, or at least I, you know, you know. Some of us kind of go our way, insensitive and thoughtless. (Laughter) And you know, years later you say hm, you know (laughter), yeah (simultaneous). Story_ID: 637666 Speaker 1: So you went on to State University of New York at Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right, so you're, you're living on campus now, right, and (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, commuting. Speaker 1: No? Commuting, okay. I didn't know it was that close, okay. Speaker 2: Commuting yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, right. Speaker 1: Stony Brook campuses-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: And so, while you're there, Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassinated, the March on Washington. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Cassius Clay [Muhammad Ali] is training here in Miami [Florida] to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --defeat Sonny Liston. Speaker 2: Right, which, which (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Vietnam War is escalating-- Speaker 2: --he did on my birthday, but that's, that was another-- Speaker 1: He did, really? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was on February 25th. Speaker 1: It was in February, you're right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Vietnam War is escalating, the Gulf of Tonkin. That summer, Freedom Summer of '64 [1964] is going on-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the Democratic National Convention [1964 Democratic National Convention] in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. The NBA [National Basketball Association] is founded. Malcolm X was assassinated in 1965. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But while you're at State University at, at Stony Brook, that, '65 [1965] is the year you actually graduate, right? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And so were you-- Speaker 2: Well, everybody remembers where they were when, when John Kennedy was assassinated. And I was on the campus with a young lady, Italian young lady was with me. We were selling tickets to a civil rights rally that was gonna be held the following week or so by (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They're selling tick- tickets to it? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was kind of like a--not, not exploitative. It was like a fundraiser for the, the cause. And-- Speaker 1: Who, who was going to be there? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Ooh, I don't even remember. I don't remember, but I, I don't think it was any like big headliners. It was--I mean, if you know, we're talking like at the time maybe two or three dollar tickets. I mean, they're not, you know, to kind of defray the cost of renting-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the space kind of thing. And you know this student who comes bursting into the cafeteria wildly, you know: "I don't know if it's true or not. I, I, I, I, I, I, I don't know, but I think I just heard on the radio that, that President Kennedy was shot in Dallas, Texas." I remember the girl saying to me, like, "You, you think that's true?" I said, "Well, one thing we know, if it is, we'll, we'll, we'll know soon enough." That's, that's for sure. And you know, that, that was like that sudden realization that, oh, you know, we thought that ended with, with Kennedy. I mean, you mean it still happens. This is, I mean, it was that whole, you know, some people called it loss of innocence. I don't know, we weren't innocent but just, maybe just ignorant. And that was--and then, you know-- Speaker 1: Now did you, did--were you--'cause I remember, and I was--I'm younger than you are, but I remember, from what I recall about the feeling of a lot of people in the country was void by the presence of John Kennedy. He was young, he told--and he was a, he had a sense of humor. He's, he's obviously very bright, and it seemed like a lot of the people he brought on with him were bright, and, and the country was going somewhere. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Not like the dread that people are feeling as we speak here today (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Yeah, yeah, right (laughter). Speaker 1: But, but in those--but people had a positive feeling about space program-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the ja- and civil rights seemed to be moving on some level. But even despite all the resistance down south, it was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --it was moving. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, yeah, definitely, definitely. And that was just, you know, this, this, I mean, more shock, I mean it was--you know, on, on, on so many levels. Story_ID: 637667 Speaker 1: And it was actually an interesting day too, because by the time I got home, I had a cousin who--he just recently passed this year, or last year--who at the time was with the, he was a member of Dallas Philharmonic Orchestra. They were waiting at the end of the pala- parade route to play the anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner']. And they were kind of among some, the, the, the later ones to get the word as to what, what had happened. And it was really kind of interesting because he called--you know, back in those days you didn't--you had to get an operator long distance. He calls his mom in New York [New York]. Of all the telephone operators in New York, he gets his sister, you know. "Katie [ph.], is that you?" (Laughter) So she hooks up this guy in a three or four-way conversation, you know, with, with oth- other family members. And so, folk were able to kind of get a, you know, on-the-spot kind of report from, from him. And, but that whole--I mean, the, the, the--everything about that, 'cause you've got, you know, of course got more surreal because, you know, you know, we're riding in the car, and we hear that, okay, they're bringing Jack Ruby out. Then you hear the pow. You know, Jack Ruby's--you know, Lee Harvey Oswald has been just shot, you know. And my cousin, you know, he was always known for these little quips, you know, his--he's driving the car (unclear) "Hm, any witnesses (laughter)," you know like wow. But it was, yeah, it, it, it was, it was, it was that surreal. But then, you know, in, in another way I think it was, it had all the shock value because of who it was and you know, the circumstances around it. But then at the same time, I mean, all this violence against the Civil Rights Movement that was going on all the--it was like, what, what country are we in here, I mean. I think the-- Story_ID: 637668 Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause his, his assassination [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was preceded by the death of the--well, well, violence in Birmingham [Alabama]. People getting killed there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly. And it was just, it just kept on and, you know-- Speaker 1: And all around the country-- Speaker 2: Exactly-- Speaker 1: --there were incidents. Speaker 2: And I, I think that the, the burning of that, the Freedom Rider of the busing-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Anniston, like-- Speaker 1: Anniston, Alabama. Speaker 2: --Anniston, Alabama, was like, well, you all were prepared to just murder a whole busload of people, just take these people's lives over the right to sit in a bus station, at a (laughter), you know. Speaker 1: And beat them with bats when they tried to get off the bus. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, tried to lock the door while the bus burned. I mean, but this is, you know, this is that, that, that--and, and is, is that's the kind of thing you see, it really go, goes back to, you know, maybe it, it, it, it, it was weird on my part, or you know, I guess I've been called eccentric or whatever. But it was like, with all that kind of thing going on, how are you supposed to be thinking about just basketball, you know? I mean, how, how, how--I mean, it was like--what, today's is a Monday? Yesterday, I mean, I think almost all day you had stuff on about football, football, football. All right, maybe, I mean, it's seven thousand miles away or something. But the fact that you have this crisis of people starving to death that gets like no coverage, like oh, you're--we're not supposed to know that, or if we know, it's oh, well, there's nothing we can do. There's something-- Speaker 1: Out of balance. Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, it, it's seriously in, in, you know, just-- Speaker 1: Now, now just be- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) spiritually. Story_ID: 637669 Speaker 1: Around your birthday, basically, Malcolm X is assassinated in '65 [1965] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: This is before you graduate [from Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And did, did you have any feelings about Malcolm X in those days? Speaker 2: I was one of those slow to come along. You know, at first I kind of, well, you know, here we're fighting for integration, and he's talking about separation and all this. It would take a long time to understand who he, like, really was and what, you know. When that happened, I think the, the, the, the, the, the, the first thing that struck me about it was basically something that he had hinted at before it happened, that look, this is not, this is not what it's made to look like. This is not some, some zealots in the Nation of Islam. This, this--it--right from the start it had something, something about it that just didn't ring right but, but aside from that, I mean, just the, the tragedy, I mean, that, okay, here's yet another assassination. I think the, the hardest part of that whole thing was--in fact, and even now as I'm saying it, see, it took me a while to even get back around to it because--was that whatever you thought of Malcolm, somebody was able to find black men to do this. And I didn't call them black men every time. I--there's another way to describe it, that, I mean, you--(gesture) you know. Story_ID: 637670 Speaker 1: Selma to Montgomery march takes place. [HistoryMaker] John Lewis has been on last week, you know, he of course, you know, was beaten on Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama] that same year-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then the Selma, Montgomery march took place with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and the rest of them-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so all this is going on. Was, was there a black organization at Stony, Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York] when you-- Speaker 2: Not, not, not to speak of. There was--no, no, there wasn't, I mean, 'cause I think if there were, I think I was one of two black students there. But-- Speaker 1: Two? There was only two black students? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. I mean, this--I had to, that, the--definitely the opposite of the HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] experience, you know. But you know, it was, see, I, I, I, I always had a very kind of functional attitude, I mean. To me it was a place to go to learn what I wanted to learn. All of that dorm life and the, the, the, the--you know, I was-- Speaker 1: You didn't have the frat [fraternity] experience or any of that? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, none of that, none of that. And it was, it was, look, I'm not only--you know, I'm, I'm, I'm gonna take as many courses as I can handle in, in, in the time I'm here. I can figure out a way that, okay, if, if I maintain my grades at a certain level, I can get a scholarship. And if I take education courses, I don't have to pay tuition. So I can actually do this and come out on the profit side (laughter) of this, get my degree, and go on to what I, I what I have to do-- Speaker 1: So, so you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) yeah. Speaker 1: --kind of focused at this point on, on what you want to do-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --in the sense that-- Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, yeah. I wasn't-- Speaker 1: You earned a-- Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: --B.A. in French, with a minor in education and Spanish, right-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in '65 [1965]? Story_ID: 637671 Speaker 1: I don't know what the NDEA is but I--is that, summer seminar in research (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, that was, that was--yeah, NDEA was the National Defense Education Act [National Defense Education Act of 1958]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what happened, the Russians beat us into space. And all of a sudden, oh, we'd better start educating American people. And the--so they had these summer institutes that were--you got a stipend. You went there, and you learned something. And so they had quite a few from that were in foreign language. And it was based on the Middlebury College [Middlebury, Vermont] in new--in, in Vermont, had developed a program where they had like four schools I think was French, Spanish, German, Russian. And during that summer you only spoke that language. And if you wanted to, after that summer of saturation you could do a year abroad and study in, in the country. And I actually applied for that and got turned down but then ended up having it, the same experience anyway. So-- Speaker 1: Through your Fulbright [Fulbright Scholarship]? Speaker 2: No. This is be--actually it was before the Fulbright. Speaker 1: So you were turned down from this one but you did get the, you got the Fulbright later then. Speaker 2: Ex- exactly. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so I had this kind of smug (laughter), you know, that when I got over to France, okay, your school that rejected me, you guys were over here having to pay your way, and I'm getting my way paid and yeah, yeah I mean, that was--but it was just kind of one of those ironies. Speaker 1: About ten years ago, we interviewed Dr. Sandye Jean McIntyre [HistoryMaker Sandye Jean McIntyre, II] of Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. He was a Fulbright Scholar, French expert, you know. Did, did you--did he have anything to do with this? Speaker 2: No, but--'cause when I went over there, I--there were a couple, there were a couple of people--there's one young lady from Morgan State among the Fulbrights. I think there were about, I think maybe seven or eight of us who were Fulbright African Americans at that were, were in France (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah Sandye Jean McIntyre was the, an officer with Fulbright. You know, he-- Speaker 2: Oh, right. Speaker 1: He was-- Speaker 2: Well, maybe-- Speaker 1: He would find the black students to-- Speaker 2: --behind the scenes, maybe-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --behind the scenes, you know. Speaker 1: Especially French, I mean, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, 'cause the way, the way we kind of discerned it, the Fulbright was working politically was that it had to do with how many people from, you know, okay, so like, New York [New York] would have a large number of Africans who would be a lot--you know. One woman who is still with us was from Nevada, so, oh yeah, she had to have been the only one in the state to apply, and it was, and I was in a va- I was just in the right position, close enough to New York that you, you need to get more people but far enough away that, you know, so I know that, that kind of thing went into it and you know, and you had to kind of, you know, run the gauntlet of, you know, interviews. And you had to submit the application, quintuplicates but all originals, no carbon, and you know, just, just to just weed out--okay, you know, we, we gotta find the people who are really (laughter), who want it that bad. Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, so this is--it took some work to do it in other words, and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, as, as, as, as, as work of that kind goes, yeah. You had to, you really had to, you know. Story_ID: 637672 Speaker 1: This is in '65 [1965] through '67 [1967]--you go to the University of Caen [University of Caen Normandy, Caen, France]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is that what it's called-- Speaker 2: Okay, it's '65 [1965] to '66 [1966] I teach high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so that's my first teaching job. And then in the summer, you know, I applied, get this summer institute, the NDEA [National Defense Education Act of 1958] up in Upstate New York. I'm not far from Auburn, New York, by the way, where the now is--no clue when I was up there that this--all that Harriet Tubman history was right there in Auburn, you know. Speaker 1: Right, that's right, where the Harriet Tubman home is. Speaker 2: Yeah, what, what really struck you with Auburn was, like, right downtown was the prison, you know, guys walking on the catwalk would growl, you know. But, yeah, so then after that, I was at the institute when I got the letter that I'd receive the Fulbright [Fulbright Scholarship]. And I had like five days to respond and you know, or I'd be canceled out and all that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it, it, it, so, yeah, CA Caen [France] is, that's one of those towns in Normandy [France] that kind of you, you know, everybody--part of the Normandy invasion history and the lore-- Speaker 1: Okay, that's where the English aristocracy comes from. Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: --the 1066-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --(laughter) (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And his castle was there at the William [William the Conqueror] and found out that he did the right thing to go over there and win because before that he was just known as William the Bastard. So he, so he did the right thing to conquer something so that he'd go down in history a different way. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there to study, study French, language, history, and culture. Speaker 2: Yeah. They had a--and it, it was something that the, the Fulbright grantees kind of went into. They had a like a special kind of curriculum for the foreign students. And so you got that, that whole ex- and it was, it was, it was, it was good. You, you learned just those things: language, some literature, the history, the culture, you know. And I mean, had I just been satisfied with that, I could have come back as, you know, knowing more. But then I-- Speaker 1: So you weren't just satisfied with that (laughter)? Speaker 2: I, I, I, I, I realized that a year there was not enough, because it was extremely rich, being in the old world, cathedrals, museums. Story_ID: 637673 Speaker 1: I did a lot of hitchhiking, which was a good way to get around and meet people and that kind of thing. And-- Speaker 2: What--did you get rides easily? 'Cause I'm thinking, here, you're 7'0" tall. You're a black American. You know, I just wonder if people, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Much--well, the French-- Speaker 2: Are people going to be afraid? Are they gonna be-- Speaker 1: --well, you know-- Speaker 2: Are they going to embrace you? Are they gonna be afraid of you or what? Speaker 1: No. They were--you know, 'cause you know, black Americans--and you, you think of, you know--well, going back to Josephine Baker and all like that, I mean, France had this whole, you know, love affair with black America and jazz and all that, you know, and, and, and the fact that the, the--I call it the old world. I mean, the culture, you, you know, you're like you're in a place where opera, a classic place, this is working-class entertainment. This is no, there's no snob thing about it. This is what, you know, regular people do. In fact, that was the, the very first day there. That was one of the culture shocks. We kind of--well, we got there; we were looking for something to do. Somebody finds this little tiny article in the newspaper about an art exhibition at a small museum called 'In the Light of Vermeer' [ph.] so there's a couple of Vermeer [Johannes Vermeer] paintings and people he in- influenced. We get there the line is like three and a half blocks long. Okay, this is--the--I mean, I was glad to have extra height that I could kind of see over the crowd and send in--and you know, get to see, see a little bit better. You know, as we're going in there, they, these guys are digging up the street. And you know, one guy is, uses the wheelbarrow as the men's (laughter) room. And you know, these American girls are just, ah, just, you know. And well, hey, you know, we're in another place. But as I make the rounds on my way out, the people on line allowed these ditch diggers on their lunch break to come in, break into the line, and they're going through. They're commenting on the calli- the brush strokes and all of this, I mean. This is, this was, was like, okay, this is a-- Speaker 2: That's a 16th century Dutch painting. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And he's not even from France, and they're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. So this is--so, you, you, you, you, and you realize, well, well, even, you know, like on the way on the ship going over, you know, the, the guy who mops the floor, you would think he was executing a Rembrandt painting, I mean. So you had this whole different attitude toward work, toward culture, toward--and, and it was really--I think something for us, from this side of the ocean, you know, to, to, to see him, but maybe bring up the hitchhiking thing was a, a, a good insight on that. It came from this German guy who gives me a ride. He realized I'm American. He says or he could speak English and 'cause he had spent eight years in the United States. And then he asked this rhetorical question, "Well, you know why you have all those problems you have in the United States?" Okay (laughter), I will have heard it here first, okay (laughter). "No, why?" "Well, the reason you have those problems in the United States is that the European in America is a fish out of water. Here, you're seeing the fish in water, and you notice you don't have those problems, do you?" Hm, eh, might be on to something here. And, and, and, and in fact, the, you know, there, there, there, there, there was a lot to that. I mean, the cousin I was telling you about who was in Dallas [Texas], okay, we--he was this violin player from as, as far back as we could remember. You know, he just had that talent. He went into the [U.S. military] service, stationed in Germany, fell in love with Germany, all because that he--the people loved the music, as he put it. And no sooner was he shipped home, I think, I think within a month he was back over there. So he was there when I was there. And you know, and during some of the school breaks, I'd shoot over to Germany. I'd hook up with him, hang out with the orchestra. And you go to these performances, and you see five and six-year-old kids just rapt attention, just taking this in. And you know, nobody's bored; nobody, there's nobody feeling like, well, we who are at this are better than the run-of-the-mill people. (Shakes head) This, this is-- Story_ID: 637674 Speaker 1: So, things like that are--just let me know that I, I, I could use some more of this before I come back home, plus the opportunity to just go ahead and do the formal thing and get my master's degree there, or the equivalent of it, and you know, and, and just get more, you know, more immersed, more involved, and got a chance to play basketball over there too, you know. And so, you know, and, and you know-- Speaker 2: Did you play for--I mean professionally or semi (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was, it was like, at the time, it was everything had to be amateur, you know. You know, you know, nobody would actually pay what you can get--depending on what team it was, you get all kind of perks, the use of an apartment, the use of a car, you know, a gift of this and that, you know. I didn't get all, all, all, all of that. Couple, you know, one team that, you know, wanted to recruit me--I don't know--they, they, they just had this kind of gangster-ish vibe about them. I kind of said I'll, I'll think about it. Then this other team was like, kind of looked more wholesome and you know, and--so it was, it was, you know, you know, good experience, good experience that way too. And yeah, so the second year was, you know, much more focused on studying and all that. Story_ID: 637675 Speaker 1: I was talking off camera about the first African festival of the arts in Dakar [First World Festival of Black Arts, Dakar, Senegal] in '66 [1966]. Now that coincides with when you're actually in France. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But these--and this is a Francophone kind of experience. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So it was that African-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --festival, but it's put together by the, basically the Negritude-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --people put this together. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In Dakar, Leon Damas is there, Senghor [Leopold Sedar Senghor], the president of Senegal was, is one of the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --one of the--Mofa Presence Africaine [sic. Presence Africaine]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you--were you aware of any of that at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we were aware, and, but it was kind of like, this kind of an exotic thing happening someplace else. Speaker 1: Did you understand it was a whole new world opening up? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and, and, and, and, and, and for me I have to say too, I mean, I, I wouldn't say I was politically unconscious before going there, but I was kind of still not, certainly not as knowledgeable as I needed to be. So there was kind of a learning curve, and, and part of that had to do really with. I mean, at this point in my life, the whole I--I, I, I, I can't even imagine thinking any other way other than Pan-Africa and, and, you know, looking all the way back, all the way forward as, you know, how we, we, we--but I had to, you know, get there. Story_ID: 637676 Speaker 1: While I was in Normandy, got to see a movie about the Vietnam War that was shot in North Vietnam by the North Vietnamese and seeing their perspective. Speaker 2: Yeah, now, now this is interesting. Because Ho Chi Minh was trained in Paris [France], right-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He went to Samoa. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. I mean, this is, yeah, I mean, and that, that process of how people like him and (unclear) and (unclear), these people who went to these institutions in the colonial countries, where I'm sure the--which (unclear) countries hoped that they would come away from as, as good functionaries. Speaker 2: They call them in Africa-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Ubuntu. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. And I mean, it was like Kwame Nkrumah coming here, going to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], and then discovering Garvey [Marcus Garvey] and like, oh, (laughter) they can--I, I didn't expect this. Yeah, so, yeah, with the, with the--yeah, the, the festival Dakar [First World Festival of Black Arts, Dakar, Senegal], like it was, you know, we were aware, but then it was also kind of couched in this--it was a real strong awareness of neocolonialism, the fact that the promise of independence was not all that it was supposed to be. And there was a little bit of a tendency to try to trot things out to make things look a certain way. But we could still sense that what was happening with that festival was more on the genuine tip, that that was not--this was-- Speaker 2: Now, now did you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --encounter a student from Martinique and Senegal all in-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Ghana? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Martinique, even Trinidad. And I'm trying to remember--Senegal. I think most of the Africans that I ran into were from Senegal. I think I ran into--well, of course, in the, in the, in the whole two-year period, then I, I, you know, I, I ran into more people from more islands, more countries. You know, Ubangi-Shari which we know as the Central African Republic, you know, just meeting people from there and hearing that story from--because you know, the outside view where, you know, you had the, you know, Bokassa [Jean-Bedel Bokassa] and you know, people like that who-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --hardly represented anything that, that--you know. But, and you heard the stories. I mean, you know, these, these are people my age. So they came up in the colonial period and you know, just these absurd assignments in school. Like, okay, you have to write an essay about what you did when it snowed. So you had to write about how you played in the snow, and you made snowballs. You never saw snow in your life. You never--but this is this, the, the, the, the, the French call it the grand civilizing mission. This was the, the part of you being civilized and acculturated and you know. Story_ID: 637677 Speaker 1: Was that a part of French culture? I know the English always castigate them for thinking they're so superior culturally. And you've described some of the things they do that do suggest like a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --certain, yeah. Speaker 2: Can we interrupt? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: The cultural imperialism, as people called it, the French were, yeah, I mean, they, they, they were--they had a heavier hand. The English were really no better, but their, their strategy was to use the, the go-betweens, you know, like identify local traditional leaders who could be, as we would say, bought off. And, and, and--but a, a lot of it was, you know, you know, like we, we, how we read now about the, the black soldiers in World War I [WWI], okay. The U.S. Army is so racist that they won't even let you wear an American uniform, so you have to fight with the French. But then in that process--I mean, on the way over there, you're from New York [New York]. I'm meeting somebody from North Carolina, somebody from Mississippi, and you're fighting all this common ground. And then you get there, and you're fighting the guys from Africa and so forth. And you know, you start realizing that your experience that you knew as a kid was not isolated, that this is a whole global pattern. And I, I think for me and those that were over there with, with me, it was a similar kind of thing, that you, you know, you like a--running into this conscious people, and, and I, and I think kind of what was the, the touchstone was had you read Fanon [Frantz Fanon], you know, 'cause that was right at that time where, yeah, okay, if, if, if, if you, if you would did, okay, now you can--you are part of a, of, of a, of a, a real conversation, because he, of course, touched on--or he, you know, I mean, he hit the, the, the, the heart and soul of the, the whole, the whole matter. Speaker 1: Okay, that's right, 'Black Skin, White Masks,' [Frantz Fanon] 'Wretched of the Earth,' ['The Wretched of the Earth,' Frantz Fanon] yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. And wretched are those two. And then the, the, the one about the--what's--they, they call it--I can't remember the English title. But the one that he, where he talks about the Algerian Revolution, which then, then was very, very fresh. I mean, yeah, that was-- Speaker 1: I know they, they showed 'The Battle of Algiers' on the college campus, so. Speaker 2: And, and you know, trying to find that now--I mean, Miami-Dade Community College [Miami Dade College, Miami Florida] had this, that in excerpt, you know. I said no, you need the whole, the whole film. I mean, it was, I mean, the film itself was just--I mean, the coup in itself to, to, to, to produce that. Speaker 1: I don't know if you came across any of the people in your, your cohort age group that were in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. And Van Lierop [Robert Vann Lierop] who do, who put (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --was a SNCC guy-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --about the same age as you. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And there's so many of them were-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada] is, he--the last I saw him he was in Fort Lauderdale [Florida]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And Courtland Cox, I, I remember him from the, the old, the AL- ALSC [African Liberation Support Committee] days, you know, the-- Speaker 1: African Liberation Support Committee. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: Right. Right. Speaker 2: --yeah. Story_ID: 637678 Speaker 1: It's funny how all these things--you got Vietnam War going on; you had Vietnam was a col- you're in France. It was a, a colony of France. That's how get involved-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because of the French. Speaker 2: And, and a lot of--I mean, the, the, the--you know, 'cause it was obviously strong opposition over there. And you know, people would kind of not know how to approach me and you know, like was I gonna be an American patriot and all that? And you know, it was kind of like, well, you know, I mean, are you for or against? This looks about--it's the truth is the truth. I mean, it is what it is. It's I--here you have these people who invaded nobody. You get invaded by Japan. You endure that, and you get through that. Then the French come back in, and you kick them out, and now here, here comes somebody else. Well, and then, you know, people are going around talking about, well, those people over there, they, they used to it and you know. I mean, they just grew up with that. That doesn't make it normal (laughter), you know. It doesn't give you--and in, in other words, like, it, it was much like what we have, we find ourselves doing here kind of all the time. You know, these opinions that we're sharing on this, it has nothing--no, it's not what you're programmed to, oh, if you're black, you must think this. If you're an American, you must be--we kind of gotta like grow up here. I mean, you know, we've got other generations coming after us that's gonna depend on us to be wise, and what are we doing, you know? But that's another-- Speaker 1: Now you were immune from the draft, right, because of your height. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I mean, they sent me, you know, a notice, and I had the pleasure of writing them from France saying well (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah I think the cut off is like 6'6" or something be-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because you can't--if you're taller-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --than that and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you're a target really. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So they-- Speaker 2: Yeah. And you don't have, you know, you got--you don't have shoes; you don't have uniforms; you don't have beds; you don't have, you know--yeah. Speaker 1: You have nothing to fit you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. So that worked out for--fortunately for me, not so fortunate for the people who didn't have my exemption. Story_ID: 637679 Speaker 1: From '67 [1967] to '68 [1968], now you were at the University de Nancy [Nancy, France], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Studying French literature and culture. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And this is--about this time, just reflecting back on what you said earlier, you had this kind of revelation about art, with-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --during the hitchhiking. Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: So, so when you--after spending two, two years in France, so were these two steady years, or did you come back to visit, or, or-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. It's just continuous. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and you traveled to Algeria you said to-- Speaker 2: Morocco. I got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh Morocco-- Speaker 2: --to Morocco, yeah, yeah, yeah. I got to-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Yeah, just the, just the--not, you know, not Fes in Marrakesh [sic. Fes, Morocco], not that, the real, real, but, but you know, Tangiers [Tangier, Morocco], Tetouan [Morocco], enough to kind of get the, the feel. And, and, and you know, it's Africa. It's a, it's a, so it's, it was, you know, different, different, whole different processing of life, you know. Speaker 1: Now, while you were gone, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] spoke out against Vietnam [Vietnam War]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --on April the 4th, 1967. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And a year later to the day he's assassinated-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --in Memphis [Tennessee] in 1968. Speaker 2: Yeah. I didn't, I never, I didn't make that connection 'til about maybe ten or twelve years ago, when I--'cause I, I looked for the speech, A Time to Break the Silence [Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break the Silence]. And when I saw the date, it was just like, oh, oh, oh, oh wow yeah, yeah, that's, yeah. Speaker 1: So, so I, I take--now did you come back before the assassination or after? Speaker 2: No, after. Speaker 1: After, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--I keep thinking I need to write down some of these arrival stories. One of those spring breaks had a, not quite girlfriend, but girlfriend, a friend who was a girl, up in, in Amsterdam [the Netherlands]. So, I'm gonna go visit her and you know, do the hitchhiking thing and got to Amsterdam. I have my directions. I see a guy walking of course never--and almost everybody speaks English, so, you know. I asked, I says, "I'm looking for Mastrat [ph.]." "Oh, no problem, I'm, I'm, I'm walking that way, you walk with me." And he asked me what I'm doing. I said oh yeah, well, I'm, you know, here, you know, we're visiting. You know, I wanna see some of the museum, you know, Rembrandts and Van Gogh [Vincent Van Gogh], all this. And you know, in fact, I mentioned--Verna Mia [ph.]--if he give me the right pronuncia--a ya, fan ho, you know. I said forget it. That sounded almost like record when attacked. So as we're walking, I say, I'm noticing all these flags are at half mast. What, did somebody in the royal family die or something? "Oh, no, that's for Martin Luther King. He was, yeah, he was killed yesterday." "Excuse me, okay." And yeah, that, that was--I can't say how long I sat by this canal just processing that. But that, that was I guess when I knew that--I actually had the opportunity to stay over there. A guy had lined me up with a job and all. And I could have kind of done this European dream thing, but that was like no, no, no, I, I can't be doing this while that's going on. And yeah, so that was--yeah, that's where I was when, when that happened. And then, and it was, it was, it was really interesting because I got back to school, to Nancy. And you know, these American students, most, you know, they--it was just obvious that, wow, they were not moved by this assassination in the same way that I was. And you know, and, and, and it was just--well, you know, it's what it is. I just--you know. And then--what was it--it's a few weeks later Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] is assassinated. And they're, you know, in such profound shock (unclear) well, well, yeah, yeah. I, I, I get that. Where were you (laughter)--you know, it was kind of, it's kind of like the Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] thing, like well, okay, so, so now you're shocked that this happens. Well, didn't you (laughter) you know, yeah. Story_ID: 637680 Speaker 1: So you came back [from France] I guess in the, what, the first part of the summer in '68 [1968] or--? Speaker 2: End of--yeah, the, the, the, the--yeah, I think around--right, July, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: July, August, end of July maybe. Speaker 1: How, how did the country change? I mean, I mean, how? Speaker 2: When I left, we were Negroes. When I came back, we were black. Speaker 1: Now this profound, 'cause people don't under this now. They didn't go through it. But one day the news con- Walter Cronkite was saying Negro. The next day he's saying black. And it happened like that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It wasn't a transition. Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it was, it--I mean, I mean, you know, I mean, I was reading, you know, some of the news and this, but coming back and, and of course, you know, 1968 was that, that year. I mean, you had, you know, China, France, Germany, Mexico, Spain, Columbia University [New York, New York]. I--it was just this, this upheaval of whatever. Story_ID: 637681 Speaker 1: France was shut down. I mean, trains weren't running. People were going back to their wartime experience, hoarding. They knew what to hoard; sugar, flour, matches. Speaker 2: What was, what's happening in France at the time? Speaker 1: This was the--what could you call it? They, they call it the events, I mean, you know. Speaker 2: Something about de Gaulle [Charles de Gaulle]. I know it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, he was, he was, he was, well, he was president at the time, but it was kind of a student uprising mainly. And it was, it was part of the same thing, 'cause it kind of, it was in Mexico, was in, in, in, in, in Germany. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember the students getting shot in Mexico in a big crowd. It was horrible (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. And in France it was this whole red flag, black flag thing. It was this red flag representing socialism, you know. The black flag, flag representing anarchism (laughter), you know. Only the young can--you know. But it, it, it, it was--and, and I'm trying--I, I, I can't even remember if there was any single--I don't think--it, it wasn't like any single event that provoked it. It was just a kind of a general--I, I, I think what--yeah, to, to, to, to, to, to--if there was a single word, I, I think it was like this idea of the demand for participation, kind of the same thing all those student occupations on campuses here and the list of demands and all of that--that when you have situations like, like when I came back I was at Queens College [Queens, New York] and we had a situation there. It was going to be something like a job fair. And the students were saying wait, wait, wait. You--why are you inviting Dow Chemical [Dow Chemical Company] and these companies that are killing people in Vietnam to come here and help them hire us to work. And so the--I think those were the kinds of questions the--you know, the university system in, in France, I mean, goes back to Napoleon [Napoleon Bonaparte]. And the idea that students felt that the way things were being taught and some of the content of what was being taught was just not relevant, not, not--I mean, you know, you have wars going on. You've got, you know, all these issues going on in the world, and you're trying to train us to be what, you know? So I think that was kind of the general, the general, you know, kind of concern. Story_ID: 637682 Speaker 1: But the fact that it went beyond the campuses, and at least in France it was, there were some things that were really interesting because you had the opposite of the lockout. You had the strike with this--the workers occupied the factory and closed out the management. And there was a watch factory nearby and a few others. But the watch factory stood out particularly because the workers took over all the functions, made sure all the shipments got out, processed, and basically demonstrated you all--this factory, this company does not even need you, okay, and (laughter), you know, so kind of renegotiation. But what was so encouraging about it was, to see, like, I mean, I've, I participated in it where we take up collections, go buy, like, cold cuts and bread and all that, make all these sandwiches and carry them to the factories. And, and, and I mean, this was like--I remember there was a Senegalese brother who was part of this. And I mean, and in the factory the workers, their families were in there, so the kids actually got to see what their parents--their fathers do. So it was this, this, this amazing kind of, you know, solidarity. Then I left there on the next stop on the way back was England. I spent some time there. And when I got to England, wow, a guy was handing out leaflets and all that. I'm full of all that energy. And he was telling me about a meeting where and for the first time the black left and the white left are gonna be meeting together. Black left and white left? Oh, okay, right, okay, yeah, I'm, I'm making my way back to the Anglo-Saxon world (laughter), you know, 'cause that was like, not even a--I mean it wasn't even a thought; it wasn't even--it was--you know, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wasn't a thing in France, huh? Speaker 1: --among students there--yeah, so. Story_ID: 637683 Speaker 1: So you get back in July of '68 [1968], and all right. And you enroll I guess in the fa- was it the fall that you enroll at Queens College [Queens, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause the, the, the master's degree program that I was in in France was Queens College, study abroad so in that way it worked was I got the French degree kind of their equivalent the master's. Queens College had a little more stringent requirement, which you had to write a dissertation and all that, so I did that and yeah. Speaker 1: So, so your thesis was about common expressions used in the poetry of Francois Villon. Speaker 2: Yes. And that was my thesis director kind of suggested that, 'cause I was, I was interested--the, the period of French history that most interested me was when--was the medieval period when the cathedrals were being built and when their world was a lot like what the Muslim world was like in the '60s [1960s], where travelers--you just take a traveler in because these are people on pilgrimages. And you know, there was this whole thing and, and where Christianity was this bond that held everybody. And, and Francois Villon was a poet of the time who was kind of rebellious sort of person. But the idea of, like, proverbs and street expressions, you know, being used in his poetry, kind of resonated 'cause that was kind of where we, where we were, you know, Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] and [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez, and folks were kind of like, well, we don't--why not write the poetry of the people who it's for, you know, that kind of thing. So it was, you know, a good exercise. And, and certainly, you know, it had to be done in French, so it was, you know, another way to help learn the language, I guess. Of course, by that time I had it. Story_ID: 637684 Speaker 1: You earned your master's degree [from Queens College, Queens, New York] in 1970. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But, meanwhile, from '69 [1969] to '70 [1970] it says that you worked as a linguist on the black dialect project in Los Angeles [California], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And was this like a precursor to the Ebonics conversation or-- Speaker 2: Very much so. In fact, the Ebonics conversation was kind of the late-coming maybe misrepresentation. What--around the time I got back into the country, the--within the linguistics field, black--the, the, the big fad, you might say, which, you know, several nonblack scholars, you know, jumped and you know, published and did, you know, made money was this whole question of black dialect, which basically was, you know, no rele- no big revelation to us, but it was to, you know, many others, that the way black people speak English is not the bad English coming from bad education and a lack of brains and ability. But like all languages, it's a dialect; it's a, it's as the, we say, systematic and a ruled governed, and it has its own logic and its own--so that as far as this interfaces with education, if teachers know this and educators in general, then, ideally speaking, you'll know that this is a situation much like a second language, tea- teaching English as a second language, and more to the point, as it, as it would turn out, 'cause there's a--it ends up being a whole segue to that story that played just a few years ago. The revelation that the, the, the, the connection of kids speaking black English to their achievement or lack thereof, was much more a question of attitudes toward how they spoke, because attitude toward the speech was really a reflection of how--of attitudes toward the people. So, consequently, somebody speaking a French accent can come here and get a job in Hollywood or get a job anywhere, and his accent is considered charming because your attitude him and his culture is that way whereas the most skilled, dedicated black person, you know--I mean, you had Vietnam War heroes, for example, who speak the way they speak coming out of the hood, and you gonna give them less respect because you associate that with blackness and blackness with all of your, your prejudices. So, it, it was that whole complex of issues involved. Story_ID: 637685 Speaker 1: What happened with that, interestingly enough, was when the final publication came out [from a black dialect project], I had to do a dissenting opinion that was appended to the report. And a few years ago, maybe three or four years ago, a scholar who is revisiting this whole issue in the course of his research came across that report, came across my dissent, and took more interest in that dissent than even in the report itself, and was able to track me down, and, and, and we, you know, had some correspondence and some exchange on that. But it was a--what, what was unique about that particular study among several that were being done was that we were working with younger kids. And it was basically just letting them talk, recording, and then listening to all these linguistic features and-- Speaker 2: Who was in charge of that program? Speaker 1: It was--there was the, the, the, the, the, the, a, the place was Southwest Regional Laboratory [Southwest Regional Laboratory for Educational Research and Development, Los Alamitos, California]. These re- regional ed- educational laboratories were established. I believe this came out of that same impetuses, the NDA--EA [National Defense Education Act of 1958], that if the Russians are beating us into space, maybe we should start educating our, our, our kids. And the--if I think hard enough, I'll remember the names of some of those people. Schultz [ph.], I think, a guy named Schultz was at the--was kind of the CEO of that, that lab. Speaker 2: Okay, okay I take it-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --he's not a black person? Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. The, the, this was--our activity was one of several activities that the lab was doing. Like one guy working on Chicano and Mexican speech; another guy was working on Japanese American. And but ours I think was the more, you know-- Speaker 2: The, the UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and--now you were there, I guess--now correct me if I'm wrong--you were there when the US [US Organization]-Panther [Black Panther Party] shootout took place right? Speaker 1: I got, I got there later that year. That was-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --January. I got there in August. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And in many ways the smoke was still in the air. I mean, Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] was hiding, hiding out. He, he use--I mean, I, I met several of the people who were there, including the brother who chaired the meeting. Story_ID: 637686 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm interested to know, at this juncture, did you consider yourself a Pan-Africanist or, or in--'cause this, here you have the Black Panther Party, and you have the US Organization that founded Kwanzaa and Nguzo Saba and all of that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you got like the Black Panthers that are seen as like heroes in black communities too so, in conflict-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I was--at that point, I don't think--I, I probably haven't, had not, like, totally ra- refined or evolved, you know, my Pan-African perspective. But I, I do remember just, I mean, not being very partial about it, the whole--I thought the US Organization had all the looks of something that was bought off, paid for. It, it looked--it was just, it didn't--giving due respect for, you know, some of the things that were said that Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] had to say were very pertinent and very relevant and you know, made a lot of sense. I mean (unclear) no, you know, denying that. But okay, coming, I had my three years abroad. I spent a year in New York [New York] as a teaching assistant getting my master's [degree]. I get this job as a linguist kind of my first real professional job, you know, in California where, you know, as a kid dreamed of living in California, so. And okay, the Black Panther Party had this--well, the persona that everybody kind of knew and sensationalized. But it also had this sort of Marxist/Leninist, if you will, idea of that this was a class struggle more than a racial struggle. I'll just, just put it that way. And some of the people in the party, of course, were, you know, brilliant. And the two guys that got killed, Bunchy Carter and John Huggins, were, was like Fred Hampton. I mean, these were young guys who had their minds on, who were really, you know, looking at and trying to, you know, figure this, this out and really come to some kind of strategy for dealing and surviving. And in the case of the Panthers, part of that was, well, we gotta just pick up guns and protect our community 'cause we can't have, you know, police feeling like they're, you know, you know, they're in a hunting preserve here, which that's okay, that's that. But then within that is a lot of madness going on. And as a matter of fact, I would learn later on that this whole thing between the US Organization and the Panthers, at least there on the campus in Los Angeles [California], really came down to these were these when they were younger, these were the Gladiators and the Slausons. And so this was like a gang rivalry thing that just took on the look of something that should have been, in some cases were, was, was much more serious and, and, and, and, and meaningful. Story_ID: 637687 Speaker 1: You know, when you just kind of look at things for what they are, how they strike you, you just, you know, see things. And Los Angeles [California], I, I used to have this--maybe I still do--you know, this idea that folk kind of take on the trappings of the place where they live so that--like when I was living in Boston [Massachusetts], you had a lot of people wanting to act like intellectuals. And in Los Angles you had this Hollywood vibe where so much of what people were doing was like playacting. Speaker 2: The drama-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --dramatizing. Speaker 1: And I would see--you know, you sit down. You enter somebody's house, and, you know, we're talking about, okay, we're in the struggle, you know. And here's some, here are people, you know, literally like playing around, handling guns. And guys, you know, trying to impress women, "Yeah, you know, it's, it's so serious out here. We may not be here tomorrow," and, but you're trying to get into this lady's pants. You're not talking about no--you know, and you know, and, and things like that. You start saying, hm, you know. But that being said, the, just the persona that you saw, the US Organization guys that you saw in Los Angeles at the time were, it was similar 'cause more than a few people used to point this out, like with the Nation of Islam, where you have movements that are more, as they were interpreting it--not altogether incorrectly I would say--it was like they were more interested in distinguishing themselves from the mass of black people than from, you know, so that, like, the example they would use is that as the--as, as people started growing afros and wearing dashikis you had the people in the Nation, you know, going with the close-cut hair and the neck--and the suits and ties, you know. And the US Organization had this whole shaved head and suit thing, know. And you know, and then you know, I mean, we, who grew up in the environment, I mean, like, okay, you know, US Organization, okay, you know, US, I mean, what is that supposed to mean? Are you supposed to be--is--you know, you're supposed to be standing up for the United States as opposed to--you, you know. You know the fact that the Kwanzaa ritual had so much of being based on essentially Hanukkah, you know, and, and Passover, you know, the writing on the candles and the first fruits and--well, don't we have--we have African traditions. Why are you borrowing from somebody else's to, to claim that, when--you know. So those are the kinds of things that, that were, you know, part of my--kind, kind of going back to that--question of leaving here in '66 [1966], coming back in '68 [1968] and whoa, you know (laughter), everything has really shifted. And, and just, just as an outside observer, you know, maybe my perceptions are right; maybe they were wrong. But just seeing it and based on what I knew, or thought I knew at the time, those--well, I guess the whole bottom line was, why did the tragedy of these guys getting killed have to happen? And it didn't have to happen. It didn't have to happen. Speaker 2: No. Later on it, it--Butch Connelly [ph.] thought now that the COINTEL program [Counterintelligence Program (COINTELPRO)]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], really, exacerbated it and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --really brought it to that, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Clayborne Carson's book. He, in fact, now he was at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] when you were there I don't know if you ever met him, but-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Clayborne Car- Carson, he was there, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And there are some other people that, you know, have written about it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that's--well, at any rate-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --so--but that was the atmosphere. Story_ID: 637688 Speaker 1: In '68 [1968] it's black power and even-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --movies come out now with more--with black themes. There's a lot of-- Speaker 2: Right, and, and the blaxploitation. I mean, you had--'cause Hollywood was kind of gone down and they weren't--so, so you--this is what actually kind of saved Hollywood economically, was this-- Speaker 1: Yeah, '68 [1968], '69 [1969]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --seventy [1970] it's so many people we've interviewed got that first job, the white corporation-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and white institutions-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, in that juncture right after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is killed to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --about 1970-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there's a business window. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Everything is opening up. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, some things opened up anyway. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. And then, of course, in Los Angeles [California], you know, you had the, the, the, the Watts [Los Angeles, California] thing was still--now, by this time you had the Watts Festival [Watts Summer Festival] and-- Speaker 1: The riot was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --sixty-six [sic. 1965] and-- Speaker 2: Exactly. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --by the time I got out there in '69 [1969], '70 [1970], yeah, there was the annual Watts Festival. You know, and all the policing is done by the Sons of Watts [Sons of Watts Improvement Association], no police, none of that, and no problems, you know. And so there were, there were--but like, like anything else, you know, we--you know, you read the news and these things, these, these events kind of come and go. And we just don't realize all these scars that get left, you know, along the way. Story_ID: 637689 Speaker 1: So you were out there for--until '70 [1970], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you came back. You went to, next you went to Boston right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boston, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Boston, Massachusetts, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so, and you were project coordinator, artist-in-residence and for Circle Associates consultants [Circle Associates, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, now here you, now you're an artist now. I mean, you're, you're an artist-in-residence. Speaker 2: Well, it, it, it, it segued into that. I first went there as--my first job was, there was a, it's an experimental program at two predominantly black schools, King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Timilty [James P. Timilty Middle School, Boston, Massachusetts]. And there was a council or something that was set up. And I guess the idea was to have parents go, and there's teachers aides and things like that. So-- Speaker 1: So were you teaching in, in Boston? Speaker 2: No, no, I, I, I wasn't; I wasn't. I, I, I was working on all kinds of things like, based on what I had done in Los Angeles [California], we were working on, like, early childhood things and that, that sort of thing. And Circle Associates was a black consulting firm based in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. And Speaker 1: Who was, who was, who founded that? Who, who was in charge of it? Speaker 2: There was a guy named--what was his name? I want to say Bob Lewis [ph.], something Lewis. The, but the people I was working more directly with--oh, now let me think--Bill Leitel [ph.]. William Leitel was somebody who kind of made his way to some prominence. And Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and Vivian Johnson [HistoryMaker Vivian R. Johnson] were--I see them now and then at that conferences. We got to be pretty good friends. But, anyway (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --Diane Renfroe was another name that-- Story_ID: 637690 Speaker 1: My first job there [at Circle Associates, Boston, Massachusetts] was to interview the people and write a--we were gonna do an evaluation of the program. And then from that I think--let's see, there was another project that I worked on. There was a teacher training project or teacher--training is too strong a word, especially when you're up against a stone wall. One of the high schools where the students were being bused, 'cause you know, that was the big issue in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Oh had the buses started at this point? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: In Boston. Now this is a-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah this is a (unclear)-- Speaker 1: So I think this was like, med--Medford High School [Medford, Massachusetts] nor- now, Medford [Massachusetts] was kind of interesting because it had been--it was an Underground Railroad station back in the day. So you had a few people descendants of folk who were in Medford back then who were very conservative and very--I mean, they were black but you know, very much thinking like, you know, their neighbors and, and so we, we had a program just kind of working with the teachers, trying to help them see what, you know, some of the issues and all. And oh, my God, that was, it was, it was just like the teachers, the administrators, I mean, they were, as far as they were concerned was, you know, they had nothing to learn from us, and they--and, but you know, if things were left in their hands, things would be just fine, you know. But, but then as my different projects, then we, we were involved with--we succeeded. The firm played a significant role in helping to stop I-95 [Interstate 95] from being brought right into Boston, from the beltway into Boston. It was called Operation STOP [ph.]. STOP was the acronym for-- Speaker 2: Were they gonna run it through the black community in Boston? Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Through Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So what happened in Overtown [Miami, Florida] and New Orleans [Louisiana] and Eatonville [Florida] would have happened there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My hometown, everywhere. Speaker 1: And, and then there was, you know, fortunately, you know, by bringing from the, from the, the, the, the, the, the, the beltway all the way in some of the outlying communities, you know, white communities, we, we formed that coalition, 'cause there were people that said look, there, there, you know, there's wetlands here. You can't just--you know. So, we, we were able to stop that and then get a portion of the, the construction budget reallocated and do a restudy. And then so we did a transportation needs survey. And then Dr. Johnson, Vivian Johnson [HistoryMaker Vivian R. Johnson], she started working. But there was a guy named George Cureton [ph.], C-U-R-E-T-O-N, who had come up with a really interesting, ingenious way of teaching beginning reading, phonics and all that. And so the, the, the program was to help teach parents who could use--teach this at home to their kids. And then I went to some of the homes and was documenting that, so I was this photographer-in-residence, as it were, and then I was starting designing, you know, doing graphic designs and designing materials and-- Speaker 2: Wait a minute. Let me go back a little bit. So how did you--so you came into this job as a photographer or, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no. That, that-- Speaker 2: Okay. That's just one-- Speaker 1: --that, that came that came later. That-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --somebody saw me with a camera and, and-- Speaker 2: So they made you the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And-- Speaker 2: But you came in from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] because of your linguistic work. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right, okay. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And that's how it--yeah. Story_ID: 637691 Speaker 1: It just kept morphing, so that the last job I had was when [HistoryMaker] Byron Rushing, who had, had since gone into politics, and oh, I think he's, was or is a state senator, started this Boston African American museum [American Museum of Negro History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts]. I got to design and remodel the, the space from office space to being a, a museum space and that was-- Speaker 2: You do that--now this is an artistic job, but you've got the chance-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --to do it because you were there, right? Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. And, and so, so that's how it morphed from one thing to I came there as one thing and left there doing art and design and-- Speaker 2: So, you did basically what the man who drove your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Speaker 2: You started doing what you-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --did. You could start doing it. Speaker 1: And, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --based on that, by the time I said well, I want to relocate to Miami [Florida], it was like, well, look, this art thing is this--let's just throw down, and let's try this. And that's-- Speaker 2: How many--you actually--there actually was--you, you were involved in the exhibit in Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We are, right, right, right. Speaker 2: --the black artist exhibit in the new museum, correct? Speaker 1: It was in, it was in Horticultural Hall [Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --which is right across from Symphony Hall [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And yeah, this lady, she kind of had some contacts and set this thing up. It was a group show. And, and it, you know, The Boston Globe reviewed it and you know, mentioned that there were some strong charcoals by Dinizulu [HistoryMaker Dinizulu Gene Tinnie]. Okay, well, I'll take it, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: Now were you Dinizulu by then? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 637692 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right now that means okay, now you got to go back and tell us now. How did you--how you got involved with African Liberation Support Committee. Just to re- recap and go back a little bit. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When [HistoryMaker] Maulana Karenga was jailed in Los Angeles [California], Imamu Baraka takes over, Amiri Baraka, who took the title of Imamu and emerges as the head of Akawa Edis Organization [ph.], based off of the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the theories and discussions-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --of Maulana. And he--they formed the Congress of Afrikan People 1970. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right. So Congress of Afrikan People, how did that come as--I think Afrikan was the CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] committee I, I believe-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --if I'm not wrong. Speaker 2: By 1970, I was really--okay, I mean, I, I, I, I, I, I, I could say that my political consciousness was awake enough to know that there were things that needed to be done, but, you know. And it was while working at Circle Associates [Boston, Massachusetts], I--there was a young lady working with me, Akosua Barthwell [Akosua Barthwell Evans] from Detroit [Michigan], who is now, she's--I see her name now and then. She's gone on to go do some good things with--in fact, she even got involved in something artistic with the Black Arts Quarter [ph.], being published out of Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] I think for a while. But anyway, I, I went to a lecture by, it was a bulletin from South Africa. And we was talking about the struggle there, and somehow that was the place I needed to be, 'cause like some of what he was say- it was, it was like it was some dots that got connected. And I said now yeah, okay. And Owusu Sadaukai, who has gone back, now to be in Howard Fuller, he, he was based in Greensboro [North Carolina]. I think he was working with the Malcolm X Liberation University. I believe he or--he was certain at the head of the African Liberation Day effort. So when I heard about African Liberation Day and real--and so what it was about and then and that it was supporting these, these struggles in, in, in, in the Motherland, it was like, okay, yeah. With more dots having been connected, I can absolutely see why, you know, you know, we need to do this. And of course, you know, you always had that back story that--I guess it was part of Garvey's [Marcus Garvey] teachings, Malcolm [Malcolm X]--that if Africa is free, then African people, everywhere, you know, that stance is like--Malcolm always used the example of China, you know. Used to be people said you don't have the Chinaman's chance once China had its revolution and rise to power. Well, you know, Chinese people aren't, don't get disrespected anymore. And, and so, anyway, you know, there was the Pan-African Skills Project that those brothers were doing in Tanzania, Somalia, and I think--in fact, three countries that were relatively more progressive, where people who had--still from here-- Story_ID: 637693 Speaker 1: So you got involved in Af- African Liberation Support Committee (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --through Owusu [Owusu Sadaukai] and--right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And learned about the Tanzanian group and all that. Things that were going on. Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 2: --right, and then we were doing fundraising and all kinds of things in Boston [Massachusetts] to support--and then what was really interesting in the case of Boston, because if you remember the, the, the, the three arms struggles--well, the five that were going on were: South Africa, Zimbabwe, Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau, what the Guinian--Amiri Kakabrowl [ph.], who is one of the polit- you know, I don't have many historic heroes, but he's one. His, you know, party was for the liberation of Guinea and Cape Verde, Cape Verde islands. And you know, south of Boston you have a large Cape Verdean community. And New Bedford [Massachusetts] is the capital of the Cape Verdean nation. So we had a, quite a bit of, shall we say, solidarity with the conscious people in that community. And I personally ended up kind of having a real bond with that, with, with those folk and you know, got to be invited to some pretty special, you know, experiences that, that, that, that they had, where, you know, folks from the Motherland would come across here, come here to, you know, talk about the progress of the struggle and all like that. So that really gave it another, another dimension. And curious enough, just like what we were talking about, while the struggle was going on, there were people who, in the Cape Verdean community who did, did not like being associated with Africa. They, they, they considered themselves to be Portuguese. They--all of those syndromes that we, you know, blacks and white masks, that, that whole-- Speaker 1: It's especially in Boston. If you go to Boston, it'll behoove them to be Portuguese more so than-- Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: And they can actually be accepted as Portuguese-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because nobody knows. Speaker 2: Although, I mean, you know, a lot of folk, you know--I mean, like, just I--a lot of us would be like, man, you, you, you can just sit right in here. You just come in and tell people your name is Joe Golmes or something (laughter). And, but you had a lot of animosity to the point where at one of these meetings, these brothers had their car firebombed, you know. And there was a newspaper that they, that they put out. The, the, the logo on the newspaper was a black panther and a tiger, and it was supposed to be like this, the, you know, the, those who wanted to be black and those who are striped, mixed, whatever. If we can get along sort of thing but after the struggle was won and independence was one, to see the transformation of that community, all those people who before were so poor to--to Cape Verde, you know, we're African. It was, it was, it was just, you know, kind of proves that, that, that theory has some, some substance, because--and, and, and you know, again, it, it wasn't just an ethnic thing or--but it was the fact that, that it was a right cause. It was a, it was a, it was, it--like, when, when you're on the true side of things, it's a moral and spirit, spiritual satisfaction that comes from being in balance with things that is not there when you, when you're not, you know. Story_ID: 637694 Speaker 1: My observation--I'm a contemporary of yours, behind you by seven years, but still, I--in the--it seems to me in the early '70s [1970s], I mean, people were doing a lot of discovery, in terms of identity. And more people more so in the '60s [1960s]. There was an attempt to do it, but, but it wasn't same depth. Like you were-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --just talking about some of the things we were doing then. But in the '70s [1970s], people are born that's in--now, 1977 is when the 'Roots' miniseries came along, which has caused like, it reached the average black person--everybody was, was concerned about their African identity. Speaker 2: Right. Well, the, and, and the way--I mean, 'Roots' was just a, a, a, a world changing because the whole country, black, white, everybody tuned into that. Like nobody, it just didn't, nothing had, had that grip on the whole country before. And it, it, it showed me something then that I, I pointed out many times since, that it proved that contrary to what politicians or you know, pundits, media say, in the privacy of people's homes, in the privacy of their thoughts and their souls, there's a real hunger and thirst to know more about, look, what, what really--what was this slavery thing? What really happened? How did these people get through this? What--how could people be persuaded to, you know, do this, I mean, to, to, to other people and all? And yeah, and, and, and I think the--yeah, that, that, that, that quest for, well, you know, Sankofa later would become like that kind of a buzz word, but to try to retrieve what that lost thing was, because like you say, it was--well, I guess now we call it the black consciousness movement, but it was in the music; it was in, you know, the literature. It was in the visual art. I mean, I, I, I, I'm, I still marvel at how there was this unwritten, unspoken understanding, like, like every visual artist had to do--just did something on the American flag, you know. Like, it was like you just had to make a statement about it with that star-striped red, white, blue, you know. And it was part of this catharsis, awakening. Story_ID: 637695 Speaker 1: I think a lot--the, the music espe- you know, Pharoah Sanders, I mean, I used to follow him a lot and you know, but so many others who were just, you know, opening this up and, as a matter of fact Pharoah Sanders did a concert at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. And it was very interesting because they ran a film loop on the backdrop. Half of it was in color showing Africa just, you know, crocodile sliding into the water and just, just natural Africa. And the other half was like black and white, and it was, you know, Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] and just different, you know, scenes of what was happening here. And as the musicians were playing, especially when that was on, people would be responding to what was on the screen, some cheering or whatever. And so the--and in some cases the, the people are applauding for the musicians, but the musicians couldn't tell what, which--so it, it really (laughter) made for a very, very interesting kind of interaction, you know. But it was, it was a heady time. It was that, it was that quest for what was power identity, you know, certainty. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Pharoah had an album, what, '73 [1973], '72 [sic. 1971], called 'Black Unity.' Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers, he played 'Red, Black & Green,' you know. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I mean a lot of the artists were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah-- Speaker 2: --focused on-- Speaker 1: --Archie Shepp-- Speaker 2: --themes of identity. Speaker 1: --I mean, people would just, just--you know. And, and you know, the visual arts had it. The play--you know, I mean, [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins and people doing just some, I mean, some of the stuff was just wild. But, but you know, this-- Speaker 2: You had the theater scene was, it was-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it was about people, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Charles Gordone's piece was just that--and 'No Place to be Somebody' was just--in fact, I, I got to see that, you know, not long after it opened, and you know, of course he was still alive then, you know, made his appearance at the end of the play and you know, lots of applause and-- Story_ID: 637696 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in '78 [1978], you exhibited some out, outdoor wood sculptures in Miami [Florida]. Now this--now how did you--can you tell us about, like--well, okay, like, maybe it starts with OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Center]. I don't know. Did you take a job in Miami with OIC? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is that it? Speaker 2: Yeah. That was after a, a few other jobs. That was like the first one, what you might call pro- pro- professional job. But after I--'cause I, I got here like in August of '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I arrived the day before or two days before Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] resigned. And the day I got here the DEA [Drug Enforcement Administration] building downtown Miami collapsed. It was an omen, I guess. The--yeah, OIC was--I was teaching there. Speaker 1: You were teach, teaching English-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --English instruction. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: But the, the whole coming to Miami story, the big significant part for me was, there's a group called Miami Black Arts Workshop in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida]. And here were black artists who had a storefront that could shift from being gallery space or workspace. And this whole collective artist spirit was there. And I was able to--once I was introduced to the place, well, I was in, you know. And, and I think the, the, I think the first meeting I went to a guy came that needed some--he wanted--he was going into the t-shirt business, and he needed some samples printed up. And the workshop was kind of that too, this kind of go-to place for your art services. And as he was leaving, I was--I asked him if he had brochures and promotional stuff for his company. He said well, no. And I said well, you know, why don't I work up some sketches? When you come back for the shirts we could look at it, and maybe we can do some business. Long story short, we negotiated that, got the job, got paid, and I was able to say well, since this came through the black art workshop, 50 percent goes into the work--black art workshop, which was right on time to cover that month's rent because it was a little--and so it, it just fit, you know. And so it was through that that the, the, the wood sculpture, it's, it, it, it's in, well, that was 1978. And so we're, we're looking at almost forty years. It's not in very good shape now, but it's still there. And it was a very--as a matter of fact, I, I got some pictures over here. It was a--the process of carving it, you know, we always say that when we do murals and outdoor projects like that, then the visual becomes a performing art, you know. So people would come and just watch and you know, bring offerings of, you know, beer, cigarettes, joints, whatever (laughter) you wanted to but I didn't get mixed up in that. And, and when we installed it, I mean people were saying, okay, you're gonna put this in that Overtown section [Miami, Florida]. It won't last three days. It won't-- Story_ID: 637697 Speaker 1: The Overtown [Miami, Florida] now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for those who don't know, is a black section of Miami [Florida]. It's one of the older-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --established. It was the business center of black Miami at one time. Speaker 2: of--exactly, exactly. It was-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --platted, Colored Town [Overtown, Miami, Florida] was actually part of the original plat of the city. And because of kind of the one-two punch of integration, as strange as that might sound, and construction of the expressway, it went from being very thriving and prosperous to being, by the time I got here, it was like--my first impression, I saw it, am I in the United States? I mean this is just, this is--it just looked so impoverished. But as we said then, look, if the art respects the community, the community is gonna respect the art. We're not gonna have any problems. And that's, that's what happened. The people--those sculptures became such a, a--I'll just say a cause for good feelings (laughter). And, and let me see, I think it was, this might have been five years, maybe six years ago now a couple of us went by the park where the sculptures are. And while we were there, a young man was walking buy. He was carrying like a knapsack, and he stopped. He said, "Did--do y'all have something to do with that?" And I said oh yeah, well, you know, kind of gave him a little history. And he was saying, he asked if he could take pictures. He was actually a photographer on his way to photograph a football game or something. And he said that every day going--coming up going to school, him and his, he and his best friend would walk past that sculpture, and hardly a day would go by when they went that they didn't talk about it, wondering, you know, who did it. But he, he said it was like part of their lives; it was part of them. And I mean, just hearing that unsolicited, you know, it, well, that, that, that kind is like one of many stories. I mean, I, I, I, I, all I can say, I've been blessed to have a whole accumulation of anti- anecdotes like that, that talk about the power of art in the community to, you know, make a, make a difference. Speaker 1: Oh, I saw the name of it 'Remembrance of The Way.' Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know that I--yeah, you know I, I know it was in--I mean, what, what is it referenced to? So-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --can you tell us about that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, of course, the, the reference is 'Two Thousand Seasons' by Ayi Kwei Armah and that whole opening section of the, the way. And of course, you know, we can extrapolate from that to, you know, you know, the, the, the, the Chinese concept of the Tao, you know, the way. And, and many cultures, Native American and others, have this consciousness of there's a way to live. And if you deviate from it, you create problems and illnesses and imbalances. And if you're in harmony with the way, then you create, you know, music instead of noise. And so that, that, that was kind of the, the, the inspiration for the title and, and this kind of a little--the, the bronze placard, the, at the, at the, the, at the site, has kind of a little tagline that says, "Dedicated to the calm unity of Overtown," you know (laughter). And that, that phrase comes from a dear friend, activist in, in, in, in the Bronx [New York] who, well, we kind of grew up together. She was a little ahead of me, but you know, brilliant woman doing a lot of, you know, work for, you know, calm unity, yeah. Story_ID: 637698 Speaker 1: During this period of time, from '74 [1974] to '83 [1983], you're an artist, designer, project coordinator for Miami Black Arts collective in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida], right? Speaker 2: Right, Miami Black Arts Workshop [Miami, Florida], exactly. Speaker 1: And so, so you came to town working with O--with OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Center]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But you ended up, you know-- Speaker 2: I, right. The, the, the, the, those are parallel, 'cause I was introduced to Miami Black Art Workshop like within the first couple of weeks that I was here. I had other jobs I had. I was a maintenance man at the Riviera cinema [Loew's Riviera Theatre, Coral Gables, Florida] down in south Miami. I was--I had a, a few others--but OIC was like the first, okay, where I'm using my credentials and actually teaching and, and, and, and you know, and doing that. So, and it was, a, a kind of synergy there because, you know, a, above that and beyond the teaching, like I could do just artwork to promote, you know, take--you know, I was doing a lot more photography then, so documenting things that were going on at OIC. There were a few things I did that I never got to do, 'cause I really wanted--OIC was located in what was an old department store. And the entrance was on the corner. It had one of those kind of free-standing glass window displays. And you know, my thought was like, what a great place so people walking by, well, here's what this place is, what, you know--I didn't get to do that, but it--I got to do a few things, like design some greeting cards that they could sell and things like that. So it was a way that the art could, you know, be part of the, you know, you know--have a presence there as well. Speaker 1: OIC in those days, they, they were--Leon Sullivan was going to Africa--I mean, Louis, Leon-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Leon Sullivan, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was going to Africa-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --quite a bit. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, and his vision for that I think was just, you know--well, he, he just had a wise overall vision. I don't know if everybody who worked in the organization had the same extent of it. Well, in fact, I know they didn't (laughter). That's another story. But it was, it--you know, I ran into an alumnus of there a week and a half ago. I don't know if you remember me from OIC. Brother Andrews [ph.]. God, you remember. That was, you know, yeah, yeah. That was important, you know (laughter), yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 637699 Speaker 1: Now, peace fell apart in 1980 when the McDuffie riots, what they called the McDuffie (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --what they call, called McDuffie riots anyway-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --hit Miami [Florida]. What, what was, what was the situation there? Speaker 2: I, I think I might have said earlier about having kind of a charmed existence. That has to be I think the fourth riot situation we are providence just removed me from the scene. I was in New York [New York] when I got the, the word that--in fact, my oldest sister [Jo-Ann Tinnie Mitchell], the one I was saying was born in St. Kitts. She had--this was just our, big part of our whole family reunion and us getting to know her. And I, I had to go into New York City that day, came back out to Long Island [New York]. She says, "You, you know they're rioting in Miami?" I said, "Rioting in Miami? For what?" "Oh, something about these police not being found guilty for--you know." And I think my first response was probably something a little bit vulgar like, well, I hope they burn everything (laughter), you know. But you know, just another one of those outrageous (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we'll still talking about it today-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --you know in 2017-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--right. Speaker 1: --with Black Lives Matter every--seem like every other month there's an incident. Story_ID: 637700 Speaker 1: Just that I'll indulge the--or if you'll indulge me. There's an, there, there are these like hidden treasures that you just, you know, never expect. Well, okay, we were in a bookstore in Washington, D.C. I found a book called 'Indignant Heart' ['Indignant Heart: A Black Worker's Journal,' Charles Denrby]. I don't know if you ever seen it or heard of it. I'm not, I, I, I, I had not heard of it. I hadn't heard of the author. And it's kind of a story of a family that leaves Mississippi and how they had to survive, and I mean, there's some rough stuff they went through. He tells the story of them stopping at a gas station. His uncle--I think it was like an older relative, like an uncle. When he got out the car, these white guys are sitting around, and they--it's kind of out in an isolated place where you realize that you're not in any kind of situation of power. They say to him that they made a bet that he can drink a, like a half pint of liquor in one, one shot or something like that. And if he could do that, they'll pay him so much. Well, whatever the situation was, he realized, okay, there was no choice in the matter. So he drinks this bottle down. And after he drinks it he realizes that it wasn't moonshine. It was kerosene. And these guys are having just the biggest laugh. They, I think they gave him something, but now--that scene, it, it, it, it, it, it stuck with me. I remember one of these--hearing one of these police verdicts. I think it was the Luis Alvarez case. The first thing that came to me was like, you know, this is like being made to drink gasoline--kerosene. Like, once you, you, you, you've done it, these people have caused you to do it, you don't know what--I mean, is this a poison that's gonna be the end of your life? Will your body ever recuperate? Will you ever be the same? But--and it's this trauma that is not gonna go away until--well, it's never gonna go away. It's gonna--and that was kind of the--I mean, the fact that that was the first thing that came to mind. And, and every time these things happen it's like, almost like that kind of situation there. A lot of, you know, you hear a lot of folks say that, as was the case with the people in Charleston [South Carolina] and Dylann Roof, you know, we've been in the forgiveness business too long. We're, you know, we, we, we can't but the fact of the matter is that the wisdom we've inherited is, well, no, you, you can't become like that, because then, then you--that's--and this goes all the way back to Kemet [Egypt] and Osiris and Set. I mean, this is that, that. Story_ID: 637701 Speaker 1: By the time I got back to Miami [Florida]--I was living in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida]--they had the streets blocked off during that. I said, "You know, you don't--no, you can't block. I live here." "Well, you can't--." I'll find a side street and just go on in and you know. And got back, and I was getting all the news reports from friends, neighbors. I saw the, this melted asphalt spot in the street. Well, that was where this Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] was overturned and burned. And, and I knew one guy who got murdered by--not by the police but by people fighting over the, the loot. And in the end it was like, I read eighteen--I think it was nineteen people that were killed. You heard all the stories. You've heard--had police where it's supposed to be upholders of the law spray painting cars that were in the parking lot, writing--spray painting looter on the car. Well, you don't know. The, the car was parked there when you got there. You don't know, but at the same time, and I've heard this story, I heard it in Los Angeles [California], where you have these ambulance back up to the store, and guys--oh, you're saying that the people in hood are doing the looting, but here are people in uniform. Yeah, police, just because--well, yeah, you know, nobody's gonna, you know, suspect you. But there are people with eyes on who saw that. And that doesn't get reported. There were the stories of, well, some speculation, some people who felt like they knew for sure that there are people whom, to collect insurance, had their property burned, and you know, the opportunity presented itself. Gonna be the best business deal of the year, so let's do it (laughter). So, you know, there's always that, and then there's that, that bottom line that I don't remember the quote, but Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], as usual, had such a cogent, eloquent analysis of what, what this riot thing does and does not do, that it is, it's like this venting even as it's happening, the people who are doing this know that this is not a winning situation, you know. And like I say, I--there was a time in France, there was a time in Harlem [New York, New York], there was a time someplace else, and then the one with McDuffie [Arthur McDuffie] where I was just not on the scene so I never witnessed that, you know, like to actually be in the neighborhood when it--no. Story_ID: 645938 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name, [HistoryMaker] Dinizulu Gene Tinnie, D-I-N-I-Z-U-L-U, G-E-N-E, T-I-N-N-I-E. Speaker 1: All right. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 25th, 1942, South Bronx, New York [New York]. Speaker 1: All right. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Many, visual artist, semi-retired educator, and formal training as linguist, writer, erstwhile activist; (laughter) the list goes on. Speaker 1: All right, all right. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At, at this present time? We are at historic Virginia Key Beach Park in Miami, Florida. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March 6th, I believe, 2017. Speaker 1: All right, and here, we're here today to complete an interview we started in February, I believe, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe so, yes [sic. January 23, 2017]. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 645939 Speaker 1: And we left off with you in Miami [Florida], just completed 'Remembrance of The Way' [Dinizulu Gene Tinnie] and you were working with the Miami Black Arts collective. And, and I just wanted to ask you what is the--can you describe the Miami Black Arts collective, and how is that different from another group, the Kuumba arts collective [Kuumba Artists Association of Florida, Inc.; Kuumba Artists Collective of South Florida, Miami, Florida]? Speaker 2: Okay, Miami--actually, the official name was Miami Black Arts Workshop [Miami, Florida], or you could say Miami Black Arts Workshop and gallery. That was the group that I joined very shortly after coming to Miami. The young lady who I connected with, who was the cause of me being here, introduced me to this artist group in the Coconut Grove area of Miami, which is the oldest section of Miami, which has a black section, which is primarily of Bahamian origin. So you have that whole microcosm of Miami history there. And the arts workshop, Black Arts Workshop, was a group that was founded on the University of Miami campus [Coral Gables, Florida] by black art students there who realized this was--they started just like in 1968, '69 [1969]. The black consciousness movement, which succeeded the Civil Rights Movement, was very much alive and, and, and certainly found its way to Miami. And those students realized that they had to do something more than simply produce pictures; they, they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There-- Speaker 2: --part of something greater. Speaker 1: --do we know the names of any of those students today? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Roland Woods, Jr. was the, I guess the primary person; Walter Dennis, who's still a visual artist, still here in Miami; Walter Mitchell, who has I think moved on to Georgia. And by the time I got here, other artists had, well, they had found their way from the campus to actually having a location in the community, and that was huge. And so Roland Woods was joined by Donald McKnight, Robert McKnight, George Wrentz [ph.], W-R-E-N-T-Z. And those were the guys I met. And essentially, they were--it was a, kind of a collective art experience. Story_ID: 645940 Speaker 1: Well, there, there was a threefold mission [of the Miami Black Arts Workshop, Miami, Florida], as I'm remembering this. One was it just heightened awareness, public awareness of black art, that there is a black art aesthetic, global black artist aesthetic even; secondly, to mentor younger (cough) excuse me, younger artists, and that really translated into afterschool activities and working in one of the local housing projects on Friday evenings with the kids while their parents were out and so forth; and thirdly it was simply to create a better economic base for artists that, you know, if people have gone to school, educated themselves to be professionals, they should be compensated like professionals in any other profession. And so that was kind of the underlying motive. But what was significant is that they had actually acquired a storefront space, which served as both workplace and on occasion we would move everything aside, clean up, dress up, and it would become a gallery space and we could host exhibitions, typically for about ten days--well received in the community and beyond the community so that the local folk and then just other artists and art lovers would attend. I think one of the most successful, and it kind of bespeaks sort of the sense and the mission of the, the, the whole idea, was one that was done in 1977 called 'Hidden Talent,' and it was art from Florida prisons. And we actually were able to go around to various penal institutions. And that was based really on, well, it was a concept I had actually seen in, in, in Boston [Massachusetts] that was done. And certainly in some places like Massachusetts, the--there were people in incarcerated situations who were, as they themselves would say, they had nothing but time so they were developing their talent but producing really conscious images. What we got here in Florida was a little different. It was like good art, not so polit- politically topical but certainly relevant. And, and then of course, for the art collectors, it was an opportunity to get really quite good quality art at quite reasonable prices. Story_ID: 645941 Speaker 1: What do you think accounts for the political disparity between the two pla- pla- places I guess? Speaker 2: I, I'm still trying to figure out (laughter)-- Speaker 1: I know it's a tricky question (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) some of those things. Speaker 1: It's a tricky question I know, but-- Speaker 2: Well, you know (laughter), I think the way I, I, I, I quote, unquote resolved this in my head was that I, I, I--at some point I realized, okay, I'm originally from New York [New York], came here from Boston [Massachusetts], have been to other places, Washington [D.C.], Baltimore [Maryland], Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], even Los Angeles [California] where, you know, you saw all of this political ferment going on, and came here [Miami, Florida] and it was quite different. And I, I sort of resolved that as well, apples don't grow down here, and oranges don't grow up there; you know, it's, it's kind of a different place. I think the most striking difference was, and you know, for, and for those of us who are kind of, for whatever reason, you know, good or bad, sane or insane, that we get attracted to supporting causes of one kind or another, what I found most striking was that in Boston, for example, you know, if something, an incident, for example, like the last issue before I left there was a situation in which two African American men were killed by police within a three week period, one while in custody found mysteriously dead in his cell; the other was shot and killed. He--one of those strange cases. He's driving a car that the police identified as being part of a prison escape attempt. Two black police see the car, recognize, called for backup. Two white officers come. The driver of the car (unclear) as he's returning to the car he spots them. He realizes that something isn't right. He wants to take off running. He gets bumped by a taxi cab as he runs across the street, so now he's limping. And the two white officers emptied their guns, and the two black officers never even unholstered theirs. Okay, give you all that detail to say: a situation like that was not very difficult for people to get together and decide, look, we have to have some response to this. And why, within four or five days' time, there was a huge demon- you know, I, I say huge--maybe six hundred, seven hundred people in front of the police station to make it known that this was not acceptable. And by contrast, when I got here, I noticed that it's, it seems that--and I'm saying seems, and maybe that's the operative word. But from where I was, you know, perceiving this, it seemed that people were responding to demonstrations based on who the leader was, you know, as opposed to the cause itself. And so it would look to me as if there were certain causes that needed to be addressed that just weren't getting addressed or others that maybe were getting more attention than they needed based on, you know, individuals. And I guess that, that, that, that's one I, I, I, I keep going back to because it, it just was a source of, well, frustration at times; and, but also, you know, a, a, a cause to try to make another effort to understand. Story_ID: 645942 Speaker 1: Now, the outstanding exception to that pattern was, you know, lit- literally decades after I got here. When the word went out that the place where we are right now, this historic beach that was the colored beach back in the day, in segregation days, was about to go down the pipeline to private development, and on that one, the response was, well, quite (laughter) extraordinary. It was--we--at, you know, various gatherings, you know, you know, I would ask, you know, where was, was--you know, by the way, would you, you know, mention Virginia Key Beach [Virginia Key Beach Park, Miami, Florida]? And the, the response was just this, this, this, this kind of cheer, this, you know, roar of approval for--because so many people had fond memories of the place. And, and that, of course--we, we're getting ahead of the story, but that, of course, is--became kind of a, the un- u- the uniqueness of this, in that when we started, just, you know, the whole effort to reclaim and save this as opposed to letting it slide into private development--The New York Times and the San Francisco Chronicle both picked up the story that, because it was such a curiosity, that the black community would want to preserve a relic of segregation, that a relic of the segregation era could actually be fondly remembered. But that's what it was. And that, too, is a, was a, a difference, I would say not even North, South, but between Miami [Florida] and a lot of the rest of the South. Other segregated colored parts in the South did not have what was here, you know. So that's (laughter) the long convoluted answer to the question you asked. You know, I, I guess it's proverbial that people say it seems to (cough) changes in latitude to bring changes in attitudes and so forth. Story_ID: 645943 Speaker 1: But I think Miami [Florida] has a unique history within even your kind of standard North, South differences. And a lot of it has to do with the fact that the bedrock black community here was Bahamian, literate, and so Miami became one of the real strongholds of the Garvey [Marcus Garvey] movement, for example. It didn't produce anything. Well, there, there was a kind of similar group to the Black Panther Party, but you didn't have that effective black consciousness movement as we knew it in the North, you know, that whole sense of what came out of the '60s [1960s]. When I got here it was as if this was a place that was kind of untouched by a lot of that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's interesting 'cause there's a, I guess--well (unclear) several things you said, like I didn't realize that the Bahamian community was that important in Miami, and, but, but it is, right? And that goes--how far-- Speaker 1: Very sig-- Speaker 2: How far back does that go? Does that--do, do, do, do the Bahamians form the black middle class basically here, or what? Speaker 1: It would be hard to kind of say it in, you know, that, that, that generically, but certainly the Bahamians were kind of the early settlers as this kind of developed into a place--I mean, the earliest settlers, of course, were native people, but, but-- Speaker 2: And black folks go all the way back to the Spanish coming here in-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --fifteen hundreds [1500s] and stuff, right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: All the back to-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --St. Augustine [Florida] being the oldest city (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: --in the United States and, and the settlements-- Speaker 1: You know, Ponce de Leon was accompanied by an African guy who was his fellow conquistador, not a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Estevanico or-- Speaker 1: Right, and then you had the, the, the Spanish, the fort where they literally welcomed people escaping from slavery in the English colonies to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) come here. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's interesting too. We start talking about-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --the Fort Mose [Fort Mose Historic State Park, St. Augustine, Florida] and the Negro Fort [Florida]-- Speaker 1: Right, exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: --the two of those places that-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Story_ID: 645944 Speaker 1: Florida really has a, a, a different history. The protest that got this beat started was like ten years before wade-ins and the Civil Rights Movement started, you know. You had a lot of--I mean, Florida really does have its own kind of separate history. I mean, you had Seminole maroons; you had an Underground Railroad escape route to, to the Bahamas through here. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause you could escape to the Bahamas here. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: It was just like you would go to--from Detroit [Michigan] to Canada-- Speaker 1: To Canada-- Speaker 2: --to Windsor [Canada]-- Speaker 1: --exactly. Speaker 2: --and get--or London [Canada] and get out of-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --slavery, you could escape to the Bahamas. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: I know the story of Madison Washington. He took a ship from I think the Carolinas and sailed down to the Bahamas for safety and-- Speaker 1: Right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and, but, but is there like a, was there traffic going back, back-- Speaker 1: There was-- Speaker 2: --and forth all the time? Speaker 1: --there, there were, you know, routes through here. There was a place on the Gulf Coast that was actually known as Angola that was part of that, that, that route. Yeah, so, yeah, you, you, you--the, the more you kind of get into it, the more you realize that Florida was and is, you know, different. The--and I think quite a few Bahamians came from Key West [Florida] as opposed to directly from the Bahamas. And they had, well, just the knowledge of, you know, how do you, how do you build houses for this climate, you know, what materials that, you know, to use--what designs do you--knowing the water, knowing the plants, Bahamian bush medicine, you know, all of that. Of course, over the years, there would, they'd be joined by the railroad builders, guys from Georgia, Alabama, Carolina, and, and then in more recent time different--you know, Haiti and all the other, you know, other Caribbean islands. But I would say, going back to your question, probably a significant part of the middle class would be that, I call it the Bahamian, the bedrock community, because they--when the city was platted in 1896, same year as the Plessy decision [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], Colored Town [Overtown, Miami, Florida] was part of it. And, and it was, it became quite self-sufficient, with businesses, the--yeah professional class of, you know, morticians, doctors, lawyers, barbers. And, and, and it became thriving (cough). So, yeah, there, there's, there's a lot there, and, and I, I guess as, you know, on a, on a personal level the way that this whole thing relates, it was the whole voyage of discovery for, you know. I mean, mean I--when I was teaching, I, I mean, in almost every class I found a way to introduce this whole concept of cultural rela- relativism where we bring light rather than heat to these differences we have by understanding all cultures have basically their reason for being. And kind of applying that to Miami [Florida], I was able to kind of look, listen, and learn. And well I'm still here. Story_ID: 645945 Speaker 1: Let, let me ask you this. There's something else you said that intrigued me too, and that was about the strength of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] in Florida. And that's--I mean, the Marcus Garvey's UNIA was the largest organization we have ever had and may be the largest we'll ever have (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: But, and, but it doesn't--it always gets sort of dissed in, in general historical studies-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and Garvey ridiculed for not knowing enough or his followers being like rank and file and not being sophisticated enough-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and all that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: But were, were there remnants of the UNIA here in (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were, there were. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, in 1987, hundredth birthday of Garvey, we, some of us, decided there's no way that this anniversary should go by without some recognition, and we, so we did have a celebration. And it brought out a lot of the local history. And there were two original members still alive, Mr. Nimmo and Mr. Gaiter [ph.]. Mr. Nimmo's health was a little better than Mr. Gaiter's. And he kind of regaled us with, you know, memories of what that, what it, what it was like. But Miami [Florida] was, got, got caught up in this controversy. You know, within the movement there was a woman who married--apparently she married a Ghanaian who may have had some royal lineage. In any case, she called herself or was called Princess Kofi [Laura Adorkor Kofi]. And so I guess Kofi was, you know, one--her husband's name. And apparently there were people within the movement who perceived that this was some--that she was trying to do some kind of power grab within the whole movement. And on one of her trips, or on her trip--I don't know how many times she had been to Miami--but she was murdered here in Miami. So, you know, that was, you know, not the-- Speaker 1: Well, did they--was, was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) best side of the-- Speaker 1: --was the murder blamed on the UNIA? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, it was within, you know, within the, you know, and yeah, they were blamed for-- Speaker 1: Does it seem likely that they did, they did it? Speaker 2: She was controversial within the UNIA. So, you know, with things like that, you know, like Malcolm [Malcolm X] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, it's like, okay, you, you--it, everything points to, but who, who really knows, you know? And I, I don't know enough about that case, you know, if they ever convicted anybody or how that, that, that went. But it did confirm the fact that Miami was, you know, really significant. And I think, you know, talking to Mr. Nimmo and talking to people I knew-- Speaker 1: Now how do you spell Mr. Nimmo's name? Speaker 2: N-I-M-M-O. Speaker 1: N-I-M-M-O, okay. Speaker 2: I remem- trying to remember. Was it Henry Nimmo [sic. James Nimmo]? Speaker 1: And Gaiter's you said, was it, was it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, G-A-T- G- G-A-I-T-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, I got-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Gaiter. Speaker 1: --one right, okay. Speaker 2: And we gave them plaques, you know, just to, you know, at that, at that, at that hundredth--you know, just to recognize how valuable it was to have these guys still around. Story_ID: 645946 Speaker 1: But (cough) I had friends whose parents or who grew up knowing people. And in fact, [HistoryMaker] Garth Reeves, the publisher of The Miami Times, his father [H.E.S. Reeves] I guess was active. And what really strikes you about that movement was that it was no, you know--how could I put it? Whereas today there are so many organizations and things that folk belong to that are--they almost work like clubs or--the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] was, was just--the people were very serious about what they were doing. They were not--the Black Cross Nurses were about being nurses. The Black Legion [sic. African Legion] was about being an army of, of people who would defend, you know, black people. The--now, of course, you know, we hear all the negative stuff. And I think one of the, one of the weaknesses, of course, the government had and I think was the fact that something like that, that reached out to everybody, all black people, that assured people that no matter what the world thinks of you, you are important; you are beautiful; you are significant and so forth. The opening that that creates for the likes of street hustlers and so forth to come in, I think that was a, just a building of vulnerability. And I, I've heard, you know, some historians just say that's what, that's what really took it down. I mean, the Black Star Line could have really been something. But when you put people in charge who may not have been thinking about the good of the organization more than they were thinking about what they could get out of it, and, and you know, the, the fam- the all too familiar drama. I mean, we see it today. You know, with how many countries-- Speaker 2: What-- Speaker 1: --gain, having gained independence have had that comprised because of, you know, self-serving individuals and, and the like. Story_ID: 645947 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So there's probably--I don't know--I would guess there's a certain amount of vulnerability in, in, in a self-help organization that's trying to help the poorest people in the country, you know-- Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yeah. Speaker 1: --the opportunities other--I mean that some see in it are not the same thing as what the-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --founders so-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: And think this is, you know, you know, I mean, churches, universities, all, all kinds of things get compromised by that. And, and, and, and ironically, I think the, the needier the people are and the more sincere the organizers are to address the need, the need, the more vulnerable the whole effort becomes. And you know, that's what, that, that's one, I think, at this point in history, I think that's one we're, you know, the human species has to, we gotta look at ourselves and say okay, (laughter)--'cause the, the times for doing what we've been doing is, you know, this isn't working (unclear) creating too many, too many imbalances; there are too many--and you know, we see the symptoms of it, you know, around us, you know, right now. Although, I also see the most positive sign being that whole standard, Standing Rock [Standing Rock Sioux Reservation], I mean, this whole affirmation that not only do we have to come to our senses again, but we now have the critical mass of people that we can do this; we can actually, you know, get ourselves corrected. So--and I guess all this kind of plays back to the, you know, to the question at hand, which is, you know, just going back to how and why the Garvey movement was so important here. And I think it, it, it does relate to the fact that, well, Garvey [Marcus Garvey] himself he, his trade was a printer and how that organization [Universal Negro Improvement Association] could reach, what was it, twenty countries and have millions of members. You know, you had to have people who were literate, and the fact that most of the Bahamian people were here were literate and could--so they--you had a colored school board and where the folks kind of knew what to do. So, again, it all, it all points to this being a rather unique place, Miami [Florida] itself, South Florida in general, you know. Story_ID: 645948 Speaker 1: I know we talked about 'Remembrance of The Way' [Dinizulu Gene Tinnie] before, but I'm not sure what kind of detail we reached; I'm not sure. But, but I wanted to ask you about your, your sculpting. And what is your--I mean, well, this is, these are wood sculptures. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And when did you get involved in wood? Had you been involved in wood for a long time or-- Speaker 2: That one, it is something that--I don't want to sound arrogant about it but I think it was just something I was born with. I mean, I--as a matter of fact, I was just working on a piece at the studio yesterday. And at one moment in the process, this thought crossed my mind that, with all the important things that are going on, this is why I'm here on earth. I have to do this (laughter), you know. There is something about woodcarving in particular that is, it's spiritual, it's, it's a connection--well, you know, the, in the Native American language they refer to trees as the standing people; you know, these are nations of people. And, and you know, and that goes to African tradition as well, I mean, where, you know, trees and just something there. And the wood, you know, it's, it's, it's flesh, as it were. You know, that whole tradition of, all right, if you're gonna take a tree to build a, a boat or, or drum frame or whatever, you have that whole conversation where, all right, I'm taking your life, but you plant, you know, so your, your, your life continues. But we're gonna give you a new life, and the new life we give you, it's gonna be--we promise it's gonna be worthy of what, you know. And with the process of carving and sculpting, particularly carvings, I do like, wood montage and collage type things as well. But with carving, well, with, with, with, with both, I--you, you, you have these, I guess you could call them conversations, you know. You, as you're carving the wood, I mean, you're, you're, you're watching, you know, I call it the, the, the dance of the, of the, the wood grain. And it, it really lets you know if you're doing something right or not, because either, either it's music or it's noise. To me, it's (unclear) (laughter), you know. And, and, and, and it guides you as to, you know, what you need to do. Speaker 1: So when did you, when did you first get into woodcarving? I mean at what stage (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you've had such a career-- Speaker 2: --I, I'm, I'm-- Speaker 1: --so you're still-- Speaker 2: --I cannot even--you know, I mean, I, I can't even remember. I've, I've tried. Like, well, when is the first time I ever did this? Speaker 1: Did you do it in high school [Earl L. Vandermeulen High School, Port Jefferson, New York]? Did you carve wood then? Speaker 2: It is-- Speaker 1: So you came out in 1960, right? So you would have been-- Speaker 2: Yeah, '59 [1959], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, '59 [1959]. So-- Speaker 2: So, conceivably, maybe I whittled on a piece of wood back then--well, of course I used to do, you know, model airplanes and you know, the wood, you know, that kind of thing. Story_ID: 645949 Speaker 1: Somehow, doing that sculpture, the 'Remembrance of The Way' [Dinizulu Gene Tinnie], was--well, we got the word that this park was being built in Overtown, Reeves Park [Henry Reeves Park, Miami, Florida]. It needed some art. The architect, the landscape architect, reached out to us at the Black Arts Workshop [Miami Black Arts Workshop, Miami, Florida]. And there were, oh gosh, any number of concepts that we looked at, pyramids and all kinds of things. And somehow the idea--I got the idea that, well, if we got large enough dimension wood, we could do these kind of totem poles, like, you know, almost like traditional house posts. And I bought some balsa wood sticks made up a sample of what this could kind of look at--look like. Speaker 2: Had you ever create- created a wooden sculpture for display before in your life at that point? Speaker 1: Did I? Well, okay, prior to that, yes. Through Black Arts Workshop we did do a, a show at Northside shopping mall [Northside Shopping Center, Miami, Florida], 'cause we, we would kind of take the art to the people that way. And I did--at one point I found a--and, and this is something that's still, you know, it kind of becomes irresistible. The people will cut down a tree, and there are pieces of wood on the side of the road. And it's just-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah-- Speaker 1: --you know (laughter), yeah, you cannot leave it. I, I got to go see what this looks like, what shapes, what--and so I did find a piece. And really, I cut--I--it was more like just kind of working with the, with nature and the natural form. And, but it, it certainly, you know, brought back the, the, the feeling and, and so forth. And I guess subsequent to doing remember--'Remembrance of The Way,' we did the--they're gone now because of Hurricane Andrew, but had a commission to do relief carving on trellis beams at the Coral Reef Library [Coral Reef Branch Library, Miami, Florida] down, down, down south. As we were--I mean-- Speaker 2: So these reliefs-- Speaker 1: --it's, it's, it's, it's-- Speaker 2: --were blown away by the hurricane, hur- hur- hur-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they got--not all of them, but it got damaged. They were western cedar and you know--so, finally the county made a decision to--that's where I found, I discovered the word deaccession (laughter) to, to remove them. Story_ID: 645950 Speaker 1: And 'Remembrance of The Way' [Dinizulu Gene Tinnie] is, you know, since 1977, it's, this year makes that, what, forty years (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's pretty weathered, although we anticipated the weathering would give it character, which it did. But then I think woodpeckers started finding ways to build homes in there and such, and that's (laughter), that can take a toll. Yeah, but, you know, even when we were working on that, I, I can remember several times just, just feeling as though this was something that was kind of just a calling to do. It, it was kind of--(pause) I know when; it's, it's just hard to find words for it. Just know when it's that, well, I would kind of know what to do, how to do it, and just do it. Now, of course, like anything else, you--there are a few things you, you learn by doing--you learn that, well, you can't--you do have to be aware of what you're doing, and you can't go against the grain; you gotta go with the grain, and you know, all those-- Speaker 2: So this--so your learning of it was more of an intuitive kind of a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --a little learning-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --rather than you didn't have a mentor to show you how to carve (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not really, not really. Speaker 2: --wood? Speaker 1: Not, not, not with that. You know, other things, you know, you know, learning how to draw, yeah, you know, you would see what other people do. This was just like, it's why you're here (laughter). I mean, it's--yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, look-- Story_ID: 645951 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know the name of it's 'Remembrance of The Way' [Dinizulu Gene Tinnie]. Did you name it--did you have the name in mind when you were doing it, 'cause you--had you read Armah and that, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I had, I had. Speaker 1: --and that, that was your-- Speaker 2: And, and, no, the, the name came after, you know, which is-- Speaker 1: Okay, this is-- Speaker 2: --kind of did it. Speaker 1: --the way is a concept in the books of-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Ayi Kwei Armah-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in, in the book 'Two Thousand Seasons.' Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: A way of, an African way of doing-- Speaker 2: Right, of, of doing-- Speaker 1: --things real- I mean, of, of, of-- Speaker 2: --of being, of being-- Speaker 1: Of being, yeah. Speaker 2: --of, of, of, of interacting. And yeah, by the time it was done, the title kind of came. Like, well, what we did was actually an, an exercise in the way, because I had about nine people helping me with this. And the way, it came together and, and, and that pattern repeated itself with just about every commission. I didn't have to look for people; I didn't have to advertise. It was just like, the people I needed just showed up. And you know, in one or another case it would be like, okay, okay, you, you've done enough. I, I see this has kind of gotten--yeah, you're gonna have to leave it alone because you're not--and-- Speaker 1: So some, so some who came to help did too much (laughter) or that didn't do-- Speaker 2: And, and some--right. I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Weren't thinking-- Speaker 2: --it, it took-- Speaker 1: --didn't have the right, the same philosophy. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, it was, it was like one of those--well, I guess it's like, you know, having musicians, you know, a band. I mean, you know, you're--it all comes together, and then some parts need a little massaging (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah-- Speaker 2: --you know-- Speaker 1: --and could be analogous what we were discussing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) correcting and--yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --earlier about the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] too. I mean, yeah, when you start something, it attracts-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a lot of the people-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --and especially if you want to attract them. And some-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --some of the people it attracts may not have the same-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and e- even though it could be well intend- well intended. Then at one point there was a lot of pressure on us to, you know, meet this deadline and you know, to the point where guys started even working late into the night whether you could--and I came one morning and I saw kind of stuff crooked, and I said, "Okay, wait" (laughter), "time." And very interesting that--'cause there would be times where--the Black Arts Workshop [Miami Black Arts Workshop, Miami, Florida] was in a two story building with an outside staircase. And we were carving it in the, in the vacant lot next to it. And there'd be times when I'd go up the stairs to look down and kind of try to see what, you know, was there. And so I had to kind of do this lecture about, "Look, you guys, nobody's going to remember this for how well--whether we met the deadline or not; it's gonna be remembered for how well it's done. Those guys have their real or imagined deadlines. We're doing this on divine time; we're--," you know. And I was explaining how what we're--the, the, the images are already there. We have to basically coax the images out of the wood. We're, we have to, you know, persuade, you know. And, and it was so interesting that maybe a couple of years later I was reading Ayi Kwei Armah, and it was another--which was--was it 'Healers' ['The Healers']? It was another of his books. Speaker 1: Right, it came next I think. Speaker 2: And he brought up this thing about the carvers coaxing the images out of the wood. And I said well, see now, okay (laughter), this is--we're, we're, yeah, we, we are in, you know, the, the, the same place. Yeah, so, yeah, as, as, as, as, as you can see, the, the, the, yeah, woodcarving is something that's extremely special as activities on earth go. And, and the fact that I was, I mean, I had a lot to do, but yesterday I was--yesterday and the day before I actually was back into it; good preparation for today (laughter), for this (laughter). Story_ID: 645952 Speaker 1: Okay, so, did the community--how did the community react to it? It's been, you said it's been like--basically it hadn't been damaged by anybody. This (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: --it's stood since '77 [1977]. That's-- Speaker 2: In (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) forty years. Speaker 2: --fact, in fact, not long after it was finished, somebody tried to scratch initials into it. And somebody else, I mean, even at the risk of doing other damage, came and scratched over like and just let it be known, no, no, we're ain't, not, we're not having that (laughter), okay. The community--I mean, the, the day was dedicated--I mean, the people were gathered. They appreciated it, basically. Speaker 1: Who showed up? Did any of the city officials show up for this? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, city officials. And the, the park [Henry Reeves Park, Miami, Florida] was named after Garth Reeves' father, Garth [HistoryMaker Garth Reeves], who I mentioned earlier. His father was the founder of The Miami Times newspaper. So he was there, the mayor-- Speaker 1: It's Henry E. S. Reeves [H.E.S. Reeves], right? Speaker 2: Right. And, but then, you know, the neighbors--one guy, you know, saw me and told me that he was so inspired he went out and bought some chisels. He, he, and, and he found some wood. He's gonna try his hand. And, and, and, and they were very protective. We might have shared the story about it where literally the day I--okay, I think I finished or put the last coat of varnish on it on a Wednesday. And that Saturday night, one o'clock in the morning, a white guy shows up with a chainsaw. And he was try- he couldn't get the chainsaw started. The neighbors called the police. The police came. Well, he hadn't done anything, so they couldn't really arrest him. They kind of took him away and told him to leave, but the fact that somebody would even think of that. And then about five months later I was in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida]. Some folks from Overtown [Miami, Florida]--I was in the store--they came, and they were asking me, "Aren't you the one who did this? Yeah, you heard about the guy who tried to cut it down, right?" And I said, "Yeah, you know, that was, that was pretty strange. I mean, it's a good thing he couldn't get the chainsaw started." And they said, "Oh no, no, no, that was back then. This is, this just happened," (laughter)--this time it was a black guy, as they put it, in an Oldsmobile. He pulls up, opened the trunk, got this axe, was walking over towards the sculpture ['Remembrance of The Way,' Dinizulu Gene Tinnnie], and as they put it, you know. They said, "Man, you should have seen it. Every kid on the park stopped what they were doing. They picked up rocks, sticks," (laughter). "They ran over. They pelted, punched, kicked until he had to just throw the axe in the back. He couldn't even close the trunk, just jumped in the car and take off." I said, "That," (laughter), "that actually happened," (laughter)? "Okay, life does get interesting." So he had this crazy phenomenon of, what's your problem? Why you, you want to cut this down with this--and then on the other side of that were all these people who, you know, protected it. And the number of people who I run into over the years who talk about that, they remem- , "You know, I was, I was six years old. I was there with my mom, you know, the day that--and you know, I'll never forget that day." And I think this was about maybe, eh, six or seven years ago a few of us who were involved went by just to see what it--you know. Young man is walking by, a whole knapsack on. And he asked, "Did y'all have anything to do, do with this?" Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, you know, kind of told him the story. He said how all the years going to school, he and his best friend used to walk pass that. And every day they'd walk by it they would comment; they would wonder who did it, what--it was just, it had just become part of their life growing up. And-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you told that story before, I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I thought so-- Speaker 1: --and I--yeah, and-- Speaker 2: --exactly. Story_ID: 645953 Speaker 1: This raises a question of--all these stories raise the question of the value of public art-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and the meaning of public art. And-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --we--well, you know, it's, public art, as a funded activity and as a, as a spontaneous activity--I mean, a lot, lot, lot of the public artists--well, the public art, art tradition in the U.S. like, I guess, kind of hit its, its gears in the '60s [1960s], the '70s [1970s], really? I mean, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe, maybe, maybe-- Speaker 1: --I remember in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: I mean-- Speaker 1: --the Wall of Respect was a big-- Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: --work of public art that-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --started in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Right. Then, of course-- Speaker 1: AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists]. Speaker 2: --there was--yeah, yeah. And you know, before that there was the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] and all. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, and we might have talked about this 'cause, you know, one of my kind of favorite observations about that is, you know, you can go to the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] or Field Museum [Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois] or any of these, and you see all these Greek, Roman sculptures, which are, they're locked up; they're lit; they're, you know, security guards are standing around. And, but this is what people saw on their way to work. This was public art. This is-- Speaker 1: Yeah, at one time they were public art. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They were just--and you know, likewise for the cathedrals in Europe. The Egyptian, you know, the Kemetic sculptures, which, you know, I'm--I haven't been there, but I'm, I'm fascinated by the concept of some of that, like, you know, what, those, those, what they call sunk, sunken relief, you know, those relief sculptures that, that are embedded in the wall. And just because of where it is, you know, you're aware that light and shadow plays a huge role in this, so that as the sun goes across the sky, and for that matter as it raises and lowers, so to speak with the seasons the shadows change. And you can just imagine that the expressions and the--so that those things are alive, and they have a constant communication, you know. And this is--yeah, public art has that advantage, you know. And I also think about the, the Ndebele women in South Africa who do the art on the-- Speaker 1: Oh, the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) outside of their houses. And then you-- Speaker 1: The big geometric designs. Speaker 2: Exactly-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and all these villages where you, you know, your art is on the outside of the house. You can have something inside too, but you, you're part of, you know, creating this-- Speaker 1: Well I guess it's a vulnerability when you do public art. If you put something up that people don't like it's not gonna-- Speaker 2: Well, if, if it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it's not gonna stand. Speaker 2: Right, if, if, if, if it goes up, and it doesn't respect the people and the people don't like it, then it deserves to be, you know, the people will have spoken, you know. If it's--and that was our whole premise with the wooden pieces ['Remembrance of The Way,' Dinizulu Gene Tinnie] for Overtown [Miami, Florida]. Look, if this speaks to the people and the people respect it, it'll last. There's not gonna be any, you know, vandalism. Story_ID: 645954 Speaker 1: So you have that factor--that, that you're, you're creating a, an environment that's beautiful, that's inspiring, whatever that is, you know. At the same time, as opposed to selling a piece to a collector, everybody gets to see it. You're, you're creating a piece that, you know, belongs to the, the millions. And of course you get paid by the republic, you know, so you're, you're compensated. And of course, there's pieces you donate too. But, and, and, and then, of course, there's that piece I alluded to earlier, which is that you're, as you're creating it, as the mural or anything like that, it becomes a performing art. And as such, I mean, it's, it, you know, it sounds a little crazy, but one of the really interesting things about that interaction, when we were carving those pieces ['Remembrance of The Way,' Dinizulu Gene Tinnie], the people would come and just offer whatever they thought had value. Somebody would bring a six pack of beer; somebody would, you know, give a few dollars; somebody would, you know, give us cigarettes; somebody would lay a joint out there (laughter), you know. And, and I, I did a mural for a restaurant on Miami Beach [Florida]. That was that in between time between the old South Beach [Miami Beach, Florida] and the, the new. So before it became glitzy, it had this, actually it felt a lot like the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] with palm trees. And that's, that, that was very much the, the feeling, and I was doing this mural. It was combined with the, the sign. And you know, it was an eatery, so I had this kind of horn of plenty, fruit coming out and a kind of art deco stuff going on. And the same thing--I mean people waiting on the bus, and I mean, you know, some people just let the bus go by 'cause they're just fascinated just to--they just want to see this thing, you know, come together and you know, coming and you know, donating, you know. So, it says something. Story_ID: 645955 Speaker 1: And then I, I, I think we may have told, gotten to the example. This wasn't a work by me, but this group called Inner City Illustrators [Inner City Illustrators, LLC, Miami Beach, Florida], who did the mural in Sherdavia Jenkins Peace Park [Miami, Florida]. I don't know if we talked about that, but this--Sherdavia Jenkins is the little girl who got killed on July 1st, 2006. Two of our brothers have a altercation in Liberty Square [Miami, Florida]--this is a populated area--have no better sense than to start exchanging gunfire. And Sherdavia was outside her house playing with her dolls and got a bullet in the neck and didn't live very long after that. Speaker 2: About what year was this? Speaker 1: That was 2006-- Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: --that that happened (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) two thousand six [2006]. Speaker 1: And we do a remembrance about every year. We do her birthday, which is March 22nd coming up, and, and July 1st, which is the anniversary of that happening. And so the city--and this brings out the cynic in me--you know, it was like a gesture of grandstanding, so to speak--decided to name this mini park, which was essentially a vacant lot on Martin Luther King Boulevard [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard] and 12th Avenue near but of--right at Liberty Square where she lived you know, in her memory. And that was done in 2009, but there was no visible evidence of that. There were some talks with the Liberty City Trust [Liberty City Community Revitalization Trust, Miami, Florida] of doing something. So finally we, our artist collective [Miami Black Arts Workshop, Miami, Florida]--we will get back to that I know--decided, well, okay, the city is crying poor mouth. You don't have money, so we will go ahead and buy the material, make a sign, let the world know that this park is named after this little girl. Speaker 2: What was her name again? Speaker 1: Sherdavia Jenkins. Speaker 2: Sherdavia. Speaker 1: S-H-E-R-D-A-V-I-A. Her mom was Sherrone [Sherrone Jenkins]; the father is David [David Jenkins], so they combined. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so we did the sign, which we understood would be a temporary one. Then we did something to be a little more permanent. We did a little mural--I mean a little monument with tiles, you know, something to be a little bit bright and joyous and inviting, our idea being that this park should eventually become a place that welcomes kids and families and be a safe haven. And then the church [Church of Christ Written in Heaven, Miami, Florida] that has the wall overlooking the park allowed this mural to be done. And these young guys--it was for the In- In- Inner City Illustrators, Chris Purdy [Christopher "Punch" Purdy] was the leader of that, did, you know, kind of a, I guess art critics would call it the naive, primitive aesthetic but very colorful, bright mural. And while that mural was in progress, the whole transformation of that space from City of Miami [Florida] property, don't do this, don't do that, to a place that people just claimed. They--you know, that Earth, Wind and Fire song, "I don't want to feel I'm in the wrong place to be real" ['Reasons']. You were in the right place to be real. Here was where people could just basically spill their guts. They could, they could share their stories. They knew they weren't being judged, the, the, the parents who had lost kids to homicide, meeting other parents, and hugging, crying and (unclear). It was just--and here is the power of art, the power of art. Story_ID: 645956 Speaker 1: Tell us about the Kuumba arts collective. Now that, that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that's established in 1980? Speaker 2: That was established in 1980. Speaker 1: That's the same year as McDuffie riots. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Emily Barefield I think was one of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exact-- Speaker 1: So, so, so tell us about-- Speaker 2: Okay, so this was, this actually started away from Miami [Florida]. Emily Barefield was a lady working with the Florida Department of State. It seems that she may have traveled through Quincy, Florida, up in North Central Florida, and encountered some very talented black artists there, and came away from there with the idea that, look this is, should not just be lost and forgotten here; this really need something more. So, through the Department of State, she kind of leveraged a way to create some meetings and gatherings of artists. So I think it really started with--I never met those guys from Quincy, but there were artists from Jacksonville [Florida], Daytona, Tampa [Florida]. And it really, and it became Kuumba Artists Association of Florida [Kuumba Artists Association of Florida, Inc.; Kuumba Artists Collective of South Florida, Miami, Florida]. It was a statewide organization incorporated with, you know, bylaws, all that stuff. And then, you know, I got wind of it and you know, send art up to one of those exhibitions I think in Daytona Beach [Florida] and you know, kind of became part of it, and more of us here became part of it. And then we had a Kuumba show here in Miami. We borrowed a space downtown, downtown development authority's office space [Miami Downtown Development Authority], in that high rise, the--at 1 Biscayne Boulevard [sic.] I believe was the address. And we sent out invitations and publicized it on the radio. And the turnout and the response was just great. And we, something we used to do at all our exhibits was support some cause. So we had an auction to support the Black Archives [The Black Archives History and Research Foundation of South Florida, Inc., Miami, Florida], which was just newly created at the time. And Edmund Butler [ph.], who was kind of the--well, he was the president of the Kuumba artists collective--artists association, actually ended up relocating to Miami and ended up staying with me in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida]. So then, as a result of that, the Black Art Workshop [Miami Black Arts Workshop, Miami, Florida] was--we had this five year contract, if you will, with the city to do facade treatments in the Grove area. That was kind of winding down. The kind of support base for that was winding down. I was getting ready to start teaching at Florida Memorial, setting up the art department there. That's our local HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], Florida Memorial College at the time, now university [Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida]. And so the Black Art Workshop sort of morphed into Kuumba Artists Association. And the association became less formally organized as a, as a, you know, registered corporation and sort of just became known as a collective, which is kind of where it is now. And it, you know, it still kind of serves as that network whereby we can share information, you know, calls to artists, public art opportunities, things like that. So as we speak, a few of us are looking at an emerging opportunity to do a mural inside of a church. It'll be a nice commission that--when I say nice, I mean, you know, great to have support for our work. But it looks like we can really do something for the church that will make it a landmark, you know, on--so, we'll, we'll see how that goes. So that's, you know, that's--and, and, and much like the Black Art Workshop, I mean, having something in place where the visiting artists, the artists from out of town, can hook onto is, is, is, is, is good. Story_ID: 645957 Speaker 1: So today the Kuumba's artists are a part of the, are part of the Miami Black Arts Workshop [Miami, Florida] then in, in the sense that they--or they share space in the--? Speaker 2: Well, actually, you know, because the Black Arts Workshop basically closed down in 1983 or thereabouts. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And so the organization--and we were meeting at the cultural arts center [African Heritage Cultural Arts Center, Miami, Florida] on Martin Luther King Boulevard [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard] for years and you know, on and off. So at this point, this is really kind of loose, even though some of the old Black Art Workshop people are still involved, you know, like-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --like the McKnight brothers [Donald McKnight and Robert McKnight]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So was a, was the arts workshop or the Kuumba collective [Kuumba Artists Association of Florida, Inc.; Kuumba Artists Collective of South Florida, Miami, Florida] part of the N- N- NCA at any time-- Speaker 2: I've been a member (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as such? Speaker 2: --of the NCA, and we at one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the National Conference of Artists. I should-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --say that first for anybody watching this-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, exactly, right. Speaker 1: --National Council of-- Speaker 2: So, yes, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --Con- Conference of Artists (unclear)-- Speaker 2: National Conference of Artists-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --founded in 1959. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Recently there's talk of a, of a resurgence. There are a few chapters that are still active. We came close to having a Miami [Florida] chapter at one point, never quite got there. But, and, and I'm, I actually did sign up and pay dues to be a part of this current resurg- resurgence, so I hope to see it really kind of-- Speaker 1: Yeah, so-- Speaker 2: --come back, yeah. Story_ID: 645958 Speaker 1: Now is the, so is there currently a group that's working on, I mean, is doing like public art in the black community now in, in Miami [Florida]? Speaker 2: There, there are, there are pockets. You know, I, I, I, I constantly refer back to Martin Luther King Boulevard [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard]. Part of that being that as, as we speak we're coming up on a year away from the fiftieth anniversary of Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination, which will be a time--not that we have to wait 'til then, but certainly that will be a time to assess where we are, but also a time when what Martin Luther King Boulevard looks like to the world will speak of what Miami--how much we value his legacy. And right now the appearance of the boulevard is not real great, except for a couple of bright spots, and there's one way, just on a volunteer basis maybe with a little bit of local community support. The artists have done some just murals and decorations. And so, yeah (cough) the, the, the, the, the push, the, the, the will to create public art in some form or fashion is there, is there, and 'cause we would really like to see that boulevard be what it was conceived to be in the first place, which was to be an outdoor museum of Dr. King's life, legacy, where it's, it's, it's, you know, it's not just a street with his name. And, and, and more important than that, like, it should be a catalyst, an impetus, a stimulus for improving the quality of life three blocks, at least three blocks on the other side, I mean, where, you know--you know, Dr. King's unfinished work was economic justice. He didn't see, get to see the Poor People's Campaign and Resurrection City and all that. But the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] were just necessary preludes to get to that. And that's what we owe to his memory. So that's kind of--if we're able to develop projects that could actually even engage some of the people in the community, you know, (unclear) and so forth, that'll be where, where we're headed. And that kind of is for the Black Art Workshop [Miami Black Arts Workshop, Miami, Florida], to the Kuumba Artists Association [Kuumba Artists Association of Florida, Inc.], the Kuumba Artists Collective [Kuumba Artist Collective of South Florida, Miami, Florida], that whole sense of artists having a real role in the community, knowing that art has such a transformative power. Story_ID: 645959 Speaker 1: You know, I, I, I may have shared that story of the young man who, you know, came to the Sherdavia Jenkins Peace Park [Miami, Florida], and he's got his, I mean he's strapped with his .45, trying to decide whether to kill this kid who just--'cause he had just--his stepson was murdered the week before. And in the presence of art, because he is in a--he talks himself right through the whole process of: he could do this; he's not scared of prison; he's done it, and to realize and okay, so if I go kill this kid, what? That's another human life lost. That's another family mourning that's--you know, I end up in prison. My baby who isn't even born yet isn't gonna know who his daddy is. We gotta stop this (laughter). I need to stop talking to some of these young people. And he--and I'm, I'm, after all that, I'm saying, you know, if there was not a mural on the wall to--that conversation would never have happened. He would never have--and you know, there was another--there were people who had come because Liberty Square [Miami, Florida] was where 'First 48'--so people thought, well, this is some kind of tourist attraction. We'll go see this place where all this homicide goes on, and people seemed to aspire to want to be on 'First 48.' I never liked 'First 48,' 'cause I just-- Speaker 2: 'The First 48,' now what is-- Speaker 1: That was that, I think it was on the A&E channel. It was these cops here in Miami [Florida], the first forty-eight hours after a homicide (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it's a TV show. Speaker 1: TV show-- Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, I didn't realize-- Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --'First 48'--okay. And this-- Speaker 1: And it, it just, to me it was like why are you playing up that side of what goes on here? I mean, I'm, I'm not denying that it goes on, but can we be part of the solution here instead of (laughter) part of the problem, as it were? But to see people who would come, attracted to the area for that and then see art on the wall and completely forget that and get into a whole different conversation, it just confirms that, you know, we're not fantasizing when we say that this phenomenon that we're calling public art has, you know, real value. It, it, it does make a difference. It does bring something more inspired, inspired and inspiring into people's lives. And you know, as self-serving as that might sound, but it's, you know, it speaks for itself. Story_ID: 645960 Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess it's the opposite of self-serving I would think-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --in terms of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --art with like a motive behind, you know-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --rather than just being decorative or being-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the (unclear) of an individual's name or something isn't, 'cause I, I was gonna ask you about gra- graffiti art and if-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Miami [Florida] being a place that has good weather all the time, I imagine has a lot of graffiti art. Speaker 2: There's a lot; there's a lot (laughter). Speaker 1: There's a lot in Chicago [Illinois], and you can't--you know, half the time it's frozen outside. You can't-- Speaker 2: Right (laughter), right. Speaker 1: You know, but, but you have a lot here, right? Speaker 2: It's a lot, it's a lot. And I have, you know, mixed feelings about it, I mean. And I guess it's just like anything else, like music. I mean, some of it you can see is creative and speaks of a, a will to beautify, to, to enliven, to, you know, express. Some of it, and you know, I, I know I sound judgmental, but some of it just looks like, you know, vandalism. I mean, it's, and, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there is a difference between tagging-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what a lot of people--they just write, tag their name with a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --spray can. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They make a design that really-- Speaker 2: There you go. Speaker 1: --just means their name-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, or they may, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and some are better designs than others. But-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but then there is actually graffiti art, which-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --is a design. And some of it--I mean, it's clearly a form of art, I mean-- Speaker 2: It is; it is. Speaker 1: --and some of which--I'm, I'm a sixty-seven year old, and you're older than I. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A lot of times people our age don't, don't understand-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what it-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what it's even represented-- Speaker 2: I mean, you have to-- Speaker 1: --at-- Speaker 2: --look real hard, yes-- Speaker 1: Yeah, do you-- Speaker 2: --exactly. Speaker 1: --can you read, 'cause you're, I mean, you're a-- Speaker 2: That's a whole--no. A lot of it, I say okay, yeah, yeah, you got by me on that one. And some of them I, ah, oh, okay, okay, I--that's pretty good. I wouldn't have thought of that, but that's, since you're gonna-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --write that, that's a good way to do it. Speaker 1: 'Cause some of it, of course, is representational-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I mean represents, like, images that we can all read, though we all don't know what the images are (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: But, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, and I, I, I guess all of this, again, it relates to Martin Luther King Boulevard [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard] because, as I look at graffiti on some of these--there's a whole--there's a portion of the boulevard, from 12th Avenue to 32nd Court, that was literally rebuilt as a quote, unquote linear park, so it has street furniture, you know, outdoor benches and, and the like. And what happens with things like graffiti and that, you know, when something looks neglected and it looks like nobody cares, then it attracts that. It goes right back to putting public art out there, the sculpture that people respect and will protect. The boulevard is--should be respected and protected so that nobody even has that thought. But right now where people come through who are not from the community just plaster up posters, advertising something that's not in the community, that's not gonna bring any support to the, any local business, well, you know, it basically says, well, this is up for grabs. I mean, you know, it's not, you know, it, it, it, it means nothing; it's 62nd Street. That's something that I hope to see change while I'm still on earth (laughter), okay. Story_ID: 645961 Speaker 1: And I'm thinking that this upcoming fiftieth anniversary of Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination is as good a cause as any to say--for all of us to say, look, let's kind of--you know, we had, on, on Dr. King's birthday, we had a few, a few people got shot. That's not the first, that's not the first incidence of that. You know, back in 2000--no, nineteen ninety--what was it, '97 [1997]? Right. A five year old girl, walking home from the Martin Luther King Parade [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Day Parade], you know, gets, you know, killed by a drive by bullet. Speaker 2: Not intended for her, right, but-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, but obviously, we have not made the case to a younger generation who basically, if anything, just feels like, you know, the opposite, that, that, that this is just a holiday, and it means nothing to them, that represents everything that they are not about. And our question becomes: why should that be? Why? And, and so we have to correct that. We have to do that. Story_ID: 645962 Speaker 1: So you taught art. Now, you, you taught at Florida Memorial [Florida Memorial College; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida] first as an adjunct; and then you rose to department chair of the art department. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Cough) Now tell us about that experience. Now you were, you were only there from '82 [1982] to '85 [1985], or did you-- Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982] to '85 [1985] and, and then back to kind of being an adjunct-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --afterwards. Yeah, and I have to thank Al Pinkston [Alfred Pinkston]. He was a professor in the music department. He was the one who basically recruited me and even provided some good guidance to, to really kind of get that from idea to reality. It was a good experience while it lasted. We--I was able to recruit a few art majors, some of them foreign students. We were able to even convert a hallway into kind of a makeshift gallery, you know, with burlap covered walls and spotlights and, and you know, showcase some, some of the work. It got to--one of the nice high points was that at the end of the school year we do the college family art exhibit. And this was where professors, groundskeepers, security people, cafeteria workers, students, anybody who was doing anything creative, come and show your work. And people got to know each other on a, like, "Oh, you do that, I, I had no idea," you know. And it would be everything from drawings, hook rugs, or you know, you know, craft. And it was some- it was, it was something to build on. We even looked at, at a good friend, who has, unfortunately she has passed on, Patricia Warren, who was doing theater there. And we even looked at building it into a talent showcase at the same time as, you know, if you had the art. You know, unfortunately, the politics at the time, there were things that, okay, you know, their trying to do this, and you know, it's like too many things are working at cross purposes here, so I said well, I hate to let this go, but you know, I'll be supportive, you know. Story_ID: 645963 Speaker 1: But it was--I was able to have as--I was able to attract really good people: Roland Woods, Jr., that I mentioned; Kabuya Pamela Bowens [Pamela Bowens-Saffo], a native Miamian, very talented artist. She's now up at Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida], was teaching with me for a while. And, and then the, the, the, the studio was also my--the, the, the art, fine art building at the time kind of was serving as my studio space as well, so it was--and I'd be there all hours of the night sometimes. And so, like, security people make, making the rounds, they'd come and get all involved in (laughter) the--seeing what's going on, looking at the progress. So it was a very stimulating environment, and, and of course, the fact that I was teaching, you know, the HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] experience. I was teaching art, French, Spanish, English, humanities; it's something else in there, might have been art history or art appreciation. So it was a way to, you know, reach more students. And like, when Roland was there, he would just recruit students at random off the campus. And he created this really great idea. There was some piled up scrap plywood that had just been sitting and sitting. He found out nobody was using it, so he'd invite the students to come and--, "Okay, what would you make out of that," and cut pieces and assemble them and then painted them and did this whole kind of sculpture garden on the campus. Well, that just elevated the visibility of the art department, and people just, you know, just one more case for that, like, wow, art really changes things, you know. So, and I'm still kind of loosely involved with Florida Memorial [Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida]. Story_ID: 645964 Speaker 1: I guess the major part of your career has been, well, well, in recent years it's been here, right? And so you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, which is, you know, it almost feels like a career (laughter). Yeah, it's, it's-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --yeah, but it's volunteer, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: You're, you're a volunteer, but okay, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --all right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, as, I mean, as, as, as you're--I mean, so, so the balance of what you've done has been not as a--you were a teacher just for a few years, I mean as-- Speaker 2: I've been, I've been a teacher pretty much--I mean as, as, as far as having a profession in one way or another, yeah. I mean, 'cause I was--when, when I first got here, I mean, I was doing other jobs. I was a maintenance man for the movie theater I was working at, you know. But then the first professional job was teaching at OIC, you know, Opportunity--Opportunities Industrialization Center that Reverend Sullivan [Leon Sullivan] founded. Then I taught at--I was teaching adult classes in French at Coral Reef Senior High School [Miami, Florida]. I was, I taught one semester at University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida]. And I, I could have stayed there, but I just--it, that, that was when I really knew, oh no, I, I need to, I need to get involved in teaching in the community. Speaker 1: So, so when, when were you at the University of Miami? Speaker 2: Something like seventy--1975 perhaps. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was before the, you know, the 'Remembrance of The Way' [Dinizulu Gene Tinnie] and all of that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I mean, I was ad--I was adjunct. I was at Black Art Workshop [Miami Black Arts Workshop, Miami, Florida] at the same time, and then, you know, I was at Miami-Dade [Miami-Dade Junior College; Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida]. You know, it's, it's, yeah, so the teaching has always been, been there, you know, in one way or another. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, did you teach at any one place long enough to retire from there or, or-- Speaker 2: Not really, not really, 'cause I was adjunct at, at the Miami Dade--I mean, sorry, Florida Memorial [Florida Memorial College; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida] was my, the, where, where I was full time. But then that was full time to allow art and everything else to happen, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 645965 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so during the '80s [1980s] you're involved in the Free South Africa Movement. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you'd already received your name basically working with the African Liberation Support Committee-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --out of California, right? Speaker 2: In Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Boston? Speaker 2: Up in Boston, yeah. Speaker 1: In Boston, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, well-- Speaker 2: And then, yeah, in coming here, the, the--what we were really fortunate to do--I, I mentioned earlier, with the Kuumba artists group [Kuumba Artists Association of Florida, Inc.; Kuumba Artists Collective of South Florida, Miami, Florida] we were doing, we would have ex- exhibitions and have benefit auctions. And I can't remember what percentage, but we were able to support the Black Archives [The Black Archives History and Research Foundation of South Florida, Inc., Miami, Florida], the Haitian Refugee Center [Miami, Florida], and one year we were able to, you know, to send a nice check to the, the Free South Africa Movement. And you know, I was, you know, involved with the--well, yeah, because that just, it was like, yeah, another one of those things that, look, we have to do this I mean. The place will be free, and we'll be part of the future, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me about--so, were you involved in the, the Nelson Mandela's tour when he was released when he came-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --to the United States in '92 [1992]? Speaker 2: --we were involved. We were involved with that. That got to be rather interesting because, as you know, Miami [Florida] was--he comes out of prison. Everywhere he goes he's welcomed as a hero. He comes to the United States, he's welcomed, he's welcomed. In Miami, the official circles snubbed him. Speaker 1: Really? Okay, so who was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Speaker 1: --who were the officials in those days? Speaker 2: This was the county commissioner and the city commission. Speaker 1: Who was the mayor [Xavier Suarez] then of Miami? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think I blocked that out. Speaker 1: I know the gov-- Speaker 2: If I think hard enough I'll remember. Speaker 1: Or the governor of Florida? I mean, all of these people are culpable I guess in snubbing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the governor-- Speaker 1: --Nelson Mandela. Speaker 2: Well, well, most of--it was Miami, because-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --why? Because he committed a cardinal sin of--he embraced Fidel Castro, okay. Speaker 1: Oh, so it was a Cuban-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, so it's that. Speaker 1: --expatriate (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. So the fact that he was friends with Castro, friends with Yasser Arafat, friends with Muammar Gaddafi, put him on the list of, you know--now-- Speaker 1: Now had--he explained why he was friends with these people, right (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, absolutely, I mean, and he did this in, you know, in interviews and so forth. And you know, our response to all this was, well, you had this same opportunity of being in support of, of the struggle, the anti-apartheid struggle as any of these other people were, you know. Instead of criticizing him for why he was supported by Ca- why, why, why was he not supported by you? I mean, you know, of course, proverbially you can't reason people out of what they haven't reasoned themselves into. This was not, this is not something that lent itself to rational thought. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause they, the Cuban expatriates, condemned Castro for human rights violations, they say. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: At the same time, Fidel Castro is supporting the human rights cause of the people-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of South Africa, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, and their--you know, so, there's a-- Speaker 2: And, and, and I mean, and, and it was really--I mean, by that point in history, and I'm, you know, not even taking a side here, so to speak, but it was, the, the whole idea here in Miami was like, well, you know, Castro just must die. Story_ID: 645966 Speaker 1: I mean the, you know, there was--you, you remember the Elian Gonzalez incident, the little kid who was found at sea on Thanksgiving Day and you know. A whole lot of the rest of the country just did not understand that. A whole lot of the local community did not understand that. I mean, you know, rationally, well, if this child's father [Juan Miguel Gonzalez] and all four grandparents were alive, why would you not return him to the family? And if your ideas--well, if you--you know, he'll be enslaved by the horrible, terrible situation in Cuba where nothing good ever happens, it, it, it--see, for, for me, I mean, it's like I go to the library, and I borrow a book about Cuba. I don't want a, a book where pages are ripped out because somebody else decided that I'm not supposed to have the freedom to read this, because you decided this is, you don't agree with this. Speaker 2: It contradicts (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you're saying-- Speaker 2: --the narrative that they already put-- Speaker 1: Yeah. So, I mean, you're saying this is, you know. There was a whole controversy with getting the school board to ban a book of, about Cuba because it gave this, it showed this positive image of Cuba. You know, I--there were a lot of incidents like this. When I got to Miami [Florida], not, not--in the first few months there was a radio host. I think his name is Enrique Milian [sic. Emilio Milian]. It seemed that he dared to suggest that maybe the time had come to open a dialogue with the Cuban government and see if we can't--and his car was bombed. His legs got blown off. Well (gesture), with respect, with all due respect to the human experience that people have had, and I'm sure there are very legitimate grievances that people have, but you know, I'm a product of the period that produced Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. I mean, you don't, you don't acquire freedom by (laughter), you know, violence, 'cause all you, you know--violence itself becomes the enemy. So that's kind of the background. Then, of course, the black community's response to the snub [of Nelson Mandela] was to create a boycott of Miami. So no black organizations would hold their conventions here. And that did actually have the desired effect of some, you know, you know, some things being done. Story_ID: 645967 Speaker 1: But my involvement was when he came to Miami [Florida], we were very adamant about making sure that we got heard and that, that the Mandelas, Winnie [Winnie Mandela] and, and, and, and, and Nelson Mandela would know that there was a part of the community that was standing up, whether officialdom did or not. A crazy thing happened. Somebody got the idea of creating a demonstration in Gwen Cherry Park [Miami, Florida], which is in the neighborhood, but it wasn't where he was going to be. And somebody, oh yeah, well, he'll be--no, he's not going over there so a few of us did go to Miami Beach [Florida] where he was. And we were able to get some, you know, notice there, even though we were in the, in, in the minority. And at--what was so interesting is I had a small sign I'd, that I'd made up. And I think a couple of weeks later, all right, that was, I was up in the New York [New York] area looking at Channel 13 [WNET-TV], and which is PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]. And they had a South African news segment. And they were reporting on Miami and did acknowledge that some people did stand up. And the sign I made was right there, I said oh, well, there you go, great (laughter), be seen in South Africa, okay. So, but I, I guess I'd be remiss if I didn't share. The aftermath of that, years later, my mom [Johanna Wittingham Tinnie] was in what was clearly, you know, her last days among us. I'd gone to New York, visited, came back, was gonna go back knowing that, you know, I may or may not get to see her again. I'm driving north, and I'm--the last thing on my mind is anything political, obviously. As soon as I cross the Dade [Miami-Dade County, Florida], Broward County [Florida] line, it was like, like the only way I could describe it was like a silent voice, and now I know it was my mom's, out of nowhere saying, "You know, the reason for the snub of Mandela--," who's thinking about Mandela, right--, "it wasn't for all those reasons they talked about, about, well, he was friends with this, that and the--the real reason for that was to let all the white South Africans who didn't want to be part of the new South Africa know that here was a place they could come to where they'd be welcome." I mean, okay (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Has it, like-- Speaker 1: --what-- Speaker 2: --come to pass that there are some-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Have, have there been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) well-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I was driving, drove to New York, got to the hospital the morn- she had passed earlier that, you know, which way later I kind of put it together, like, my goodness, that message came just as she was making her transition. So I mean, she had--'cause she, my mom, belonged to a kind of a--she had a circle of friends that had--they were so politically savvy about things, and so in a way it wasn't surprising that that would come that way. In the weeks that followed, South African Airways was parked at the Miami airport [Miami International Airport, Miami, Florida]. I think it was two flights a week. That wasn't folks--that wasn't us flying back home. That was--so, it was just, well, you know, confirmed. Story_ID: 645968 Speaker 1: Those kinds of experiences naturally, I mean, to some people they sound weird, but I've--as I, as I was saying, like, the woodcarving and so forth, you realize that there is a, a way of knowledge, you know, the way where we do stay connected with ancestors and generations yet to be born. And it may come in the way of words that your spirit hears. It may come in the way of, you know, different insights you get. But I think that that--and, and you know, I guess that's why I say I'd be remiss not to, to mention it, because I, I'm, I'm convinced that as we go forward from where we are to where we have to be, a lot of what's gonna be needed is a reawakening of that, the way, the traditional--no, those, those things that we were taught are--well, that's primitive, that's superstitious, it's this, that's--no, no, no, no, it's knowledge; it's knowledge. I mean, everything that happens to us in human experience is, is knowledge. You know, our dreams bring us knowledge. And I'm, I'm thinking that that's where--that's probably part of why the art culture, music and all of that has such a important role to play in, you know, certainly in our lives as a village, as a tribe, but you know, for humanity in general, you know. Story_ID: 645969 Speaker 1: Now (coughs) 1992, you completed a--no, I don't know--well, well, tell us about the Henrietta Marie activity now, 'cause you, you created a memorial for the-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --Henrietta Marie, right? Speaker 2: I didn't-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I was instru- instrumental in an oblique kind of way. I became (unclear) let's see--I believe it was 1986, we've mentioned the National Conference of Artists, had the annual meeting in Washington, D.C., at the Howard Inn. At that, that great magazine, American Visions [American Visions: The Magazine of Afro-American Culture], that Gary Puckrein [Gary A. Puckrein], I think, was the editor. It came out of Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] and some kind of way. They, those were distributed. We got back. Caleb Davis, who is an artist, but he had operated a gallery here, Gallery Antigua, for a number of years. And that was like, the black owned, black operated gallery in Miami [Florida]. He was, he was there. I was there. When we got back, he asked--he called me. He said had I looked at the magazine, and I said well, I hadn't had a chance to look at it yet. He said, "Well, there's an article in there about a, a slave ship wreck that was found near Key West [Florida]." (Laughter) I said, "Oh, really?" Well, you know, almost without any hesitation, I found the article--found the magazine, read the article by Ray Lane, a journalist out of Chicago [Illinois]. And I said well, okay, I'm, I'm in Miami. Key West is like down the street. I have no excuse not to be involved with this. So a couple of weeks later I took a trip down to Key West. My daughter and I went down. And I got to meet with some of the archeologists who were working on it. It's at the Mel Fisher Museum [Mel Fisher Maritime Museum, Key West, Florida], which I am now on the board of, just to show you how things have a way of developing. And they were very welcoming. They were really interested and excited that somebody really had taken note of the work. And so I shared this when I got back with people I knew, got an invitation--this is one of these stories that has the kind of (gesture) (unclear) but it's gonna get to home plate. I get an invitation to a gathering that's being held by a gentleman whose mom was one of the Harlem Renaissance artists, [HistoryMaker] Georgette Seabrooke Powell. Her son, Ric Powell [Richard V. Powell], who I would learn later was a musician who worked with Donny Hathaway. He was an ex-Navy SEAL. He has a whole--a second cousin of Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], all these things. But in the course of the conversation, he mentions that he's a scuba diver. And I said, "Oh, well, then I need to connect you with my friend," Howard Moss, who was a scuba diver, who also went down to the Key West and looked at this Henrietta Marie. And so, I ended up introducing those two guys, introducing Henrietta Marie subject to them. The following year they have the annual dive summit in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], and they invite the people from Key West to come up and do a presentation about the Henrietta Marie. The whole national group of scuba divers [National Association of Black Scuba Divers] gets excited about this and decide we're gonna do a memorial and invite our members to put prayers or whatever inside, and we're going to lay the, the--at the spot. So that was how I got connected to it, and then I was there, got invited to go down when the, you know, when it was taken out and, and, and, and placed. And I understand that since it's been placed, it has just become beautiful because coral and everything has grown all around it, except on the blond--bronze plaque, because you know, the, the bronze just don't accept--so you can just, you can still read it with all this, you know, life around it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is-- Story_ID: 645970 Speaker 1: So the ship was a, the Henrietta Marie was a-- Speaker 2: Eng- English slave ship, had dropped people off possibly in Barbados first, certainly in Jamaica. There were no Africans aboard. Leaving Jamaica, you got to go back to England. Dir- directly would have been to go through the Windward Passage between Haiti and Cuba. But if you did that, you almost certainly would run into the French Navy, and you just didn't want to-- Speaker 1: They're at war then like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) be ba- yeah. So-- Speaker 1: Now what year is this? This is the earl-- Speaker 2: Seventeen hundreds [1700s]. Speaker 1: Seventeen-- Speaker 2: Seventeen hundreds [1700s]. Speaker 1: --hundreds [1700s], okay. Speaker 2: So they decided to go around the western tip of Cuba and come to through the Florida Strait [Straits of Florida]. And I think that was around November, and it was a very bad idea. The storm came up. And there was a place called New Ground reef that they--you can just kind of, like, recreate this drama in your mind where, all right, you're on a--you know, you've got these mountainous waves. And coming down the downside of one of these waves, you know, at speed, and it's like, you know, you're like, what, twenty-six feet of water when, when the water's flat, and you see this exposed reef. And you just know well, we're not gonna see England. And that's, that's--and so apparently, it hit with enough violence that the heel of the ship just lodged right in there, and then the waves just tore it apart and--so the archeologists could actually from this, you know, like accident investigators all this can be retraced, you know, you know-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --how that happened. Speaker 1: The ship held like a full cargo of enslaved Africans, or, or what? Speaker 2: Apparently, apparently. I mean, that ship was, it wasn't--that story has added interest because it was right at this kind of fulcrum point where prior to 1700 the, the royalty wanted to maintain the slave trade as a royal monopoly, not the most efficient way. So they started experimenting with private trades, and Henrietta Marie was one of them. And in the 1700s they would prove to be the much more efficient, much more profitable way to do this. And England would become the largest, you know, carrying nation in this, in, in, in this business. And-- Speaker 1: So the government would basically give them a license-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --would license individuals-- Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to do it (unclear)-- Speaker 2: So, this was like one of the early experiments in that. I'm not remembering if there's a record of how many Africans were embarked. And I'm not sure if, like I say, if there was a previous stop in, in, in, in Barbados, which was sure Africans were delivered to Jamaica. And then they loaded with what they called dyewood and you know, other products and you know, the trade triangle, you know, where you profit at all three points. And you know, that's what they were headed back to England with. Story_ID: 645971 Speaker 1: So the Henrietta Marie really gives us a window into that particular period, because, like slavery itself, and, and you know, a lot of times we, we look at it from our perspective today, and tend to see it almost like a monolithic--well, you know, it was this, not realizing that this was constantly dynamically morphing, changing, becoming more or less this or that as, in this case, profit would, would, would, would dictate. And you know, it, it, it still raises the fundamental question: well, if you wanted the labor and the skills of these people, you could have just negotiated a deal, and you'd have made the same profit. You could have brought--why did it have to be stolen labor, captive people, forced labor under the whip, under the unpaid, you know? And, and, and, and like I say, then, you know, a hundred years later you get to the 1800s, early 1800s, 1807, 1808, Britain, United States abolish the slave trade, as they called it, certainly out of moral concern to some extent. In the case of the British, well, since Cuba and Brazil are now becoming so competitive in the sugar market, well, if you can deprive them of their labor supply, you--and then from the American side, 1804 the success of the Haitian Revolution was enough to like, let's not bring any more Africans in here. But then, of course, like everything that gets declared to be illegal but is profitable, continued and even led to ships being designed specifically for that-- Speaker 2: To hide the fact that they were slavers, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for the, for--yeah. Story_ID: 645972 Speaker 1: Now the, the Henrietta [Henrietta Marie]--I mean, what actually--so did you see some of the--I gue- I know you've seen some of the-- Speaker 2: Oh, like the artifacts (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) pieces. Yeah, and did, did they inspire a piece that you did, yeah? Speaker 2: Well, on one of my visits, 'cause I do these impromptu visits down to Key West [Florida], and according to Malcom [Corey Malcom], one of the archeologists who, who's still the director of archeology at the Mel Fisher Museum [Mel Fisher Maritime Museum, Key West, Florida], I got there and he said, "Oh, you know, you came at a good time. We just got some of the shackles and artifacts out of the bath," 'cause you know, there's this whole process of reverse electrolysis that has to be done to remove all the encrustation so you can actually see. And you know, I had seen the pewter dishes and trade items and a lot of, you know, beads and things that were salvaged. To walk into that room and see shackles and see little shackles like that, you know, there are times when people could say what they want about fragile male ego and all that, but if, if, if that's the only thing that you can hold on to to keep from just completely losing it, well, it'll do. That was, you know, you know, the, the, the late Tom Feelings who did that book of just really fine paintings. Speaker 1: 'Middle Passage' ['The Middle Passage: White Ships/ Black Cargo']. Speaker 2: Yeah. He and I many times shared the thought while, you know, that was in progress, of this is a story in history that you never get used to. You, when you think you've read or heard the worst, you, you're gonna find something else is gonna come up that's gonna let you know, oh no, that wasn't it; it, it gets worse yet. It is an emotional minefield 'cause you don't know what page you're gonna turn, what thing you're gonna see, what that just, you know. And, and when you think that the hardest thing we're doing is reading books and looking at images, you know, you get a, a feel for, you know, what, what, what--a, yeah, a, a feel, an, an inkling, an idea of what this really was and, and you know, and to, to experience. Story_ID: 645973 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the monument for the African cemetery [African Cemetery at Higgs Beach]. This is, was erected in 2005 on Key West [Florida], right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And tell us what the, what hap- what, what happened on Key West and what, what, what the monument was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, that, that monument is at the location of the first fifteen burials that were discovered. The story of the African cemetery, the, the fact that an African cemetery exist at all, was unearthed by Gail Swanson, who, she's been Florida Keys [Florida] research for a long time and, and you know, not a formal academic scholar but very diligent and, and very meticulous in her research. And she came across, seen a map or--of Key West that indicated this African cemetery. So that was around 1996. And we knew that there was this cemetery in the area. A historic marker was placed in the area. And it would be--before we go to, like, discovering the burials, the story was this. The United States, by 1860, is very much on the brink of all out civil war. The, the, the dialogue in [U.S.] Congress is getting more and more contentious and so forth. So as a result, the United States government decides to take its treaty obligations a lot more seriously in terms of capturing, going after American owned slave ships. So, in the year 1860, I think they captured more ships than in all the years before. And three of the ships headed for Cuba were intercepted by U.S. Navy steamships. The first one was the Wil- Wildfire, which was captured by U.S.S. Wyandotte [U.S.S. Mohawk], brought into Key West, then the bark Williams, and, and the third one was the Bogota. They were all captured in the vicinity of Cuba. 1,432 captives in total were aboard. Key West at the time was a town of three thousand people, so you're adding like half of the size of the population to the population. The U.S. marshal, Fernando Marino, had to be very creative and very generous in hastily getting some barracks built. The community was very generous with clothing and food and blankets and whatever they could bring. And the Africans would be housed there for twelve weeks, until President Buchanan's [President James Buchanan, Jr.] executive order for them to return to Africa, not to where they came from but to Liberia, to go into effect. During that time, 295 of them die, and they're buried in this burial ground, you know, properly buried. I mean, there was a, somebody was hired to make coffins and so. We have the invoice for the coffins. Now, how good they were, we don't know. But so, we now know that these people are buried somewhere in that, in that area. Finally, through the Mel Fisher Museum [Mel Fisher Maritime Museum, Key West, Florida], Corey Malcom, whom I mentioned, the archeologist, they're able to organize a ground penetrating radar survey, and they find fifteen burials. And that gave us a location of, okay, now at least we know, so the historical marker was even moved closer to that spot. Story_ID: 645974 Speaker 1: And we knew that there were many more yet to be found. But in the meantime, it was some folks in the community concerned, but a lot of people outside of the community who knew the story, that you have to have some kind of proper memorial here, you know, rebar and orange construction netting going around a little area is not exactly a proper memorial. So, after a time, and I think by now we're up to 2005--the rediscovery was around 1996--the Monroe County public works department, they designed and built a memorial. There had been some talk about having one designed, and I was hoping to compete with a design. At one point I think I was even invited to be on the selection committee. I said well, I'd, I'd rather be the one selected, but (laughter), you know. But in any case, they came up with something fairly basic, which was a rectangular slab with concrete columns and fencing in between on three sides. But they built it in such a way that it would, as they say, like, float above the, the ground, not be actually imposed on the, the grave. And so at that point, it was kind of like, well, okay, we have this basic design, but we need some art, you know. And there as a local activist, Norma Jean Sawyer, who, native from Key West [Florida]. She had been following the story all along. She knew me, and she knew another artist, a Nigerian born artist named Johnson Odibi. And to sort of just move this along, because it had been taking so long, she was able to get us selected to go ahead and let that, that slab be our, our, our canvas. Story_ID: 645975 Speaker 1: So with that, it was already poured, so, but the columns hadn't been poured. And I said well, okay, this is good. That means, like, before you pour any concrete, let's, we can come up with some designs, where we can just cast into the concrete and that, that, that'll help, you know, on, on the columns. The columns were, was like ten of them with slanted tops that were supposed to have bronze plaques. So, I was fortunate enough to be able to come up with designs for the columns, for the fencing, you know, like, this, do some decorative fencing. And the design of the fence kind of evokes the, the lyric out of Lift Every Voice and thing--'Lift Every Voice and Sing'; it says, "Facing the rising sun of our new be- new day begun as we look out over the ocean" [sic.]. And-- Speaker 2: A song that was actually written in Florida, too, right? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: By James Weldon Johnson. Speaker 1: Right, right. And kind of--and then Johnson Odibi, he came up with the idea of a, a kind of a running tile mural along the platform riser and abstract family design, like symbolizing the future, to go on the outside of the columns. And we were able to create a, a kind of a map and a, you know, artwork for the surface, write the text for the, the bronze plaques using a, a, a kind of a map and you know, artwork for the surface, write the text for the, the bronze plaques using Adinkra symbols from Ghana to kind of tell the story of the saga. So you know, starts with Sankofa, where we have to go back and get the history to, you know, get by the handcuffs is a symbol called Wawa Aba, the, the seed of the wawa tree that the symbol of hardness and toughness, ako- Akoma Ntoso is the linked hearts, this, the, the symbol for agreement and accord. And then the three famous ones, the Nkonsonkonson, the links of the chain, Gye Nyame, the symbol of the omnipotence of God, Mate Masie, the symbol of knowledge. There's a corner column that just explains the whole thing. And then we have two more, the Osram, the moon, the idea that, you know, the moon doesn't go around the earth in a day. This has to run its course; this too will pass. And then it ends up with the one that kind of affirms that, you know, there is a god in heaven; you know, we know this. And it, it relates to--there's a spiritual, I hear--what is it--, "I hear music in the air. I know there's a God somewhere," that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: "Above my head," and-- Speaker 1: That's the one, yes. And I also on the plaque related it to this great proverb from Brazil that says--and you know, this is what would have fortified those people as well. But it says, "Don't tell God that you have a great problem. Tell your problem that you have a great God," you know. It's just--so, oh, and then the other feature we were able to put in was at the top rail of the fences, we actually have 295 solid iron pyramids, so there's one for each person, you know, so that as you go there, especially you know that, you know that, okay, these are, you know. And there are two additional ones for the two people who, when they were being taken out to the ship to be returned to Africa, two--one, one of the boats capsized, and two people died, was just swept away. So they're remembered there as well. And so that's the--and the whole, the whole overall theme of the monument [African Cemetery at Higgs Beach, Key West, Florida] sort of suggests that, as you look out over the water, you see water. But below the water there's this whole story that, that you know, lives there. Story_ID: 645976 Speaker 1: Now you've exhibited in quite a few galleries, right, the Corcoran [Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.], galleries here in Florida, you know, oth- oth- you know, outside of the state, I mean. What, did you generally do sculptures or paintings or what, what do you-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I generally do painting, sculpture, drawing, collage, and lately monument designs, 'cause I did one ['Richmond Heights Pioneers Monument,' Dinizulu Gene Tinnie] for Richmond Heights [Miami, Florida] historic community here, and, and, and graphic design. I've not been, you know, in the gallery system, you know. Through our artist collective [Kuumba Artists Collective of South Florida, Miami, Florida], we done many of our own ex- exhibitions but have had those good opportunities when they, you know, did come along. Speaker 1: But you have had, I mean, the one, the '94 [1994] exhibit, that, that wasn't the only one where you, you were the only artist, was it? I mean the '94 [1994] Gallery Elegua [ph.], -legua? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Elegua Gallery-- Speaker 1: Elegua, okay. Speaker 2: --in, in, in, in Tallahassee [Florida]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a solo show. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was a solo show. And I think that was the first place I got to exhibit--there's a piece called 'In the Wake of Columbus' [Dinizulu Gene Tinnie], 'cause you know that, 1992, that five hundredth anniversary-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: --of Columbus [Christopher Columbus] was like the--I, I, I can't be silent about that (laughter). So, and that, that's the piece that actually got exhibited at the Corca- Corcoran also-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Washington [D.C.]. And it actually ended up in the possession of Dr. Maya Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou], so it had a-- Speaker 1: Right. Now this is, that's-- Speaker 2: Right, and got a, finally got auctioned at Swann [Swann Auction Galleries, New York, New York], you know, after she passed and the--yeah. So that, that, that, that piece I, I hope and trust is still having a life of saying what needs to be said about Columbus (laughter), you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So what, what does it say? I, I don't remember seeing this one but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a, it's a, it's a piece that--it's--consciously or unconsciously, I, I would say it was kind of inspired by the line from Robert Hayden's poem, 'Middle Passage': "Voyage through death / through life upon these shores." So it kind of invokes that kind of this rise from, you know, death and destruction, you know, a lot of skulls and bones and that kind of thing, and this kind of a coffin shaping (unclear) with the diagram of the slave ship in the middle of that. And in the middle of that is a small mirror that lets you know that (laughter) we're part of that. And that, in turn, kind of invokes the, in the Congo culture, those Nkisi sculptures that have the mirror and the, the people drive blades and nails into. And, and then it sort of, you know, rises into this more, you know, hopeful, the future. So that, yeah, Columbus needs to be--you know, we, we, we, we talk about narratives that need to be re- revisited and retold and revised; his is one. I mean, the, you know, barbarism should not be glorified. I'll just leave it at that (laughter), you know. Story_ID: 645977 Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite piece of work? Speaker 2: You know, that's like the parent being asked, who's your favorite child? Speaker 1: I know (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know that's cliche. I, I, I think there's a piece that has become kind of sort of a signature piece. It's called Seven--'Seven Masques of the Crossing' [ph.]. And it's a--I learned the word polyptych; you know, you have diptychs and triptychs. And when you get to seven canvases (laughter), it's a polyptych. And it, it-- Speaker 1: Now these just, these are--how, how large are these canvases? Speaker 2: That one, each one is, if I'm remembering correctly, it's like, twenty-four by thirty, so that the whole piece ends up just about twelve feet long and about two and half feet high. So it's, and so it kind of captures this sort of epic sweep scope. And each one kind of has a masque quality, if you will. And it basically tells a story of, from there to here and returning, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then other than that, I mean, you know, we talked about 'Remembrance of The Way' [Dinizulu Gene Tinnie]. There's a, a outdoor--another public commission that's, that a fire station here called 'Gathering of Spirits' ['A Gathering of Spirits,' Dinizulu Gene Tinnie], and that's kind of African and Native American inspired. There's, there's one called New--'New World' [ph.], which has gotten a little bit of popularity. It hasn't sold yet. But that one for me kind of stands out because it's like one of the very pieces that was done with no prior plan. It's not like I made a sketch and thought, oh, this has possibilities. It's kind of one thing led to another to another to another, and so that, that was interesting. And then I'm, I'm, I, I've done, I did it for, when Duke Ellington's hundredth birthday was coming around, I knew I had to just do something. So I did a kind of, I guess you could call it collage sculpture called 'Duke's Flight' [Dinizulu Gene Tinnie]. I finished it ten years later, but it finally got finished. And so I was able to do one for Thelonious Monk that was shown in New York [New York] for remembering his, I guess it was ninety-fifth in, in, in 2012. I understand it's going to be another, a follow up exhibition this year. And in that same vein, I want to do one for Sun Ra, so, end up with kind of a trilo- trilogy of these--I mean, coincidentally, all three were pianists and composers and leaders. And you know, the challenge and the (unclear) with that is like, oh, can I be as good with this as they are with what they did? You know, if I can get there, mission accomplished. Story_ID: 645978 Speaker 1: Now do you have like a--where do you work and what's your routine like? I mean, you, you, you still, like, really pr- creating full time in-- Speaker 2: I, I, I-- Speaker 1: 'Cause so many people-- Speaker 2: I wish. Speaker 1: --retire, and then they, they take up art. They have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Ex, ex-President George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] is now painting full time, you know. Speaker 2: Oh? Oh well, good (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's like-- Speaker 2: --good for him. That's (laughter)-- Speaker 1: --like it's a--but where do artists retire to (laughter)? What do they do? Speaker 2: They (laughter)-- Speaker 1: They start governing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we don't-- Speaker 1: --or what do they, what do they--yeah-- Speaker 2: --we, you know, you don't, you, you don't retire. You can't go on strike. You can't--none, none of the benefits, other than you get to do that, you know. And I have a, fortunately, I have a studio space, a house two doors down from where we live. And you know, too much of it is storage space for--but there, there's, there's workspace there. And no, no fixed routine, but my challenge is that, is just having too many hats, you know. And-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you're on, you're on quite a few-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --boards and then quite-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --a few volunteer, volunteer positions. Speaker 2: Right. And then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are some of the, the ones that you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and then, of course, as, as each of those become more successful, they become more demanding, you know. But Virginia Key Beach Park Trust [Miami, Florida], you know, it's just I chair that. That's, you know, like, kind of this first-- Speaker 1: That's where we are right? Speaker 2: That's where we are now, Mel Fisher Maritime heritage museum [Mel Fisher Maritime Museum] down in Key West [Florida], I've been on their board for a number of years, the New Birth Corporation [New Birth Corporation, Inc., Miami, Florida], which is the nonprofit that is the keeper of the Howard Thurman legacy. Story_ID: 645979 Speaker 1: And now, Howard Thurman, his, his story, his childhood home is in Daytona Beach [Florida]. For a while I was kind of the long distance maintenance man (laughter) for that. And, and his, his, his legacy as a theologian, I mean, he was literally a forerunner of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], was at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. He visited Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi], and that whole vision of Christianity having a very activist social purpose on behalf of, as he called it, the disinherited. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he ended up founding, I think, what some people will say, say was the first really truly integrated congregation in the United States, a church [The Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples] out in San Francisco [California]. So he's a figure that really deserves more recognition and you know. So I've been--and then that actually ends up being a, a, a double legacy, because it's his and then also the scholarly couple, Reverend Jefferson Rogers [Jefferson P. Rogers] and his wife, Mary Grace [Mary Grace Harris Rogers], who were colleagues of mine at Florida Memorial [Florida Memorial College; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida]. They're the ones who really started the effort to save that. So their legacy and all of what they did is all built into that. So that, that, that's another, you know, one of those things that, it's a, you know, honor, a privilege to be a part of and you know want to see that built. Story_ID: 645980 Speaker 1: So, you know, I think those are the boards. Oh, yeah, yeah, and the Urban Environment League [Urban Environment League of Greater Miami, Inc.] is locally based here in Miami [Florida]. And that's just an organization, as the name suggest, that can--we make living in urban environments somehow better and more uplifting because, you know, you can look at cities as--well, certainly they're, you know, they're exciting places to live. But the fact that so many are surrounded by shanty towns and poverty and you know, either literally or metaphorically that--I mean, you know, Miami is like one of the poorest cities in the country. I mean, I think Miami and Detroit [Michigan] sort of vie for that dubious--but you wouldn't know it, to look at the, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I would never think of, of Miami like that. Speaker 1: No, you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody thinks of Detroit that way, but-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Miami-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --and, and yet the big money-- Speaker 1: --beneath all the glitz-- Speaker 2: --in both sides. I mean, in both-- Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: --in both areas there's a lot of big money, but it's not in the hands of-- Speaker 1: Right, but-- Speaker 2: It's not distributed-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --very well. Speaker 1: But the average person--I mean, the housing, the, the cost, it's, it's, it's, it's--you know, you know, and when, when you, when you think of this metaphor of like during the Vietnam War where you're destroying villages and people's capacity to be, to be self-sufficient and putting them in relocations and concentration camps, if you will, that's almost the same thing as, you know, as people being driven from the rural places where you could grow food, hunt, fish. You come to the city, and it's a whole, well, Stevie Wonder, you know, 'Living for the City,' I mean. So, the Urban Environment League you know, I think it's, it's like a voice of some kind of sanity. And it was through that organization that I became aware of the fact that this place, Virginia Key Beach [Virginia Key Beach Park, Miami, Florida], was threatened with being lost to just more rampant development. Story_ID: 645981 Speaker 1: Is Miami [Florida] the kind of place--I, I know I've--we've interviewed other people in the past, some of whom actually performed on the beach back in the day. And I mean, is, is it a place where artists actually, can actually sell their work to tourists and that sort of thing? Is that, that the kind of--or, or, or, or does the African American community participate in that-- Speaker 2: Interesting question, a very interesting question because I've kind of had this crazy trajectory through life that by the time I decided to relocate to Miami, I had been then doing all different kinds of work but gravitating more and more toward doing art, so that by the time I decided I was gonna come here, I said you know, I'm just gonna go ahead and try this art thing, just, just, just, just go with that. And now, you know, that's about as absurd a premise (laughter) as you can have. I mean, I, you know, relocate and you have no job. You don't have any- and you're gonna go there and be an artist. Okay, well, you know, good luck. Well, I meet the Black Art Workshop [Miami Black Arts Workshop, Miami, Florida]. Within two weeks I get my first job through there. I can say, well, you guys were saying you didn't have next month's rent. Well, now that's taken care of, we got--. And somehow, you know, for me personally--I can't speak for everybody--this has somehow been sustainable. And at the times when I'd say, you know, why am I here? This place is, you know, there, there, there, there's not an art, artistic consciousness to speak of, although that all changed radically with Art Basel coming here, I mean (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Now who is that now? Speaker 2: Art Basel--the City of Basel, Switzerland, used to host--not the city but the organizers in the city, had what was called the largest art festival in the world every, I think, July. It seems that sometime I guess in the early 2000s they came to Miami Beach [Florida], and liked it, and came up with the idea, well, you know, we could do a kind of baby sister exhibition in the winter here in Miami. And that's how that got born, you know, at the Miami Beach Convention Center [Miami Beach, Florida]. And it was kind of the catalyst that was needed to just get a whole, you know--since, since the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the main purpose of that is to sell art, I mean. So everybody who wanted to sell art just figured--so you had all these--you know, so now, I mean, it's, it's, you know, when it comes you've got things happening in the streets, things, you know, all over (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is an annual-- Speaker 2: --the place. Speaker 1: --art fair-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --sort of art-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --expo, ex- ex-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --ex- exposition, yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And what-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --is it called? What's it called? Speaker 2: Art Basel-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --B-A-S-E-L. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 645982 Speaker 1: But certainly, in, in earlier days, I mean, you know, Miami [Florida] was just, you know, not you know known for anything. However, it seems that every time I had my doubts or, you know, something would come along, I'd get a commission, or this. And you know, I'll say okay, well, evidently the spirit wants me to be here. And, and then on--well, you know, I met my wife [Wallis Hamm Tinnie] here, so it's kind of like, well, you know, this is the place. And, and then just on, just other levels, it just seems that, you know, you don't think of Miami as a place that is so connected with African culture, although, I mean, you have Bahamian, Cuban, Haitian and Cuban traditions (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It actually, yeah, it, it, it's actually deeper than people, than people think, much deeper. Speaker 1: Yeah, but you know-- Speaker 2: And what's, what's the black population of Miami now? What is it? What percentage is it? Speaker 1: I believe the percentage is--and I just looked this up recently. Is it--I'm gonna say between--I'm gonna venture to say between 20 and 40 percent. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think you're right. Speaker 1: Forty might be high, but yeah, yeah, maybe more like 20, 30 percent, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, I just think with the in- with so many tourists coming here, you know, in the islands, you know, a lot of people like to sell paintings and stuff and then, you know, in Haiti and other places. But was that a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There used to be, there used to be like a, a whole Haitian painting and, and so forth. Speaker 2: Is it about-- Speaker 1: You don't see that like, like you used to. Speaker 2: --is it by access to the tourists? I mean, 'cause it--I, I guess at one time public access to tourism was, was greater than it may be now. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and, and, and, well, I think that, I guess the market or the marketing has changed too. Okay, during Art Basel, for example, there's a show I had real doubts that this Art Africa [Art Africa Miami Arts Fair] could make it in Overtown [Miami, Florida]. I said like, all these other things are being held in Wynwood [Miami, Florida] and Coral Gate [Miami, Florida], it was Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida]--art gallery districts. Who was gonna go to Overtown, which is known for being the kind of depressed black historic area? But people came. And the first time I showed work, I, you know, people bought it. I said well, well, I, I guess, you know. I think there's more that can be done. Greater Miami Convention Business Bureau [Greater Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau, Miami, Florida] has kind of started doing some good stuff with this Art of Black [Art of Black Miami], where they, during Basel, they'll get the word out where all the black art is being shown and, and, and programs going on and so forth. So I think it's improving that way. At the same time, and, and, and, and you know, so much of actually my, my perception of the art scene is, well, well, I guess it's getting narrower than it used to be. I'm, I'm, I'm kind of more seeing it through the lens of my own work and my own relationship to it than as I used to, kind of, like, looking at the whole phenomenon. But I feel, certainly for me and, and, and, and, and I don't doubt that for others, that the whole idea of what art is, why we do it, why it's needed, is going to be going through some changes in evolution. I mean, the new political climate I think is forcing a lot of hands (laughter) that way. The climate itself, I mean, you know, there are, you know, life on planet Earth is changing, more people, warmer temperatures, sea level rise. And socially we're gonna see, as we saw in the last election, you know, panic responses to that, that can be pretty dangerous. And you know, life is gonna have to be, we're gonna have to be astute and, and level headed and I think in a mode where we can feel that we're contributing to the, you know, the light rather than the darkness, so to speak. Story_ID: 645983 Speaker 1: Well, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I guess I'm back with where Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was. We have got to get economic justice and e- and, and any economic, you know, we always use the word econom- econ- e- economics or economy with, you know, the idea of dollar sighs, and it, it, it's not. Economy is the total, totality of resources, natural resources, human resources--that we, we have got to get to a place where we are making better use of what we have for life giving and life sustaining purposes. I think that, as somebody put it well, where others see nothing but impoverishment and problems, we have to see the abund- abundance in the impoverished communities materially. In these incarcerated situations, we have a diamond mine of knowledge, potential. The mythical achievement gap that we keep hearing about in schools, I'm more and more convinced that it's not that these African American students are lagging behind others but that they are ahead because of having inherited much more truth where you just, you don't have the luxury to be seduced by irrelevant information or information that's, that you al- already processed that it's being presented to you at this slow, slow rate that just bores you until you, you know. So I think there are potentialities that are yet to be realized. And my hope is that we get to do that because, historically, every single social demand that the black community has made has always benefited the whole human race. So, if we're able to do that, I see that, I see a lot of that having to do with almost like a kind of total solidarity with the Native American cause, because this is the land that, that we're on. And those understandings of spirituality and we are what we are, are so close that the reawakening that we're seeing there, like at Standing Rock [Standing Rock Sioux Reservation], is I think in, very much in, in lockstep with our own. Story_ID: 645984 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now when you look back at everything you've done so far, and you've got a lot of different kinds of talents, is there anything diff- major that you would change if you could, you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Probably, well, you know, hypothetical questions are always, you know, crazy. But I guess I, I have to leave that at, you know, if that's what it took to get me where I am, then I guess I'll live with that (laughter). And yeah, could I have been a better father, a better spouse, a better person, a better artist, a better basketball player, a better factory worker, probably yeah. But (laughter), you know, I think, you know, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou has that, that, that, that quote that, that Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] in particular, you know, talks about how liberating it was for her when, you know, that idea of look, you know, when you didn't know better you didn't do better. Now that you know better you do better. I, I think, you know, that's kind of where we are. I, I've been--my wife [Wallis Hamm Tinnie] and I--a couple of anniversaries ago, I did this whole thing about the best is yet to come. And I was saying, you know, I--it's nice rhetoric, but I'm, I'm gonna make that a vow, you know, that whatever, however good, whatever, we still, with the time we have left, you know, just we're gonna make that, hey, this is, hey, max out, just make it the best before we, you know, leave here. And so that's kind of how I'm, you know, I, I, I, I, I absolutely do believe that, you know, the past is present; the future is now; everything's in the present moment. The decisions you make affect our next generations. They honor or fail to honor the people who came before us. And I think being aware of that, and conscious of that, is a small help to maybe, you know, doing the right thing the best way we know how. Story_ID: 645985 Speaker 1: Now, in that regard now, when you look back at everything you've done, what do you consider is your, your major contribution? It doesn't have to be a thing necessarily, but what's your contribution to the world? Speaker 2: I would, I, I, I would say having the opportunity to realize that whatever talent I've been given that to do something that maybe somebody else could not do, having the opportunity to use that in the proper way, which is to kind of give back rather than to say oh, look at me, I'm this, or pay me more (laughter), I, if, if that has in any way been as beneficial as I'd like to think it has been to, you know, the universe and the community as much as to myself, than I would say that's a contribution that I would consider worthwhile. Story_ID: 645986 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your family. Now you're married. You, you have children, right, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Married-- Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: --two daughters [Antoinette Riley and Michelle Riley]. My wife, Dr. Wallis Hamm Tinnie is a native Floridian, retired educator herself. I got two beautiful brilliant daughters in the (unclear) (laughter), you know. And they are just a source of endless pride and inspiration and all that, all that good stuff. I'll, I'll be sure to provide some pictures. And the most recent evidence of all that was here at the beach on February 25th, which is my seventy-fifth birthday. They organized a beachfront bash where the, rather than gifts to me, people donated to the Virginia Key Beach [Virginia Key Beach Park, Miami, Florida] cause. And that actually took in a couple of thousand dollars, which wasn't bad for (laughter), you know, a day's work, as they say. But you know, to have kind of seen them at work, making that happen, was, was impressive. It was just, it was, it was a good, it was one of those good moments in life, especially since my older daughter, she doesn't live in Miami [Florida], so she had to come here to be a part of it. And yeah, so it's-- Story_ID: 645987 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about this place that we're at here, Virginia Beach Park [Virginia Key Beach Park, Miami, Florida]. What is the--we've alluded to it all during this interview, and from beginning to the end--I mean 'til now. But, like, tell us about where it is now and, and what its significance is to the community. Speaker 2: Okay, it was the colored beach back in the day. Before it was officially designated that it was unofficially that. Folks used to come out here on boats, and nothing here, but it was a place that black folk could come. And I always liked that quote from Robin Kelley [Robin D.G. Kelley] that talks about the segregated colored parks were places that people could go in weekends and reclaim their souls and recharge, get ready to deal with another week of that. The--it was thanks to a bold protest wade-in in 1945, the county established it, improved it, made it very close to separate and equal with Crandon Park on Key Biscayne [Florida]. Speaker 1: So it was unofficial 'til 1945, you say. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean it was an unofficial place that we would gather. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: People just kind of knew it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But it wasn't-- Speaker 2: Right, just like-- Speaker 1: Had no designation. Speaker 2: No, no, no. And once it became-- Speaker 1: Was it an official park then? Speaker 2: Well, well, it became an official county park. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then they made all the improvements. And then you had things that were unheard of in other southern parks, mini train ride, merry go round-- Speaker 1: So did it get bigger than the other parks (laughter)? Speaker 2: It was (unclear) was like eighty-two acres now, and it was bigger than this, and it had a boat ramp, I mean. When--I mean that--I'm a newcomer--when we started this, and I went to the county and, and, and here in the office you'll see some of the historic pictures. I'm, I'm looking at these pictures like, these people were living--this is, you know, parking lot full of late model cars, boats, trailers, you know-- Speaker 1: Seems like a African American amusement park in a lot of ways, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I mean it was, it was--and then to, to hear the people tell about how, you know--I mean, people just rhapsodize: it was paradise; it was like a trip to the Bahamas without leaving the city; it was a beautiful place; it was--you know, people got baptized here. People were--you know, the church socials were here. All the social classes, all the neighborhoods were brought together here. So it, it's a very special place that a lot of people fondly remember, I mean those who still just like, you know--you know, to hell that it was segregated. And (laughter), you know, we just don't dig the strict--the, the, the restriction. But you know to hear the people talking about its children had their favorite horse on the merry go round and was, hoped somebody else didn't get to it before they did, and you know, the famous Virginia Key corn dog at the concession stand that, you know, once you bit into it, this is as close to heaven as you can get on earth (laughter), you know what I mean, and those kinds of stories. Well, they certainly, you know, you know, inspired me. Story_ID: 645988 Speaker 1: And so, the fact that we were able to save it at all, and, and with this whole coalition of environmental activists and public park activists and historic preservationists; and, and then, of course, there's the African American community, which includes people in those categories, was, well, you know, it was great. And, and you know, it, it took some personalities like Mrs. Range [M. Athalie Range], our late, much beloved, very in- influential matriarch to make it happen with the degree of success that we've had. So where it is now, the--once we saved it and convinced the powers that be that restoring this and bringing it back was a more sensible use of the land, the first two things are done. It's been restored, and it's been reopened. And where we are now is that the idea is to create a, basically an eighty-two and half acre indoor outdoor slash virtual museum experience so that the story of the park [Virginia Key Beach Park, Miami, Florida] historically, the human history, the social history, and the natural history, because this is a barrier island with a few very unique features, create that botanical garden experience, allow people who come to reconnect with nature. And, and what makes that whole opportunity even more fascinating is that we can do it in a seamless way. You come here to have fun, and you have all this knowledge around you that you can just take in as much or as little as you, as you want to. So, here we'll be telling the story of black Miami [Florida]. As Mrs. Range put it, "All the folks who come here from elsewhere need to know--have a right to know who built this into an attractive place to come to in the first place, you know." This, you know, Henry Flagler did not break a sweat building a railroad (laughter), you know. The sewers did not get dug by themselves, and you know, the whole story of those being done with dynamite charges, that people are hands and limbs and so forth. There's a lot of stories that, that, that have to be told, in addition, the story beyond here. Where were these and what were these historic neighborhoods? What was it like, you know, to be here? I mean, here you had this whole thriving black independence, but you know, 1923 the Orange Bowl parade's first prize for the best float went to the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], like this is a wholesome community organization. This place has a whole story to tell just like the country has a whole story to tell, that--I've, I've used the analogy of, you know, the history we have is like you have a magnificent Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] symphony with all the F sharps removed out of it. And you know, we can all talk, and the critics will talk about how great it is. But then you put the missing notes back in, and then all of a sudden it's something that, oh, you don't need critics. Everybody gets this. We can enjoy this. So, that's--what's happening here--and we really, you know, without undue self-importance, we really see that the opportunity that we have here might just be the pilot for the country, the world, in the sense of creating again like that, that seamless experience. But because this, this island is like the closest thing to anything that's been left natural here in Miami, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --with the exception of Simpson's Park [sic. Simpson Park, Miami, Florida], we can create this museum that's not on the park but of the park. So we'll have a museum building that kind of morphs from interior to exterior and tell a story that's informed by traditional wisdom as much as by, you know, available records and the like. Story_ID: 645989 Speaker 1: Are you ready for our last question? Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm. Speaker 1: This is the last one. Now, is there anything we need to talk about before I ask my last one? Speaker 2: Well, no, go ahead (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Anything? All right, well, the last one, last one is similar to, I guess, when I asked you about your favorite projects but, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That one, (laughter) at the risk of sounding like I'm evading the question, I'm--I'll put it like this, I, I had a friend and neighbor who, very devout. And he was once, at one time he asked me about, you know, had I been thinking about my salvation and you know, these things. And I said well, you know, in all honesty, no. All I can try to do is live right. That, whether I get saved or what happens, that's in the hands of God; that's, you know. And, and sort of how I get remembered is gonna be based on what I've done and essentially what people make of it. I know some folk--you know, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] talked about being, remember me as a drum major. I haven't processed it that way. I'm just kind of like, okay, here is some art; here are some things; here are some things that were done, and they, let them speak for themselves and so be it (laughter). Like I said, it, it, it sounds like a non-answer, but that's kind of, you know. I'm, I'm, I'm really thinking that posterity will, will make that decision, and, and I, and I'm comfortable with that, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you so much, all right. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you. It was, well, as the cliche says, an honor and a pleasure. This was, this was good...