 Story_ID: 614384 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Faithe Colas, F as in football, A-I-T-H-E, C-O-L-A-S, as in Sam. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a middle name or-- Speaker 2: Annette. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And actually it's hyphenated, it's Thomas-Colas. It's Faithe Annette Thomas-Colas [HistoryMaker Faithe A. Thomas-Colas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My dad [Floyd Thomas, Sr.] would just, not be happy if I didn't put Thomas in there; that's my legal name. Speaker 1: Okay, so Colas is a married name? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born June 22nd, 1961 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your occupation? Speaker 2: Currently I am the community relations director for The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee and I also co-host 'Black Nouveau' on Milwaukee Public Television [WMVS-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is Wednesday, November 19th, 2008. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Divisional Headquarters [Wauwatosa, Wisconsin]. Story_ID: 614385 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, management compels me to ask five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. My favorite food is pizza. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is black. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Oh, summer, summer's my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination would be a Caribbean island. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Whatever it takes. Story_ID: 614386 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family first, and then your father's [Floyd Thomas, Sr.] side, so we don't get them mixed up and so, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Helen, H-E-L-E-N, Annette McCray, M-C, capital C-R-A-Y [Helen McCray]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Well, mom was born in Opa-locka, Florida on October 5th, and I'm not sure what year she was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'd have to do the math. Speaker 1: Okay, about how old was she when you were born? Speaker 2: Well, she was sixteen when I was born so sixteen from forty-seven, I guess, or is that sixteen, see, that's not my forte, that's not it (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, okay. Speaker 2: Okay, so we'll figure it out. I'll get-- Speaker 1: Sixteen minus sixty--I mean sixty-one minus sixteen that'll give us the answer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I'm not going to do it now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right, so, what do you know about your mother's side--did she grow up in Opa-locka? Speaker 2: Mother grew up in Opa-locka until she was probably about fourteen years old and then she moved to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] where, and joined her mother here. She was raised by her great- by her grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, what do you know about your, the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them and are there any stories associated with them? Speaker 2: Well, there is a story associated with my mother's side of the family, beginning with my great-grandmother, Patsy McCray who was actually Patsy Ford McCray [ph.]. Ford was her family name and there is conversation that has gone down from generation and generation that that side of the family was owned by the Fords, Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan], and that we are descendants of that family. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories associated with that, that-- Speaker 2: Well there's the story that there was one daughter that was born from a relationship with Ford and a male Ford family member and, of course, a female member of my great-grandmother's side of the family, and pretty much that, that kind of is where it lies and dies. I've tried several times to have conversations with my great-grandmother but, you know, you run into a wall with the senior members of your families and, and it's not just my family, I've talked to several friends who have tried to trace their genealogy and there's just conversations that some folks just are not going to have. And so, I get to that point in each conversation where we are descendants from the Fords and that's all you need to know. Speaker 1: Okay, is there any, do you know if, if Henry Ford's family has roots in Opa-locka? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I've never had an opportunity to research that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, be interesting to find out if there-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, it would be. Speaker 1: --they actually were from around there and you'd say, oh, oh. Speaker 2: Sure, and, and you know, my great-grandmother's family were farmers. They migrated to different areas to pick, you know, fruit and vegetables, that's what they did for a living at that time, before, well, post slave time---slavery times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that would be on my mother's mother side of the family. On my mother's father's side of the family, my great-grandmother was German and she married a Native American and from that union my great-grandfather--my grandfather was born, along with several uncles and aunts and-- Speaker 1: Okay, so they weren't African American, they were German and Indian? Speaker 2: No, they were German and Native American, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know what Native American group? Speaker 2: Cherokee. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. So I take it, one of them married an African American woman or something? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. My grandfather and my grandmother began dating. They were never married but my mother was conceived and born from that relationship. Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay. Now what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name is Lucille Berrien. Speaker 1: Okay, well you had two of 'em, I guess, on that side? Speaker 2: And, right, and my great-grandmother, her mother's name is Patsy McCray, P-A-T-S-Y, McCray, M-C-C-R-Y [sic.], and she's still living. Speaker 1: This is your great-grandmother on this-- Speaker 2: This is my great--great-grandmother, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So she must be, how old is she now? Speaker 2: She's, well you know, between grandma and granny, they both don't like to talk about their age, so I'm always guessing. I can pretty much bet, granny's over a hundred and my great, and my grandmother's over eighty. Story_ID: 614387 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Helen McCray] talk about what it was like to grow up in Opa-locka [Florida]? Speaker 2: There are a few stories, you know. Of course, they lived down the street from a swamp so there was always alligators, you know, in the yard or along the street. She talks about, you know, being able to just go outside and pick the fruit that you wanted to eat, you know, oranges and things like that. She mostly talks about her upbringing when she came to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] at the age of fourteen and immediately started living with her mom and going to school and meeting friends, you know, and those kind of relationships. I've, you know, grew up in household where all those friends, friendships that she made in high school, those folks stayed together, they're still friends, you know, so, a lot of times we'd see all those friends coming by, you know, and they talk and they'd have hours of social, socializing together, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so she went to high school here in-- Speaker 2: She went to high school here. Speaker 1: Okay, in Milwaukee. Speaker 2: My mom graduated from West Division High School which is now Milwaukee High School of the Arts [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and what's so strange about that is her first granddaughter, my daughter [Paige Colas], graduated from the High School of the Arts. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so your mother came here to join her mother and, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 614388 Speaker 1: Let's go to your, your father's side of the family real quick, and I'll--can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Floyd Thomas, Sr. and it's F as in football, L-O-Y-D, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Dad was born in Batesville, Mississippi and dad's birthday is July 20th, and again, I don't know the year, you know. I, I, this is the part where you can tell you're aging 'cause at some point I used to know all that stuff and then now I just know birthdates, month and day. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: You got to pass the baton and let some of the young people keep up with that stuff now in the family. Speaker 1: Okay, well, what do you know about your father's ancestors? Speaker 2: Well, it's really interesting because I'm actually working on a project now for the Thomas family and my father was born to Lucille Thomas who is his mother and his father's name is Marigold Perry. My father's parents weren't married and so my father carried on the family name, of course, Thomas. He took that family name at birth. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but his, his father's name was Marigold? Speaker 2: Yes, Perry. Speaker 1: Perry, okay, all right. That's an unusual--is there is a story behind his name? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. Speaker 1: Marigold, okay. Speaker 2: I don't know very much about the Perrys at all but what I do know is that we were actually Erbys. My father's family were actually Erbys, E-R-B-Y, and Captain Erby owned what would be my great-great-great-great-grandmother, I guess, and from that union, about sixteen children were born. My great-great-great-grandfather, who I have a photograph of, when he became an adult, he changed his name from an Erby to a Thomas. His name was Edwin Thomas Erby [ph.] and because he didn't want the association of Captain Erby, he dropped Erby and became a Thomas and migrated from the East Coast area, I believe, to Mississippi, in the Batesville area and that's where he and all of his children were, you know, lived and stayed and were born. From there came, Edwin had a son and then his son had children and one of those children was my great-grandfather, Stanley Thomas, and Stanley Thomas met Minnie [Minnie Thomas], I'm trying to think of my great-grandmother's last name, maybe it'll come to me as we talk. Minnie and Stanley had twelve children and one of those twelve children was my grandmother, Lucille Thomas, at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And then she met Marigold Perry and they had a son and that's my dad, Floyd Thomas. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now is there, did your father, did you know your father, I mean, did you have a relationship with him or did they split up and then he, you know, usually people end up with their mother when, when parents split up? Speaker 2: Right, my father never stayed connected to his family, his father's family. I think as a small child he visited him a few times and that was pretty much the extent of their relationship. The two families intermarried, you know, quite, quite, on several occasions, at least two or three times, the two families-- Speaker 1: Okay, so there are other brothers and sisters that married-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and cousins and just other people in, you know, on the Perry side of the family that married into the Thomas side of the family and vice versa and so that just goes to show you how really important it is to know who your family is because a lot of families intermarried, you know, without understanding or knowing the history or who, who's part of your family. So that happened a few times in, between the Perrys and those descendants and the Thomases and those descendants, but my father was raised by his mother and his great-grandparents and he lived on the farm in Batesville, Mississippi and the, the family still owns that land. Story_ID: 614389 Speaker 1: Did he have a chance to go to school down there in Batesville [Mississippi] or-- Speaker 2: Yes he did. He, he went to school up until, I believe, maybe some time in middle school and then his family, his mom [Lucille Thomas] and he and some--and his brothers moved to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. I do know my father [Floyd Thomas, Sr.] graduated from what is now Milwaukee Tech [Milwaukee Trade and Technical High School; Lynde and Harry Bradley Technology and Trade School High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], was then, Boys Tech [Boys Technology and Trade School]. He graduated from Boys Tech. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did he have any interesting stories about growing up that he shared with you? Speaker 2: No, daddy's really quiet. He's very quiet, doesn't share too much about, you know, growing up, stories or anything. Anything that I know about my dad's background, I have found out from his brothers. He's the oldest, daddy's the oldest and he has two brothers. So, his brothers shared with me, or his mom has shared with me, other members of the family have shared with me. You know, I've seen pictures of dad when he was a little boy and it's amazing because I have a little brother from my father's second marriage who looks exactly like those pictures of daddy when he was a little boy that just blows you away because my brother from my dad's first marriage, our mom [Helen McCray], you would think when you look at my brother that he looks like dad but when you see Joseph [Joseph Thomas (ph.)], you see daddy as a little boy and you see Floyd, Jr. [Floyd Thomas, Jr.], daddy, as an adult. Story_ID: 614390 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: My, my parents met at church and they, they met, as best as I can recall, at a church called the Lighthouse Gospel church [Lighthouse Gospel Chapel, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Now, that church still exists but not in the same location and, of course, it's not, because it's not in the same location, it's not the same dwelling but Lighthouse at that time was just a small little church on, I want to say 17th [Street] and Walnut [Street] and that's the church that I went to when I was a little girl and I went to that church probably until about sixth grade and then we switched to parochial schools and we went to the church, to the school that we went to. Speaker 1: Was it a Catholic school? Speaker 2: Lutheran school. Speaker 1: Oh, Lutheran, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, okay. So, so they met at church? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, now, your mother was sixteen when-- Speaker 2: My mother was sixteen when I was conceived and my mother was seventeen and they married in March and then I was born in June. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my parents were married for twenty-five years before they divorced and, and from that union, there's me and my sister, Gina [Gina Thomas Koonce], my brother, Floyd [Floyd Thomas, Jr.], who's actually two years younger than I am and my sister Gina and I share the same birthday, only she's seven years younger than I am and then my sister, Kristyl [Kristyl Thomas] is nine years younger than I am. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's from my father's [Floyd Thomas, Sr.] first marriage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his second marriage, I have a sister-- Speaker 1: His first, wait a minute. Speaker 2: His first marriage is with my mom, Helen-- Speaker 1: Okay, right, okay. Speaker 2: Helen McCray and his second marriage is with, oh, her name will come to me, Sharol- Sharolyn Williams [Sharolyn Thomas] and Sharolyn has two children from the--my dad's and her marriage, Stephanie Thomas [ph.], and Stephanie is fifteen and Joseph [Joseph Thomas ph.], and Joseph is thirteen. Story_ID: 614391 Speaker 1: Well when you think about your parents' personalities and talents and dispositions, when you think about, you know, both of them, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think, and my sisters [Gina Thomas Koonce and Kristyl Thomas] and I, we have this discussion all the time, I think that I have the best of my mom [Helen McCray] and dad's [Floyd Thomas, Sr.] qualities (laughter). Speaker 1: And they don't or-- Speaker 2: And they don't, and they don't. I do, I honestly believe that. I honestly believe I have the best of my mom and my dad's qualities, their best qualities. I think I took after, you know, those things that make them shine, you know. My father has an entrepreneurial spirit. He's his own person and I definitely have that and my mom is outspoken and ambitious and I think I have that. My dad has a way of being quiet and subtle and an extreme amount of patience and I think I have that and my mom is a planner and I'm definitely that, you know. No, it's not to say I don't have any weaknesses but when I think of my parents in terms of myself, I honestly believe that I had an opportunity during my growing years, when they were at their best, you know, they were young, they had lots of energy, they were excited about their future together, they had lots of dreams, they were ambitious, they were go getters, they believed that they could accomplish everything. My father's owned his own business for forty-seven years, you know, so I've always been around the atmosphere that you can have your own business and you can generate your own income and you can determine your own level of wealth, you know, so I've always been in that environment and I, I take that from my parents. My mother was, had some firsts in her lifetime and the first or the second African American to work in one of the most prestigious modeling agencies here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Which one was that? Speaker 2: Rosemary Bischoff [Rosemary Bischoff Studios and Models Agency]. It no longer exists but at that time, Rosemary Bischoff was the top modeling agency in Milwaukee, if not the Midwest, and my mother was the second African American model to join that agency and she was very sought after and so as a little girl, I would see her in, you know, public appearances, you know, selling products, representing, you know, vendors in the organization and, you know, she just had this real strong public persona, you know. She was always pristine and sharp and clean in her appearance and manners were important to her, speech and English, you know, very important to her. Both my parents had high school educations and I do believe they both wanted to go on to college but, you know, you start having a family and, and other things take precedence (simultaneous). Story_ID: 614392 Speaker 1: Well, I suppose it, it sounds like they had the support of their families, you know, you have teenage, teenagers, you know, having a, you know, starting a family. It's not something that probably the families would have preferred to happen but they, they seem to have support apparently 'cause they-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't think, I don't think in those times, you know, when, when girls got pregnant in those days, boys married them, you know, and, and the proper thing to do was to marry the girl and build a family and they did that. They weren't any different than any other family, they did that. Speaker 1: Well, some of them didn't do that. I mean, it's there, even in, in those days, there are people who did not do it and the fathers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we have the impression-- Speaker 1: --would disappear and all that, all that kind of thing would happen too. Speaker 2: Well, we have the impression that, in those days, boys married girls. That's the impression that we have, that's the impression that I have. That's what my parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.] did. That's what my dad did and they managed to work through all those challenges that young people have in relationships then and now and they were successful for numerous years and, you know, had a twenty-five year marriage and, and after some time just said, "Okay, we'll call it quit-" (simultaneous). Story_ID: 614393 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did your mother [Helen McCray] have to drop out of high school [West Division High School; Milwaukee High School of the Arts, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: She did drop out of high school for a while but then she returned to get her diploma. Speaker 1: Okay, because I know often in those days there are no provision for-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --a pregnant girl in high school. Speaker 2: Exactly. There's no-- Speaker 1: I think the-- Speaker 2: --there was no support system built into the school system, I believe, at that time. Speaker 1: --there's--I think 'cause I know we interviewed Ms. Daniels [HistoryMaker Irma Daniels] who was one of the founders of Lady Pitts [Lady Pitts School; Lady Pitts School Age Parent Center, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what Lady Pitts, particularly to address that problem in the '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: --you know, so in the '60s [1960s], they really didn't have a way dealing-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no, in the '60s [1960s] there was nothing like that, you know, about girls got married, was pretty much it. Speaker 1: Yeah, so she was able to finish, 'cause a lot of girls don't, once they have a baby, they drop out of high school, they don't go back to finish. Speaker 2: Right, right, no. Speaker 1: So she was able to go back and finish-- Speaker 2: She was able to go back and finish. Speaker 1: --and even have a career? Speaker 2: And, and she did, she had a career, she absolutely did, and she, you know, she did several things in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. I mean, she was, was a model and she worked the business with my dad [Floyd Thomas, Sr.]. Story_ID: 614394 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what was your father's [Floyd Thomas, Sr.] business? Speaker 2: My father was a cabinet builder and furniture builder and designer and, I'll tell you a very interesting story. When my father graduated from high school [Boys Technology and Trade School; Lynde and Harry Bradley Technology and Trade School High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], there was a furniture company in Sheboygan, Wisconsin that was looking for a furniture designer and my father sent his drawings to the furniture company and they loved him, they called him, they set up an interview for him and he went to the interview and when they saw that he was an African American, of course they had no place for him. Several months later, my father saw his designs in the furniture store and so-- Speaker 1: So they used his, the designs he sent them out to-- Speaker 2: Exactly, and that propelled dad to start his own business. And so from that point on, he'd been, you know, doing his own thing, building cabinets, building furniture and, of course, over the years it progressed to fencing and roofing and interior and exterior design and winterizing homes and now he owns a security door business where he sells security doors and specialized windows. Speaker 1: Now what's the name of your father's business? Speaker 2: Thomas Doors [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So, but I take it he went straight through high school, you know, during that period, he didn't stop (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he did. He went straight through high school, graduated at the top of his class and is known in this community, in Milwaukee's [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] community, as a master craftsman. He's a very, very quiet man and wouldn't know how to, you know, take in the fact that he's been in business over forty-seven years and there should be a big splash somewhere, you know, about how long he's been in business and all of the different businesses that he's created and generated and the services that he's provided in this community but whoever you talk to, that he's done work for, they will tell you, because they've told me, he is a master at what he does, you know, and I'm very proud of that, you know. Dad, he's a perfectionist, he is. Speaker 1: Okay, now is your mother [Helen McCray] still working? Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Does your mother still work? Speaker 2: My mother still works. Now she works for Luther Manor. She manages one of their, or maybe several of their dining facilities in this assisted living facility for senior citizens. Story_ID: 614395 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory in the family, of life in your family? Speaker 2: I do, sure. My earliest, one of my earliest childhood memories was on my seventh birthday when my sister [Gina Thomas Koonce] was born. We were having a birthday party at my grandma's house and my mom couldn't stay at the birthday party because she went into labor. So for my seventh birthday, it was my brother [Floyd Thomas, Jr.] and I and some cousins, an aunt and my [maternal] grandmother [Lucille Berrien] and my parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.] weren't at my seventh birthday party because they were trying to sell me on, "You're getting a little sister for your birthday present." So in my mind, at seven years old, I'm thinking, oh, I'm going to get a friend that's going to come and play with me on my birthday, but when she came home, she's this little red thing that couldn't do anything but just lay there and I remember peering through her crib, and thinking, this is a horrible gift. I can't play with her. Story_ID: 614396 Speaker 1: Seventh birthday, you got a baby sister [Gina Thomas Koonce]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, so that's one of your earliest memories? Speaker 2: That's one of my earliest memories. Speaker 1: So you share the same birthday? Speaker 2: We share the same birthday. Speaker 1: Oh, that's got to be, is that irritating? Speaker 2: Oh, that, when you're a kid, that's very irritating, you know. People would buy us gifts of clothes and they would be alike. Well, you know, when you're fourteen and your sister is seven, I don't want to wear the same swimsuit as she is, she has, you know. So, that was an irritating part, you know, and because my brother [Floyd Thomas, Jr.] was born on June 28th, the three of us as children always had one birthday party, you know, so there was no individualism, you know, and I didn't want my friends to mix with my brother and his friends. I mean, my brother was just gross. He was just a boy, ugh, gross, and then, you know, seven years later, you got this little kid sister who is quiet and shy and, you know, she doesn't say anything, you know, she's just there. You couldn't play with her because she was just very, very quiet and shy. So those are the memories, I mean, those things stand out very, very clearly in my mind. Story_ID: 614397 Speaker 1: And you grew up in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: --and well, did you grow up on the North Side of Milwaukee, what's the area (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I grew up on 25th [Street] and Center [Street]. Speaker 1: Is that considered, well what neighborhood is that considered? Speaker 2: Well now it would be considered extreme inner city, then it was middle class, black Milwaukee. When my parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.] purchased the home from Martin Schreiber [ph.] who was, the Schreiber family was absolutely wonderful to my parents and became really good friends of my parents. Mr. Schreiber sold the home to my parents and that was about the time where white flight was taking place. Many homes in that area were owned by white families and the families decided to leave that area, you know, move out in the suburbs or further out in, in the City of Milwaukee and so-- Speaker 1: Now this is, I don't know if this is true here but I know in Dayton [Ohio] it was true and some other cities I've talked to where the Jewish community moved out first usually and the blacks (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --would buy the homes-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of the Jewish community. So I, I take it that Schreiber's-- Speaker 2: And there's a-- Speaker 1: --a Jewish name? Speaker 2: Well, the, I think the Schreibers were German but that, there is a section of Milwaukee that's that way, you know. Jewish families moved out and the white families moved--and black families moved in, absolutely, and in Milwaukee on what is now considered like the North Side maybe towards the east side, these great big mansion homes, white families lived in those homes and then black families moved in and became renters of those homes and those dwellings kind of went to the wayside but now those homes in that area, you can't touch anything for under a quarter of a million dollars. Speaker 1: So gentrification is-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --coming, yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and the area that I grew up in, you know, it was a beautiful area. Lots of black families lived there. I remember in the '60s [1960s], during the riots, having to, I remember the words, black power, we used to have to write on the windows so that the rioters would know that a black family lived there. So, and I remember not being able to go out and play. I remember my [maternal] grandmother [Lucille Berrien] and my parents talking about marching. I remember going through the public school system [Milwaukee Public Schools]. I went to Clarke Street School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and I was part of the first wave of black students to be bused out of our neighborhoods into white schools in outlying areas. The first white school I went to was 82nd Street School [Milwaukee German Immersion School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. So, I remember those things. The neighborhood was beautiful. Story_ID: 614398 Speaker 1: Well, on that note, we always ask this question, and we ask it the same way to everybody, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Ugh, the trees that touched each other at the top when you walked down the street. The trees were so tall and they leaned over onto the street area and they touched each other. That was so beautiful to me, I remember that, and I remember the neighbors. People always saying good morning to you and, and, of course, you know, you're saying, good morning to Mr. and Mrs. Weathersby [ph.] or, you know, Mr. and Mrs. Tate [ph.]. The sound of children playing, you could always hear that. One of our favorite games was kickball, you know. We used to play that a lot. The smells of the streets. There was the smell of bread being baked. I used to love that. My [maternal] grandmother [Lucille Berrien] lived in Hillside [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and when I would go over there, there was Mrs. Karl's bread [Mrs. Karl's Bakery], I think, used to be baked down there and I used to love the smell of the bread, and you could walk, you know, and there were fountains, water bubblers on the streets and so you could stop along the way to school. There was an island on, I would walk to Clarke Street School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] on Center Street going west and just as you were crossing Fond du Lac Avenue, there's an island there and it had a bench and a water fountain and when I learned how to walk home from school, that would be my halfway point, that's when I knew I was halfway home and I'd always stop and, and get a drink of water from the water bubbler and it just seemed to me to be wholesome and I felt secure, you know. I never felt like anything would ever happen to me. Even in those turbulent times, my parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.] were very, very protective of us. I mean, we knew that there were some racial tension going on. We knew that there was some racial things happening but my parents were very, very protective. Story_ID: 614399 Speaker 1: You were a relatively small kid, you know, when, you know, a lot of the, the riots took place-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and the real, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --serious, you know, racial strife went down so-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --being born in '61 [1961], Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died when you were seven years old, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, I just want to put it in perspective for anybody watching this. So, so you were seven. Were there riots before Dr. King were killed or, was killed or was, or did the riots take place in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: The riots took place in '68 [1968]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, and-- Speaker 1: So you were seven? This is the same-- Speaker 2: I was seven. Speaker 1: --about the same time when your baby sister was born? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly. As a matter of fact, had she been a boy, she was going to be named Martin Kennedy and that was--my mother [Helen McCray] was just so convinced that she was going to have a boy because that's what she wanted to name Gina [Gina Thomas Koonce]. She wanted to name her Martin Kennedy. Speaker 1: In those days, you couldn't tell until they were born. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: Now everybody knows in advance-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but, you know, in those days you had to wait. Speaker 2: Right, right, whether you're going to have a boy or a girl, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, yeah. So, gee whiz, so, did the riots like, did they, so you had to write, your parents had to write, black power on your windows-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to keep-- Speaker 2: And there was a curfew and I remember not being able to go outside to play. I real- I do remember that. I remember, we had a great big bay window in the kitchen and I remember looking out the window, you know, all the time, because I really wanted to go out and play but we weren't allowed to play outside then. Speaker 1: Did you see the National Guard and all that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I did see soldiers and I saw, you know, the, the tanks that they rode in, driving up and down Center Street. There used to be, as I was saying before, the trees that touched each other in the sky, you know, when you walked down the street, we, the back of our house was on Monroe Street and those trees, somehow in my memory they still stayed but on the main street, on Center Street, those trees, the tops of the trees were cut off and that's so that people couldn't climb in them and hide and, you know, shoot guns or anything like that, so, it just, it just became, I think, the beginning of the destruction, so to speak, of our neighborhood. Those trees never grew back. To this day, there are no trees on Center Street and it looks, you know, blank and gray, you know. When I went to school at fifth grade, fourth and fifth grade, I went to St. Leo [St. Leo Catholic School; St. Leo Community School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and so I would walk down, I guess that would be 24th Street, and there were trees there and I used to love it because you could hear the birds singing and you'd see 'em going back and forth, it was just so beautiful. The side streets still had the trees that touched, the main street didn't, and it was real stark and it was real gray but I, another memory that I had was: when I grow up, this is the neighborhood that I want to live in. You know, because you knew everyone, everyone knew you. You could walk to school and it was safe. Everything that you needed seemed to be right in your neighborhood, you know, you could walk to it. There was a Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and there was a Kroger [The Kroger Company] in the neighborhood. There was a Oasis Theatre [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] which doesn't exist there anymore. There was Center Street Library which is now Wisconsin Black Historical Society [Wisconsin Black Historical Society Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and Center Street Library has moved onto Fond du Lac Avenue. There was a Robert Hall store [Robert Hall Clothes] there and these are all stores and, and establishments that I used to walk to as a child, you know. We used to spend the first--my first date was at Oasis Theatre and I went there with a little boy that I went to school with and I can't even remember; it was a scary movie. I know that was a scary movie that I saw and my brother [Floyd Thomas, Jr.] and I would spend Saturday afternoons in the library with Terry [ph.] and Jerry [ph.], there were a set of twins that lived across the street from us. They, their older sisters babysat for us, you know, so it was just, it was just really nice, you know. I remember having good memories, even in the middle of all that and I think that people forget that black families, even though we were all going through the Civil Rights Movement and, and white families that were supportive of the Civil Rights Movement, that people forget that black families still had to have breakfast, we had laundry to do, our kids had to get off to school, you know, their children still had sibling arguments and things like that. Somehow, just the everyday life of black people seemed to have disappeared in the whole dialogue of civil rights but people like my parents who were supportive, absolutely, of the Civil Rights Movement, they still have families to feed, you know. We still had to get off to school, you know, and we still had our homework and, you know, she was still making peanut butter and jelly sandwiches. Story_ID: 614400 Speaker 1: We, during--when my mother [Helen McCray] started working after my sister [Gina Thomas Koonce] was born, for a short time we had a nanny who was German and she was from a wealthy white family and she just kind of was on one of those excursion experiences and saw the ad that my mother was looking for a child, an in house child caretaker, and Sophie [ph.] answered the ad and so I'd say for a couple years, my brother [Floyd Thomas, Jr.] and sister and I, we had, we had a nanny that took care of us and one of the memories I have about Sophie is she introduced us to bread and butter, not toasted, just butter on your bread and I couldn't fathom eating this but if you didn't eat it you starved 'til lunchtime. And so to this day, I love bread and butter, any kind of bread and butter, I just, you know, a connoisseur of different kinds of breads and Sophie would walk us to the park every day and she'd meet us after school and she'd make our snacks for us and she'd make us dinner and she'd make sure that, you know, we were all ready for bed when mother came home and it was an experience and I'm not sure a lot of African American children (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm sure of it. Speaker 1: --you know, yeah. We, we had, we had a lot of, what I would say, were kind of upscale experiences and we lived an upscale lifestyle from, from my view as a child, you know. We had, we had swings in the yard and we had a basketball court in the yard and we had a sandbox in the yard and, you know, we had a deck and we had tall fences, you know, that you couldn't see through, you know. We had lights in our yard and, I mean, my parents really tried to give us the best and expose us to the best and we went to schools in the neighborhood and after we grew out of those schools, we went to parochial schools and our first parochial school, we were the only African American children in the school, my brother and sister and I, you know. So, we had exposure to other cultures and it was the first time that I learned that, you know, white people aren't just white people that, you know, there's, there were Irish kids that went to the school and Polish kids and Italian kids and so I became cognitive of different cultures and races and I, I'm very comfortable, you know, in diverse audiences, in diverse company and I have diverse friends and somehow in all of this, I developed a real keen sense of myself, you know, just being very confident and, but I did recognize, more than anything, I didn't recognize my color was a difference as much as I recognized that my gender was a difference, you know. Girls, girls, I didn't, you know, I could know an answer in class and I bet you nine times out of ten, one of the boys got called on before I did, you know. Boys seemed to be concentrated on more and geared more towards and seemed to have more support for things that they were interested in, you know. Story_ID: 614401 Speaker 1: You started school at Clarke Street, is that it? Speaker 2: Clarke Street School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], kindergarten. Speaker 1: Clarke Street School, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, kindergarten through first grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then second and third grade, at 82nd Street School [Milwaukee German Immersion School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: That's for second and third? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Did you go on to the parochial school after that? Speaker 2: No, then third, fourth and fifth grade was St. Leo's [St. Leo Catholic School; St. Leo Community School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the parochial school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's kind of like a Catholic school. It was Catholic community school. That was kind of just as, you know, the community school concept was taking shape and form and then from there I went to Pilgrim Lutheran School [Pilgrim Lutheran, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for sixth and seventh. Speaker 1: Now is there a, is, did the, some of the dynamics of the neighborhood change, you know, after sixth, '68 [1968] seemed like a crucial period after the riot-- Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: --and all that. Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: So, I noticed that's the year that you end up going to, the third grade, when you're eight you end up going to St. Leo's? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so were your parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.] trying to get you away from the-- Speaker 2: Well, they were-- Speaker 1: --public school? Speaker 2: --getting me away from public school, absolutely-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --get all of us away from public school. They weren't happy with, with public school at all and then there was one incident, when my mother was very pregnant with my sister [Gina Thomas Koonce] before she was born, the school was doing some blanket testing of its students and somehow in the evaluation of my test it came out that I was a slow student, like a retarded student and my mother was not accepting the results of that test and she made a real ruckus out of it. I mean, a very, very huge ruckus and when it was all said and done, I was no longer earmarked as one of those special needs kids with a retarding, you know, disability, a learning disability and I was sent on to the next grade. Speaker 1: Now how, do you have an analysis of what happened there 'cause, were you a good student at school or did you have-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I think I was a good student but I was also a quiet student, you know, at that time. I think I was in first grade or second grade and that's just before I got bused and I just think that, you know, you're not really sure, you know. I really believe that the system was just doing a testing, you know, a guinea pig, sort of speak, philosophy, you know, trying to implement this kind of learning thing or maybe it was based on funding, you know. If you had so many students that had learning disabilities, you could get more funding. I don't really know all of the dynamics but I, I do have a sense that it, because I have that same sense now that students of color, you know, if you've got some new idea, you got some new tests, you got some new something that you want to implement, you're going to try it out on us and, and, of course, at the school it's made up of mostly African American children, who else are you going to try it out on, you know, and some of us are going to slip through the tracks, through the cracks, and I think that at that time, I was one of those students earmarked to slip through the cracks from this testing and my mother just wouldn't accept it. She just wouldn't hear of it. She demanded to see the results of the test. She wanted them analyzed herself and they had no idea who this little black woman knew in the community and she called all the white folks that she knew that could advocate for her and she, she made a real ruckus and she called all the black folks that she knew in the community, you know, and she got, she got all the support that she needed and, and she's a pretty, she's, she's a good pistol herself, you know, and, you know, just like any, any other mother, don't mess with her kids. Speaker 1: Yeah, well she saved you from probably years of, of setback, I mean, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely, she did, she did, and I'm, you know, I'm, mother's been a great advocate, you know. She was a great mother in that way. She advocated for us and there was no way that her children were incapable of success. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so St. Leo's, now you said that was a community's Catholic school? Speaker 2: Yeah, St. Louis was a--St. Leo's was a community Catholic school. They served breakfast-- Speaker 1: So, you didn't have to pay tuition for it or-- Speaker 2: I don't believe that we did but we did have to participate in fundraisers, you know. We were always selling something, you know, donuts or candy or something. I mean, the school probably existed a lot on, you know, its parental support and community support. My mother was even one of the administrators, if not one of the principals at the school during that time that I was there. So she was very engaged in education, not just for us but for all the children, you know. She was real, real supportive that way. Story_ID: 614402 Speaker 1: And I think that was probably, let's see at aged nine or ten, I can't--fourth grade, fourth grade, that my grandmother decided to run for mayor of the City of Milwaukee [Wisconsin] so she was the first woman-- Speaker 2: Your grandmother did? Speaker 1: My grandmother, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, now what was your grand- now, what was her preparation of--there's got to be a back story to this, so, so what was your grandmother doing that, that propelled her to seek-- Speaker 1: Well, grandma was involved in the Civil Rights Movement very heavily and, and she was involved in rights for low income families. Speaker 2: Now this is your grandmother, which one is this? Speaker 1: This is my mother's mother. Speaker 2: But what's her name? Speaker 1: Lucille-- Speaker 2: Lucille-- Speaker 1: --Berrien [Lucille Berrien]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and grandma decided to run for mayor and at that time, Mayor Maier [Henry Maier] was the mayor and Chief Harold Breier was the police chief and he was extremely racist. I don't think you would find information that said anything different about Chief Breier. His-- Speaker 2: Okay, so, so the mayor's name is Maier? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: The police chief is Breier? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And you, okay, all right. Speaker 1: And my grandmother decided to run for mayor and she was the first woman, and African American in the City of Milwaukee to do so and she gave him a run for his money and, of course, she didn't win but it was, you know, all the rave here in Milwaukee and especially in the black community and I remember, you know, canvassing for her and, you know, handing out flyers and putting flyers on doors and houses and going with her when she was knocking on doors. Speaker 2: Now in those days, did she run as a Democrat or Republican or Independent? Speaker 1: As an Independent. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She ran as an Independent and she's run for several offices since then, you know, as an Independent, mostly on principle, you know. I don't think she's ever anticipated winning since her run for mayor but she's run on principle and she's--that, that right there it was real significant for me because my grandmother was my very first girl friend and by that I mean, we played dolls together, we had tea parties together, we went, she would come Saturday mornings and, you know, get me up early before everyone else, including my parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.] and, you know, French braid my hair and, you know, give me some cereal and say, okay let's go and we'd be off to an estate sale or, you know, a rummage sale. We spent all day doing things like that. She taught me the value of collecting things, you know. As a child I collected coins and stamps and tea sets and she taught me how to crochet and knit and sew and my first sewing machine was one that was a pedal, you know. I learned to sew that way. She was my best friend. We did everything together. And so when she decided to run for mayor, of course, she had me in tow. I went with her everywhere, you know, and I'd listen to her talk and I (simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 614403 Speaker 1: I'm sorry, but was she [Thomas-Colas' maternal grandmother, Lucille Berrien] a member of a community organization, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or anything like that or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was, she was, she was a member of several organizations. There was one, it--I'm sure it'll come to me, Commandos. Speaker 1: 'Cause I'm just--okay, the Commandos? Speaker 2: The Commandos. Speaker 1: That sounds like, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well she was real radical (laughter). Speaker 1: Now who else is in the Commandos? Speaker 2: Michael McGee, Sr. I know at some point was supportive of the Commandos or involved in the Commandos. My grandmother was one of his Black Panthers when he started the Black Panthers organization [Black Panther Party]. Speaker 1: Oh, Michael McGee is the-- Speaker 2: Senior. He was an alderman. Speaker 1: --man that had the, the black militia group here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. My grandmother was part of that group too. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a front liner. Yeah, she believed in, and still does, in the revolution. She's a real pistol and-- Speaker 1: Now, McGee guy, did, did he get in some kind of trouble or something? I vaguely remember. Speaker 2: His son. Speaker 1: His son did, okay. Speaker 2: His son did, um-hm. McGee, Sr., they did some redistricting of his district and in, I don't know, remember what year that was but that last election when they did that, he was unsuccessful in his aldermanic bid, again, and so he retired and later became a talk show host that actually, although it was a local talk show on WNOV 860 AM [WNOV Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], it got national attention in its early days for his presence as a co- as a host of the show and, you know, I think he did some really great things for the city. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's, yeah, there's so many little things about Milwaukee that-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, that pop up in my head in the '80s [1980s] and I just, you know, I was aware of that and I just had forgotten about it, but okay. So your grandmother was a real, so she was a real-- Speaker 2: She still is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's still very, very much involved. She was involved in Mike McGee, Jr.'s [Michael McGee, Jr.] campaign for alderman and she was involved in the support once he was arrested and put in jail. She believed in the philosophy that he had of taking care of senior citizens in his neighborhood but his demise has just recently gotten him six and a half years but, you know, those were news stories and that was the trial that he was involved in but my grandmother has always been involved with politics here and the lay of the land. I would consider her, and I'm sure many will consider her, a strong leader in Milwaukee's black community. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So she's in her eighties now you said? Speaker 2: Yes she is-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --and she, she, she, if you call her to go on a picket line, she's there. If you need her to march, she's there. If you want her to speak about the, you know, the challenges that African American families still have, she's there. She's been a foster parent over ninety-six children, you know, and, you know, so I have lots of cousins and all those children, you know, some have done well, some, you know, have not but she opened up her home and heart to these children and their families and to this day, if you need anything, she, she believes in supporting those most in need no matter the racial background. She believed, you know, the whole idea of brotherhood and, and, and we're all a village. She, she believed in that before those words and concepts, I think, became popular, you know. Story_ID: 614404 Speaker 1: Off camera, I was asking you about [HistoryMaker] Vel Phillips, attorney Vel Phillips, who became a judge here [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and I think she's a little bit older than your [maternal] grandmother [Lucille Berrien] even-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --and, and you said you had an opportunity to actually be judged by her in court. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I had a, I meant I had an opportunity to see, and for the first time, Vel Phillips. When I was about ten years old there was a little boy in the neighborhood, well, that morning my mom [Helen McCray] sent me to the store and she'd given me a fifty dollar bill and, to purchase cigarettes for her and I went to the store and purchased the cigarettes and this little boy was in the store and he saw me, you know, do my exchange and he followed me out of the store, he stole my money and when I went home, I just had the cigarettes and no change and my mom asked me what happened and I told her and, of course, the police were called and they went searching in the neighborhood and they found the boy and they brought him back to the house and I pointed him out as the boy. Well, he had to go, we had to go through court then. So, in court, the judge was Vel Phillips and I remember thinking, I've never seen a woman or a black woman as a judge before. So that was my first time, you know, meeting Ju- Vel and seeing Vel and having that kind of impact on me but we had to go to court and, of course, the little boy had to do, go to juvenile detention and things like that but, that was my first exposure to Vel. Speaker 1: So did you have any idea that there were any black women judges before you met her? Speaker 2: I had no idea there were black women judges. When I was a little girl, I wanted to be an attorney but, you know, that's, you know, like little girls, little boys, you want to be doctors and lawyers and things like that but I had no idea that there, you know, what a judge was really, you know, not at nine or ten years old. Speaker 1: That's an interesting story. Story_ID: 614405 Speaker 1: You were at St. Leo's [St. Leo Catholic School; St. Leo Community School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] through the fifth grade-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and then you went to-- Speaker 2: And then I went to-- Speaker 1: --a Lutheran school? Speaker 2: Pilgrim, Pilgrim Lutheran School [Pilgrim Lutheran, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]-- Speaker 1: Pilgrim, okay. Speaker 2: --for, I believe sixth, seventh and eighth grade and I graduated from there. I was baptized there and confirmed to the Lutheran faith in seventh or eighth grade. Speaker 1: So now was that part of the, you had to be a Lutheran to go to school here--there? Speaker 2: You, you didn't have to be a Lutheran to go to school there but the more that I was exposed to the Lutheran faith, the more that I--that's what I wanted to be and my mother [Helen McCray], she was real conventional this way. She's the spiritual person more than a religious person and we had gone through a nondenominational church growing up. It wasn't Baptist, it wasn't Lutheran, it wasn't Sanctified, although she was brought up in a sanctified background, living with her great--her grandmother [Patsy McCray], my great-grandmother, but mother wanted us to choose our own religion, what, you know, what we wanted to follow, what doctrine we wanted to follow and at that time in my life, that's what I wanted to do. And so I became Lutheran and then I went to Milwaukee Lutheran High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for a year and my father [Floyd Thomas, Sr.] had lost some contracts. I believe that was '76 [1976], 1976, and I believe we were in a recession of some sort and my dad lost several contracts which meant that they had to choose who was going to stay in private schools. So, my brother [Floyd Thomas, Jr.] and I--he was coming out of middle school--we ended up at John Marshall High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and my sisters [Gina Thomas Koonce and Kristyl Thomas] stayed at the private parochial school. Story_ID: 614406 Speaker 1: I graduated from John Marshall High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] in 1979 and that was a culture shock for me, going from, you know, kind of a more protected environment to a public school environment where you really have to act independently and you, you kind of, you're kind of on your own, you know, kind of thing. If kids had problems with their school books or their classes or a issue with the teacher, where I come from, you tell your parents and mom went to deal with it. At this school, that was not what happened, you dealt with it yourself. I mean, I would tell my mom [Helen McCray] and my mom would, you know, go to the school and manage it but then the teachers or the administrators or the guidance counselors, they would come to me and they would ask me, so you really, I learned to become my own advocate and become a much more independent thinker and advocate for myself, you know. Before I even got home, by the time I got home, I'm telling mom the results, you know, of what I did--what I had to do and what I learned to do and how I learned to communicate with other people and how I learned to manage and, you know, manage my way through a challenging issue, you know, a teacher, whether it was a teacher or administrator or class or anything like that, you know, and just fitting in, it was just a different environment of, of, of kids, you know, that seem to be on their own, you know. I saw them with much more freedom than I ever had. Speaker 2: So, did you like that better? Speaker 1: I learned to like that. It was quite an adjustment. It was a real culture shock for me 'cause I came from eighth grade wearing socks and shopped at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] in the girls department and no cosmetics and ponytails and then I go to high school, Milwaukee Lutheran [Milwaukee Lutheran High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and you see girls that are, you know, they're much more mature in, in their presence and in their presentation. And so it took me, it took me the second semester, as a freshman in Milwaukee Lutheran, to adjust, you know, to kind of fit in, you know. I had patent leather shoes and I had to buy some stacks, you know, 'cause all the kids were wearing stacks, you know, and they were wearing, the girls were wearing pantsuits and I had just dresses, you know, and no blue jeans and then when I left Milwaukee Lutheran to John Marshall, the girls wore blue jeans to school every day and t-shirts, you know. I mean, I didn't have anything like that in my wardrobe so my home environment was a very protected one, you know. There was nothing that I wore that didn't match. It was a suit and, you know, it had stuff that with accessories that went with it. In public school, these kids, they wore tennis shoes to school and, you know, blue jeans and the girls wore makeup and, you know, they had their hair relaxed and, and I didn't. So, it, it was a real culture shock for me but I adjusted. I adjusted and I, and I learned to fit in, you know. I tried out for cheerleading so I became a cheerleader and I tried out for track and I was on the track team and, you know, I broke some records and-- Speaker 2: In, in what event? Speaker 1: I ran sprint, 100 yards and the long jump. Speaker 2: So you broke records in the 100 yard dash or-- Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm, you know, and jun- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's notable, that's-- Speaker 1: --as a junior varsity person, you know, and I really enjoyed it but it was a way for me to integrate myself socially, you know, with the school and to kind of, I always wanted to be in the know, you know. I want to be with the crowd of people that make things happen and the cheerleaders seemed to be the talk of the town and very popular and very, you know, knowledgeable. Everybody knew you and so I wanted to be that, be in that, be in that kind of crowd and those sports helped me to do that and they, you know, they helped me to learn to communicate with people and, and build friendships with different kinds of people. Story_ID: 614407 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: History. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: History was my favorite subject. Speaker 1: What aspect of history, ancient history or American history? Speaker 2: You know, I really liked all the history and I, but most of all, I liked reading about people, you know. I liked biographies, you know. To this day, collect books on, you know, other people and so one of my dreams is when I retire is to be able to go on book vacations where it's just me and my books and I can read about all the people that fascinate me. Speaker 1: Well who were some of the most fascinating characters in history that you read about that they kind of made an impact on you? Speaker 2: They were: Harriet Tubman, Frederick Douglass, Thurgood Marshall. These folks just fascinated me. [President] Thomas Jefferson, [President] George Washington, [President] Abraham Lincoln, you know. I just wanted to be able to absorb as much as I could about history and, and the people and their lives. As a person, I wanted to be able to connect with them. You know, I wanted to see, you know, what about them makes them, you know, like me, you know. I mean, where is the, where is the every day, I wanted to know about the everyday person, you know, in, in those folks. And so, those are the things that fascinated about me, that fascinated me about them, you know. It was great knowing that they did some really wonderful things in this country but I wanted to know what makes you an everyday person, you know. George Washington, the, was a great man in the history books but he owned slaves, you know, and, and I wonder what that, you know, what he thought about that. I used to wonder those kind of things and ask those kind of questions of myself but and, of course, you can't know about a person unless you're going to read about him. Speaker 1: You know, a lot of people, politicians always refer back to what the founding fathers meant and what they, you know, did you, do you find that when you really read about 'em they, you know, you have a different idea of who they are? Speaker 2: I do, I do. You know, I have to keep in mind that slavery in, in the mind of Africans and the creation of a new race of people, African Americans, you know, started in this country and how it started, that these folks were part of that but that was, unfortunately, the way of life back then, you know, and somehow these people had good moments in their, in going about their everyday life and, and I don't know that any book could ever tell me how they managed to be these great people but at the same time, to be involved in, in, in human ownership, you know, and they're not, and as I got older, searching for books that recognized the work, the work and the craftsmanship of Africans and African Americans born in this country to the success and the wealth of the United States. And so, there's always that kind of curiosity, you know. I always had these kind of questions in my head, even when I was reading about these folks and you learn about them in school. There's only one teacher, one white teacher that I had in fifth grade [at St. Leo Catholic School; St. Leo Community School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] that took this information, you know, the history book information, and said to us, there's always more to it. It's not here, but there's always more to this, you know. These people did great things but they also did this and it was also that white teacher that made us believe that we could be doctors. I mean, he would, he would call us Dr. Thomas, you know, Dr. Lawson, Attorney Thomas, that's how he would address us, you know, in school, not, you know, not Faithe [HistoryMaker Faithe A. Thomas-Colas], you know or not Angela, you know or not Tom but Dr. So and So or Attorney So and So or, you know, Teacher So and So, you know, so he gave us a sense that we could be much more than we ever thought about, you know, while we're reading these different history things and he actually introduced us to, you know, black figures in fifth grade, you know. Before then, I don't think so and after then I know several times in my education, I've had to ask, or my parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.] have had to ask for, you know, an integration of black material, you know, as part of the curriculum. Story_ID: 614408 Speaker 1: In your household, I mean, black history was discussed and, and so and there was expectation that it should be taught at school? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother [Helen McCray] was very good in sharing those things and, of course, grand- we had grandma [Thomas-Colas' maternal grandmother, Lucille Berrien], you know, who was always, you know, doing the black power thing. She was always doing something radical, you know, that, you know, for me radical is something that you do that gets you noticed, you know. She protested the Vietnam War and, you know, folks were shaving their head and my grandma shaved her head too, you know. Gram was the first woman that I saw wearing an Afro and when [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis came to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], my grandmother was one of her bodyguards. It was the first time I met Angela Davis and she was the second woman that I saw with an Afro and I tried, you know, forever to wear an Afro with very long hair and at that time I was probably about ten or eleven years old, you know. So, yeah, we, we were exposed to black empowerment and black images and self-pride. I never felt different, I never felt different. Story_ID: 614409 Speaker 1: Did you like to write? Now, you're a journalist, basically, you know, someone in the media today-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you're a journalist and a writer, I mean, did you like to write in those days or did you-- Speaker 2: Well, I kept journals and I did, I liked to write. I was real nosy as a kid, you know. I always wanted to know what was going on. I was always getting in trouble 'cause I was hanging out where the grownups were, you know, up under a table or sitting nearby some stairs where they were in another room or, you know, if there was a wall between us and a doorway, I was on the other side, you know, listening. And so, and I would, I would keep diaries and journals and I was always, I always wanted to write. I don't think that I really had a concrete idea that I would get involved in communications in any form, it really just came out of necessity. There was a job opportunity at the Milwaukee Courier newspaper-- Speaker 1: In, in, while you were in high school? Speaker 2: No, that, that came as I got, I got married [to Christophe Colas] after high school-- Speaker 1: Okay, we're going, we're going to slow down and not go that far yet but, but just, I'm just talking about in the early days. Did you-- Speaker 2: In the early days I had no, I wanted to be an attorney. I wanted to be a lawyer as a little girl. Speaker 1: Oh, I was going to ask you, what reading material came into the house? I mean, were you, I know that Milwaukee, you worked for the Milwaukee Courier-- Speaker 2: Milwaukee Courier-- Speaker 1: --that's the oldest black paper I read. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: There's also the Milwaukee-- Speaker 2: There's Milwaukee Community Journal. Speaker 1: --Community Journal, right, right. Speaker 2: And The Milwaukee Times and Milwaukee Courier was in our house and the Milwau- I think then there was the Star Times [Milwaukee Star Times] and, of course, the Journal Sentinel [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel]. I read, you know, magazines. I was always looking in magazines and I was always looking in books. We had a set of encyclopedias, you know, so I was always looking through those. We, grandma [Thomas-Colas' maternal grandmother, Lucille Berrien] would get, when we would go to the second hand stores, we'd get the National Geographic magazines, you know, I always liked looking in the pictures, you know, and I was an avid reader. I loved to read as a kid, I still love to read. I don't get enough pleasure reading time, leisure reading time as I would like, you know, but I would read a match, you know, box if I were sitting some place and that was the only thing with words on it, I would read it. Story_ID: 614410 Speaker 1: It's like a big time for black people in the media, you may not have been aware of it as you were coming along-- Speaker 2: No, right, no. Speaker 1: --black folks have been in movies or TV-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to the extent that they were when you were a kid, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a kid, you know, I was a kid and a teenager and none of that stuff meant anything to me. Speaker 1: Yeah, Bill, Bill Cosby's show in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in the mid-'60s [1960s], you would have been about six or seven when that came out. Speaker 2: Well, the 'I Spy' show. Speaker 1: The 'I Spy.' Speaker 2: Yeah, 'I Spy,' 'Julia,' I remember seeing 'Julia'; I loved 'Julia' and my dad's [Floyd Thomas, Sr.] favorite show was 'All in the Family' and, what's the show with Redd Foxx? Speaker 1: Oh, 'Sanford and Son.' Speaker 2: 'Sanford and Son,' oh my gosh, dad loved that. He would get his TV tray and, you know, Friday, Saturday night, whatever night it came on, we'd all gather in the den together and we'd watch 'Sanford and Son' and dad would just laugh 'til, oh, his laugh was just contagious. So, yeah, yeah, we, I grew up with those TV shows, 'Good Times,' you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, the movies-- Speaker 2: 'Fat Albert and the Kids' ['Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids'], you know, I think, 'Super Fly,' I might have been a pre-teen when that movie came out (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Shaft' and 'Super Fly'-- Speaker 2: 'Shaft,' yeah, 'Shaft.' Speaker 1: --and 'Foxy Brown.' Speaker 2: 'Foxy Brown,' oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: So did you go to movies, were you allowed to watch all that kind of stuff at the movies or, in those days? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was. We would go the movies and we'd watch all that kind of stuff. There just seemed, you just seemed to know, you know, right from wrong. Speaker 1: So you knew the difference between somebody, what they're doing on screen-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and what you could actually do yourself? Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Now my brother [Floyd Thomas, Jr.] was different. You know the karate movies came out and all that kind of stuff and, you know, of course every little black boy wanted to be 'Super Fly' or, you know, a karate guy, you know. He always wanted to do all those kind of things but somehow in my mind, as I do today, when I watch television, two things run through my mind, either for commercials or television, the first thing is, if I'm watching a program, and it's not, you know, a biography or, you know, something like that, it's for entertainment, it's strictly entertainment and then the other thing that pops into my mind and that's probably just, you know, fast forwarding my years of being involved in the newspaper [Milwaukee Courier] was the lack of our presence even this day on television, you know, and then the kind, the depth of that presence, you know, that still runs in my mind. So, you know, I've learned over the years to say, I'm watching this program because I strictly want to be entertained and not look at, you know, a racial or gender makeup, you know or to be sensitive to the fact like if you watch, sometimes my girlfriends and I call Lifetime channel, you know, all of the themes in there seem to be bashing men, you know, but if you just take yourself out of the picture for a moment and say, okay, why am I watching this movie, this is for entertainment purposes, you know, because you can get so caught up in the reality of things, you know, that you have to separate, you have, sometimes you have to leave all the race and the gender challenges that you have in day to day living, you have to put it aside because you can get exhausted, you can just be absolutely exhausted. Somehow I've learned to put things in compartments in order to manage and to get some downtime and to enjoy movies. Story_ID: 614411 Speaker 1: So when you were a senior in high school [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], you're relatively new to the school and yet, but you were still involved in a lot of activities-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --and did you earn any honors as a senior? Speaker 2: Well I did. You know, I earned my letters and my numbers for cheerleading and track, you know, and some medals, you know, some little things you get to put on your letter, your letter jacket, you know, and that was pretty cool, you know. I mean these were all things that, you know, say that you've been successful at something, you know, and that's important to me, you know, and it was, you know, I liked goals, you know, so I'd set a goal and say I'm going to be a cheerleader and I'm going to earn my letters and, you know-- Speaker 1: Well what was the name of your teacher, the teacher, the white fellow that taught history that you really enjoyed? Who, what was his name? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember his name. Speaker 1: That's for the sake of history, I was trying to get his name, but we'll, well maybe you'll think of it before we finish. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: But, so, so when you were a senior, what were your aspira- did you still want to be a lawyer? Speaker 2: I still wanted to be a lawyer when I was a senior and, you know, my parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.] were constant--at that time, my parents' marriage was going towards the end of their marriage where it was obvious that they were having discussions and dialogues about, you know, divorcing. That was, you know, that was obvious. Speaker 1: So they were still together when you were a senior? Speaker 2: They were still together when I was a senior. Speaker 1: Okay, but you could tell there was-- Speaker 2: Well, you could tell that the marriage was, you know, deteriorating, you know, unfortunately, and, and so they were in a mode of taking care of our day to day needs, you know, food, shelter and clothing and there was not a lot of emphasis or preparation, I should say, for college, you know. So, they wanted us to go to college but they weren't really involved in helping make that happen. If that's what you wanted to do, then that's what you needed to do as a young adult. You're eighteen now, you know, so you need to find your own way to, to do that kind of thing. Story_ID: 614412 Speaker 1: So what did your counselors say about it in school? Speaker 2: Well, you know, we had some great counselors. I was just trying to think, I almost called her name, I think her last name was Antidore, Kemi, Kemi Antidore [ph.], I think is her last name, K-N--K-E-M-I, Kemi, and she was the counselor at UWM [University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and for students that were, didn't have the best grades that you were the first pick of kids, you know, to be selected for college and my ACT scores were average, you know. My grades were average, I had Bs, Cs, you know, grades. In my freshman year at UW, she was very, very encouraging, very, very encouraging but as the oldest in my family and knowing that my parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.] were going through the challenges that they were going through in their marriage and my mother trying to keep her arms around my brother [Floyd Thomas, Jr.]and my sisters [Gina Thomas Koonce and Kristyl Thomas], I got, I got detoured in college and started working and providing financial support, you know, and, of course, you know, you're a young person-- Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you did start at UW? Speaker 2: Yes, I did start at UW and-- Speaker 1: Did--okay, so this is like UWM, you're there-- Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979], '80 [1980], '81 [1981]-- Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 2: --and, you know, trying to do, you know, as the oldest, I always have felt responsible for my sisters and my brother, you know. There was, I was the kind of kid that when you notice that there's family challenges going on, you know, you just kind of step in and do what you can and my mother brought us up like this. You had chores but if you noticed that the garbage needed to be taken out and that wasn't your chore, it was still your responsibility to take out the garbage. And so, I really, really absorbed that philosophy of hers and, and so when you notice in the family that, you know, there's something that you can do to help, you know, bring things along, that's what I did and I think I sacrificed my college years to-- Speaker 1: So you're trying to keep the household together? Speaker 2: --to try--to keep the household together and do my part, you know. You see both your parents, you know, challenged with their, their divorce, you know, not happy with each other, but still caring about each other, not really sure what to do, you know. Speaker 1: So they were still living together, though? Speaker 2: Right, they were still living together and my parents, and, of course, then I'm a young person and so I'm dating and I met my ex-husband [Christophe Colas] and we got married and we had a daughter and then we got divorced and then during all this time, you know, I'm balancing what I believe is my role to my family and trying to maintain a responsibility to myself, my own desires to finish school and then, you know, you fall in love, you get married, you have a child and parenting takes over, you shift gears. Speaker 1: Okay, so when was your daughter born? Speaker 2: My daughter was born May 15th, 1984-- Speaker 1: Okay, 1984. Speaker 2: --and her name is Paige [Paige Colas]. Story_ID: 614413 Speaker 1: You were taking courses at UWM [University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And still staying, staying with your parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.], right, and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, I was, I was, I, you know, I left home to move into a dorm, kind of facility for girls, for females, for women, and then, and I was going to school and-- Speaker 1: Okay, so that was when you first started, right? Speaker 2: That's when I first started. Speaker 1: And then you said, you were like in and out of school, things like that? Speaker 2: Right, I was in and out of school. Speaker 1: So, when you got married [to Christophe Colas], did you, you have your own place or did you-- Speaker 2: No, I was living with my grandma [Thomas-Colas' maternal grandmother, Lucille Berrien]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was living with my grandma then. My parents had, they had divorced, they were living separate and actually they got, the same year I got married, they got divorced, you know. So, and I tried, you know, we were trying to go back to school and, you know, we had our careers and my parents had divorced and my mother had moved out of Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and moved to St. Louis [Missouri] and my father had custody of my brother [Floyd Thomas, Jr.] and my middle sister [Gina Thomas Koonce] and my mother had custody of my baby sister [Kristyl Thomas]. So, the family had pretty much started, you know, going its separate ways and it was, that was a real trying time for all of us, it really was. It was a very trying time for us. My parents now, you know, they, they, you can put them in the same room (laughter) and, and dad takes all the jabs still, you know, but it's all in fun but it's, it's good to see that they have transitioned, you know, to a post-divorce relationship and enjoy being grandparents now. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, time is what it takes usually. Speaker 2: Yeah, time does help you heal. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were married in nineteen eighty-- Speaker 2: Well, in '84 [1984], my daughter was born and so I was married in '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, but I believe it was October, '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Now, now you were still working on finishing school or thinking about trying to figure out how-- Speaker 2: I was still working on, I was still in school, I'd, you know, gone to, you know, several different colleges in the area, you know, trying to find the right fit. And then when I became pregnant, that was, you know, going to college and working was an impossibility for me so I moved to St. Louis. My husband at that time, had a job where he traveled and our marriage was, it was a young marriage and, you know, it was challenged and our daughter was born in St. Louis and we moved back to Milwaukee shortly after Paige [Paige Colas] was born, probably, she might have been, maybe six months and a few months later, we filed for a divorce. So, I was divorced probably about '85 [1985], '86 [1986]. Story_ID: 614414 Speaker 1: What are you doing for a living during all this time, I guess? Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm trying to start my own business as a consultant, I'm working at a bank and-- Speaker 1: Okay. What kind of consultant? Speaker 2: Public relations consultant, you know, engaging black businesses in the community, you know, getting them community exposure, event planning, things like that, and I happened to have a client at that time that owned a black cosmetic company and, Laquita Cosmetics [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and Mary Dalton gave me, was my first client and I was going to seek media support, partnership for her, and I met, I had a meeting with Jerrel Jones who was the general manager of WNOV [WNOV Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and the owner of that station and the Milwaukee Courier newspaper and during our meeting, when I'm talking to him about my client, I didn't realize he was really interviewing me. He's asking me, you know, what, how was I making money and I said, well, I'm selling advertisement, you know, in the program booklet and I'm doing event planning for this client. And so, he offered me an opportunity to join him at a meeting he had the next morning at Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company], here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and I was working at the bank and I had to be at the bank at nine o'clock and he says, well the meeting's at, the meeting's at eight o'clock, you'll be well on your way by then and you join me for the meeting and if I sell it, I'll give you the commission. So I showed up for the meeting and, of course, he sold the account and he gave me the commission, which was more money than I made in two weeks at the bank and he offered me a job and I accepted it right there and that morning I went in and gave my two weeks' notice and I started working for WNOV. Speaker 1: Now what does WNOV, once again, it's a, it's a Milwaukee native, it sounds so much-- Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --like a Chicago [Illinois] one. We have WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, WVON, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, and they've got N-O-V? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: So, what, what do the call letters stand for or did they or is there, is it well known what they stand for? Speaker 2: It'll come to me. Wisconsin's, Wisconsin's Negro Owned Voice [sic. Wisconsin Negroes Own Voice]. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah of course, WVON is Voice of the Negro. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I worked, I worked for, I started out working for career communications and I stayed at the radio station maybe six months, maybe shy under a year and then transitioned to the newspaper which I loved the environment at the newspaper, absolutely thrived in the environment at the newspaper. I could read newspapers every day, I was selling advertisement, I was learning about, you know, how to sell ads, I learned the business from the ground up. Working at the Milwaukee Courier was a lifesaver for me. Speaker 1: Now this is 1987, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I, I learned editing, I learned proofing, I learned copyediting, I learned the language, I learned the community, I became much more conscientious of issues and politics and quality of life issues for African Americans, civil rights, I mean, it was like, it was like somebody just opened up the book and said, here it all is and now it makes sense. I mean, life made sense for me personally and for me as an individual living in the City of Milwaukee, I learned that at the newspaper and I found, I found my niche. Story_ID: 614415 Speaker 1: Nineteen-eighty seven [1987], but you have been prepped on some level by association with your [maternal] grandmother [Lucille Berrien]? Speaker 2: I had been, I had been (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In terms of what the politics are, and issues are-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --in the City of Milwaukee [Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: --I have been but I'm not sure I connected the dots, you know. Speaker 1: And you kind of got a who's who from her too 'cause the people she associated with? Speaker 2: I did. I got a who's who, you know, and I got all the prep work, you know, but it wasn't until I got to the newspaper that I really, really connected the dots, you know, and it just, it, everything just made sense. Speaker 1: Was it that it became not extraneous material but material you use every day? Speaker 2: Absolutely, it was material I used every day, you know, and-- Speaker 1: And so, in some ways, you're well prepared to do something. All of a sudden, you know, you're an expert almost on this stuff before you even get in it and you can apply everything you know to, what you-- Speaker 2: Right, right, and, and I, I think the surprising part was that as time went on, I did realize that I was an expert but as I said, you know, I'm in my early twenties, you know, mid-twenties, you know, I'm a mom, I'm divorced, you know, all I'm trying to do now is, you know, take care of my daughter [Paige Colas] and myself, you know, make some money so we can do this but then I found my niche, you know, at the Courier, it all made sense for me and I just, I don't know if it wrapped itself around me or I wrapped my arms around it but I was there twenty years and I just lived and breathed and ate and slept the newspaper and it just, it was so exciting and I just loved it. I remember in high school thinking whatever it is that I want to do the rest of my life, I want to feel great when I get up in the morning. I don't want it to be a chore, you know. I don't want to go, oh, it's good money but I hate going here. It was never that way. It was seven days a week, twenty-four hours a day and I loved getting up in the morning. I loved--and add to the fact that, you know, I was able to take care of myself and my daughter, my quality of life improved, I became a much more well rounded person and really found my passion, you know, as a person that loves to do for others, I could really, I could do this now in a huge way through the pages of the newspaper. I get to be part of a team that shapes perceptions, you know. The things that we receive when we're watching television and we hear from the mainstream press, I know better 'cause I'm part of the press too and I know how important a headline is. I know the other side to that story that you just heard, I know where to go to get the real deal, you know, and to know that I was part of an institution, not just the Milwaukee Courier but the black press of America where I get to show the best side of African American life. I get to tell the rest of the world that black people have quality of life, passions and issues, from education to health to politics. Yeah, there's some, we're going to show you the other side of even the bad issue. If you point it out in the mainstream media that it's something negative, we're going to picket so that you see there's another element here, you know. That's phenomenal. That was just phenomenal and I got a real surge out of it and deadlines being pushed, you know, everything's exciting, you know. You know you're creating, you're making decisions about how to best intrigue your readers, you know, and how not to just be a voice for Milwaukee's African American community but when other communities and other cultures read about black life in the Milwaukee Courier, they're really learning something, they're really learning something. They're learning how to respect us, understand us, live with us and communicate better to us. Speaker 1: Now, kind of walk us, now you started out in what position and what position did you end up at? Speaker 2: I started out in sales. I started out selling classified advertisement and then I became an office manager and from there I became the associate publisher, well before that, the advertising manager and then associate publisher and editor and then the publisher. Story_ID: 614416 Speaker 1: Did, now Milwaukee [Wisconsin] is, the black community here is what, Milwaukee is a city of about 400,000 people maybe, was it more than that? Speaker 2: I think it's more than that. I think it's more like 700,000 people. Speaker 1: Seven hundred thousand, okay, and then the black community's how many, you think? Speaker 2: I probably estimate about 300,000 or so, African Americans in Milwaukee. Speaker 1: So about half or almost half of the city? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, absolutely. Most of the city is made up of African Americans and people of color. Speaker 1: Really, now-- Speaker 2: We are becoming a minority, majority city, if we are not already. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause in Tennessee you think of it as a German city with all the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, well that's what this, Milwaukee's background is German, absolutely, but it's done a total reverse, yeah. It's a city of people of color. Speaker 1: Okay, so I was going to ask, one question was, how does it sustain all the interest, all the papers? You know, you've got the Community Journal [Milwaukee Community Journal], there's a third paper going too? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I don't know that it does. I don't know that it does. I think for our market, three newspapers is huge-- Speaker 1: Too much. Speaker 2: --and it's over saturated, that's what I think, and, and that's only from the perspective of being a publisher and your responsibility is to generate revenue and, of course, to improve, you know, the overall look and feel of the newspaper but you find that you have to think outside the box, inside the box, turn the box upside down, you know, in an environment that has not always welcomed black newspapers and the Courier, having the reputation of being the most outspoken and radical newspaper, and radical just means, you can shake it up, you shake it up, and we don't, you know, mince words, you know. We call it like we see it, you know. We pick a side and we go with that side. There's no gray area with the Milwaukee Courier, that's not the history of the newspaper. And so I think for many years because we told it like it was, it hurt us in our revenue and then when the Milwaukee Community Journal and Milwaukee Times [The Milwaukee Times] came along, they took, I believe, in my opinion, a conservative viewpoint, one that would garner them in a position where they could get more revenue. And then, the other thing is, you know, everybody don't play together well in the sandbox. And so you have an atmosphere in the corporate community where they will pitch one black newspaper against the other, you know, and after a while I think that we just, you know, if we didn't get smart, we should get smart and we learn how to play the game a little better so that if you don't get it, then I'll get it this time. If I don't get the business, you'll get it this time but this, this community I don't know that there's enough revenue that any of the black newspapers are getting that will help make any of them the way that they should be, you know. Most of us haven't moved past twelve, fourteen, sixteen pages, you know, a week, and, you know, we're all--the Courier's the oldest so the Courier's about forty-four years old going into its forty-fifth year, you know, but I think even, I still think there's an extreme amount of value in the black press, even with newspapers, mainstream newspapers, you know, just kind of, their circulation is just kind of falling to the wayside, you know, except if you get another Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] moment where everybody's sold out. I mean, that's just the beautiful thing in the newspaper industry but I think that we, we can use this as an edge because in this town, there's nobody really talking about black issues except for the black press, the black print press, and there's a black radio station, all talk here, we have one, you know. We have, but the city is, it doesn't need more than one, you know, it doesn't need more than one black newspaper, you know. So, we'll see what that turns out to be because I think that it would serve all the black press better. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: We could work together. Story_ID: 614417 Speaker 1: What were the, I guess the juiciest issues in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] when you were working for the Milwaukee Courier? Speaker 2: Ernest Lacy: that was a big one. I remember marching in that. That was the first time I ever marched. Speaker 1: Now this was a man who was brutalized by the police, I believe? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well tell us the story 'cause most people watching this will not know. Speaker 2: Well if I remember correctly, Mr. Lacy was in the custody of Milwaukee Police Department and was killed while wearing handcuffs. Speaker 1: Now this is in what year? Speaker 2: That's a good question-- Speaker 1: Or roughly. Speaker 2: --I wouldn't, well let me see, it had to be in the early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Is this before you, you came on to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, this was before I came on to the newspaper but, you know, that story transitioned even once I came to the newspaper with, you know, lots of other things, most recently the Frank Jude [Frank Jude, Jr.] case. This man was beaten by off duty police officers, you know, that case. Speaker 1: So, so it's used as like a prototypical case of police brutality (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly. Speaker 1: --that keeps reverberating through the community? Speaker 2: Exactly. The Jeffrey Dahmer case was really big here and there was, you know, conversation that, how could, you know, if there were a black man like Jeffrey Dahmer living in a white community, first of all, would that, would the neighbors have allowed such a thing, you know? He just integrated into the community of color where he was able to, you know-- Speaker 1: He lived in a black neighborhood? Speaker 2: He lived in a black neighborhood, you know, and, you know, if he were a black man living in a white neighborhood, you know, um, I don't think so. Speaker 1: He'd probably be picked up for walking his dog or anything, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, you know, but he went unnoticed and his behavior went unnoticed for a long time. So that was a huge story. Speaker 1: You're talking about the women who actually called the police about the young-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, the young Asian-- Speaker 1: --I think the Laotian kid [Konerak Sinthasomphone]-- Speaker 2: --yeah, yes, that was-- Speaker 1: --that was stumbling about the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly and, you know, just the way that the police department's relationship at that time with Milwaukee's black community, you know. I'm, they, they knocked on Jeffrey Dahmer's door, you know. They were, you know, just several inches away from saving other people's lives, you know, but, so that was an issue, you know, in the newspapers, how the police department relates to the community of color, you know. How things like this can happen in our community and not in a white community. Speaker 1: So, so is the representation of black officers very low in Milwaukee by comparison to the rest of the police department? Speaker 2: I would say so, yeah. I would say so, particularly at that time. We did have an African American police chief but most of his career was spent on, you know, this constant confrontation and rivalry between his office and the then Mayor Norquist [John Norquist] office, that was always news on the front pages, you know. Speaker 1: Who was the chief and-- Speaker 2: Chief, last name is Jones. Speaker 1: Okay, we'll just call him Chief Jones [Arthur Jones]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, call him Chief Jones. Speaker 1: Yeah, so Chief Jones, and his contention with the mayor was what? What was-- Speaker 2: Well I, you know, I, in a nutshell, I just think that they didn't allow him to do his job, you know, without, you know, for lack of a better term, just this constant nitpicking about policies and procedures and, you know, and things like that. There seemed to be a personality clash that played out in the public in a major way and it, it interfered with the operations of the police department, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was, you know, those were big stories in the headlines. Story_ID: 614418 Speaker 1: You said your [maternal] grandmother [Lucille Berrien] ran for mayor. Did she run while you were working with the Courier [Milwaukee Courier]? Speaker 2: No, 'cause I was a little girl then, I was ten, but the Courier did endorse her and I remember looking through some of the archived newspapers and finding that newspaper where they had endorsed her and it was just great, you know, to, to get this connection and the owner, Jerrel Jones, had been in business with my parents [Helen McCray and Floyd Thomas, Sr.], you know, when I was a kid and I didn't know. I didn't know that until, you know, I came to work at the newspaper. It was, it was just a wonderful experience and it really, it has propelled me to the point that I'm at now where I've moved more into public relations. I've kept my media part of my career, my working with Channel Ten [WMVS-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] on 'Black Nouveau' as a co-host so that keeps me involved in terms of being a reporter (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I want to ask you about 'Black Nouveau' but I have just one other question about, 'cause you were involved in sales and advertising and that sort of thing a lot. Who supports the Courier--who supported the Courier? I mean, is it typical of who supports black newspapers around the country, I mean in terms of the advertisers and-- Speaker 2: It is, it is. Miller Brewing Company, which is now MillerCoors, are still a supporter of the newspaper, Johnson Controls, a lot of corporations support the newspaper. Potawatomi Bingo Casino [Potawatomi Hotel and Casino, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] is a good supporter of the newspaper in term--you know, business supporter, these kinds of organizations, you didn't have a lot of black businesses as, they seemed to dwindle away as the paper got older. Speaker 1: Okay, so small black businesses really don't support these papers to the extent that-- Speaker 2: No, and, and I don't think, you know, and the reason I think that black businesses don't do business with the black newspapers is because I don't think many black businesses have a marketing component in their business plan. They don't really understand that marketing and advertising is an investment that you have to do when you're in business, you know. Who's going to know that you're there, you know? Some black businesses don't have to advertise in that huge way like Perkins' Restaurant [Mr. Perkins', Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. They're a mainstay in the community but they do advertise for special editions, Black History Month, you know, things that are really tailored maybe towards that industry or, you know, our culture but, and it's not just black businesses, but it's businesses that are in the black community that don't respect our community. They come in our community, they set up business, they take hoards of money out of our businesses from our families and people but they don't put anything back in it. They don't do business with radio stations, they don't do business with the newspapers, you know, I mean, they're next door to the newspaper, they don't even let you put your newspaper in their store, you know. They're just, they're just closed off to the fact that you're in a neighborhood and you should be doing business with the other businesses in the neighborhood. They're not conscientious of adding the black press to their vendor list and that's something that I think needs to be addressed in a major way. These companies are not the MillerCoors and the Potawatomies, you know, they are not them at all. They are not the Johnson Controls that, you know, these folks get it. They are the other businesses that are in the neighborhoods that are on the corner stores, you know. They own the gas stations, you know. They own the fish markets, you know what I mean, and they don't do business with us and they, they are absolutely clueless to what I call proper business etiquette, you know, and they, they just, those kinds of business could turn the corner for the black press in terms of revenue. Speaker 1: Okay, and these are non-black owned businesses that are in the black community? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. They don't give to UNCF [United Negro College Fund], Thurgood Marshall College Fund, I mean, they, nothing. They don't, you know, sponsor a kid to go to camp, they do nothing. They have no investment. Speaker 1: Okay, so I'll just say myself that these are mostly Arab owned businesses-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Korean owned businesses-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --in the black community-- Speaker 2: --yes, in the black community, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --that serve the small store, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the dollar store, the gas station-- Speaker 2: Right, right, and the other token to that, or the other side to that is, African American consumers need to become more savvy. Where we spend our money at, we need to ask, who do you do business with? Do you do business with the Milwaukee Courier? Do you do business with, you know, WNOV [WNOV Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? Do you do business with WMCS [WMCS Radio; WZTI Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], you know? Do you send a black kid to camp, you know? Are you supporting UNCF? Do you have a team? We need, as consumers to be, conscientious of spending our money with other African American businesses and we need to be conscientious consumers and ask where we spend our money. Do you do business with other black vendors? And until we do that, we're, you know, we're not helping ourselves enough if we're not doing that. Story_ID: 614419 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, can you state, please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Faithe Colas, F as in football, A-I-T-H-E, C-O-L-A-S [HistoryMaker Faithe A. Thomas-Colas]. Speaker 1: And last time, I think we had you listed as Faithe Thomas-Colas? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Are you using just the Colas now? Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is June 22nd, 1961 and I was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin at Mt. Sinai Hospital. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: So when you ask my occupation, do you want my title or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, please. Speaker 2: Okay, so I am the assistant divisional director for The Salvation Army. Speaker 1: Okay, now so you're no longer the director of communications or-- Speaker 2: No, actually, I oversee that department, so I got a promotion. Speaker 1: All right, all right, you were a journalist and a-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I was a journalist, communications specialist, professional and a publisher. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, we're back up. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is Monday, February 20th, 2017. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Presently, we are in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. We are at the Divisional Headquarters for The Salvation Army of Wisconsin and Upper Michigan [Wauwatosa, Wisconsin]. Story_ID: 614420 Speaker 1: We left off last time talking about your stint with Milwaukee Courier. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And we talked about how you got started, basically, selling ads for Jerrel Jones-- Speaker 2: Right, right. I started selling, I actually started at the radio station at WNOV radio station [WNOV Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], selling advertising and shortly after that, I'd say maybe three, four months, there was an opening at the newspaper in sales and so I went over there and just found the environment to be more conducive to my personality and because I'm a reader, the newspaper was just a perfect fit. So I started there in sales and worked my way up through the ranks. Speaker 1: Okay, now I neglected to ask you about the founding of the Courier and so I did a little research myself but it was founded by Mary Ellen Shadd Strong, right? Speaker 2: It was founded by Mary Ellen Shadd Strong and her son, Jerrel Jones and I believe in June of 1961, '64 [1964], 1964. Speaker 1: Okay, and she, yeah, she went on to, they bought the station, WNOV, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And shortly thereafter they founded-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --was called Courier Communications Corporation [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: That is correct. They founded Courier Communications Corporation. Speaker 1: Right, and so, but in the '70s [1970s], Ms. Strong moved to Chicago [Illinois] and it says here, I don't know for real, if it happened for real but from what I read, she moved to Chicago and founded Black Family magazine? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And left the paper with her son, Jerrel? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, and he's been publishing the paper ever since? Speaker 2: Continues to be the president and CEO, yes. Speaker 1: But does he live in Florida now or is he, or is he still in-- Speaker 2: Well, no, Jerrel Jones, he lives here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I read a rumor on the Internet that he was going to buy the Onyx nightclub [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and re-fix it, you know, where the tragic shooting was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he's a businessman, you know. Mr. Jones is a businessman, a media owner, of course, the radio station and the newspaper but also owned real estate and this, other businesses so he's definitely an entrepreneur. Story_ID: 614421 Speaker 1: We left you off and you joined the paper in '87 [1987] and we were talking about some of the stories from the late '80s [1980s] like the Jeffrey Dahmer story. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: The police struggled with the police chief [Harold Breier] here-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and as we get towards, I guess, 1990, you take more and more responsibility on? Speaker 2: At the newspaper I do. So, I started out in sales and shortly after that became the advertising manager, assistant advertising manager, if you will, and then associate publisher, editor and finally the publisher. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So as publisher, you're responsible for, you're not the owner but you're responsible for the-- Speaker 2: Day to day operations of the newspaper, making sure advertising comes in, making sure the bills are paid, making sure staff is in order and in place, making sure there's planning and strategies for, not just the current year but for three to five years out. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, while you were, now you served in that position until, what, you started as publisher in 2004 and you left in 2007-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but, so what were some of the, I guess, milestones in, and as publisher of the Courier? Speaker 2: That's really, so the question for me, the answer would be the, would be my professional milestones as the publisher of the Milwaukee Courier. You know, I think that, because I was only the third publisher in the history of the newspaper, to my knowledge, I was the only one publisher-- well let me state it like this, as the publisher of the Milwaukee Courier newspaper, I wanted to kind of redefine things and make it my own. And so with that I also co-hosted 'Black Nouveau.' That, for me, I think, expanded and grew the readership as well as the viewership of 'Black Nouveau.' Speaker 1: So was the paper, was the Milwaukee Courier officially involved with 'Black Nouveau' as such? Speaker 2: No, they were separate entities but just as the publisher, being a community person, being a public figure, if you will, and being dedicated and committed to providing information to Milwaukee's African American community [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and those that live in, in and around Milwaukee's black community and do business with us, I really felt it was important for me to be in places that normally publishers had not been in, such as public television, such as the radio. So I did radio and I did television and I did the newspaper. Story_ID: 614422 Speaker 1: 'Black Nouveau' was produced by Milwaukee Public Television [Milwaukee PBS, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: 'Black Nouveau' is produced by Milwaukee Public Television. Speaker 1: Still. Speaker 2: It's still in existence and I worked with the team at Milwaukee Public Television for about five years. Speaker 1: Okay, beginning what year would you say? Speaker 2: So, I would say in, oh, I would say I started working with the Milwaukee Public Television in '09 [2009]. Speaker 1: Okay, 2009, all right. Speaker 2: No, let me take that back. That wouldn't be correct because I was still working there when I was, when I came to The Salvation Army [The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin]. So, that would probably be about '05 [2005], 2005. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And that would be about the same time that I started doing a radio show with Eric Von, who was my late husband. He did a panel discussion about--Eric did a panel discussion about issues and topics that took place in the headlines during that week and the segment was called, 'Back Story' [ph.] So, I was one of the panelists on that show. Speaker 1: Okay, now were you on another show called, 'What's Going On?' Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And actually that's what started my television career, if you will, at MATA [MATA Community Media, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], 'What's Going On?' co- and that was shown, then was hosted by Martha Love. Story_ID: 614423 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to backtrack, again, here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Just ask you like now, so, you're, you were serving as publisher of the Courier [Milwaukee Courier]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --through two thousand and-- Speaker 2: Seven [2007]. Speaker 1: --seven [2007]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right. Speaker 2: So you're there during the time, you were there during the time that [HistoryMaker] Marvin Pratt was mayor, right? Speaker 1: I was. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Yes I was. Speaker 2: So you covered that--was that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We did. That was exciting. That was an exciting time for the city, most definitely for Milwaukee's black community [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and I think just in the world of politics, it was very exciting and interesting. Speaker 2: Okay, do you have a, now, there's a considerable, considerable amount of material that's been written about why he lost 'cause he seemed like he, he won a primary over, you know, the two top opponents, then he lost the general election. Do you have any thoughts about why he lost the general election 'cause I know some of the articles attribute his loss to press coverage? Speaker 1: Well, that could be. I really, so from a personal point of view, because at that time I didn't know my husband but my husband worked on Tom Barrett's campaign and I think that a mind like Eric Von's was critical to Marvin Pratt's election and his campaign. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Mr. Pratt was telling us about four days, nine negative articles about him were published in the paper and he just couldn't--it was so much, it was, he was kind of, damn, but you couldn't even answer all the charges, you know, before the election and then after the election was over, all this disappeared. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: It just disappeared. Speaker 1: Well, I mean, you know, politics, it's a dirty business, it really is and I think that for the moment, it was exciting for us to have Marvin Pratt as the mayor. It would have been, most definitely history making for him to continue as mayor. I have high regards for Marvin as I do for our current mayor, Tom Barrett, who is a good friend of ours but I, I think that just the overall campaign of Tom Barrett versus Marvin Pratt, obviously, had a larger impact on the voters. Speaker 2: Did the Courier endorse anybody? Speaker 1: The Courier, we endorsed Marvin Pratt. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, interesting. So did you ever have arguments with your husband about the election? Speaker 1: Well, I didn't know him then. Speaker 2: Oh, you didn't know him, all right, that's right. Speaker 1: So I didn't know him then but I think that, you know, you have to have, I think that the one, the most important thing now in hindsight, with any politician or any person running for an elected office, you, you have to be friends with the media, you have to have friends in the media. You need to have relationships with the media, all of them, all of them, and be able to be prepared. You have to be prepared when you are in the newspaper when you are out front, on camera for, you know, being transparent. Story_ID: 614424 Speaker 1: Now this is interesting because as we sit here in 2017, we have a president of the United States that just yesterday or the day before called the press the enemy of the American people (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, so it's interesting, just this whole dynamic of what's happening from the White House, that election, the presidential election. Obviously, the Democratic Party made some huge mistakes in not, in not catering to, not revisiting, not making high priority their constituency. Those people that they know vote for them, I really believe they took 'em for granted. So, and most definitely a visit to Milwaukee, back to Wisconsin for Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] was critical, that's obvious. President Trump [President Donald John Trump] is way out of his league. He is a businessman and there are a lot of dynamics that go on in business that just don't go on at a government level and I don't think that he understands that. He's very good at diversion, you know, so there's a whole lot going on in front of the camera and so everyone's watching that but are we watching what's going on around him. He's confusing everyone, obviously, and, again, you, you just don't want to make, you don't want to make enemies of the media. You never know when you're going to need them. Everybody needs somebody. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, he certainly has angered most of the media. Speaker 2: He really has angered most of the media and, along with that, I don't believe that his team has not advised him on the best way to deal with the public, to deal with the media but my sense of President Trump is, he's a know it all and it's very difficult to penetrate information to a know it all. I know everything so there's nothing you can possibly tell me. There, you know, when you're in PR [public relations], which I have a background in and I have great experience in, it's very important to listen to your team, otherwise, what's the point in having them around. It's not conducive to you, it's not in your best interest as a person like President Trump to have yes men around you. You need people that are going to be real, truthful and transparent with you. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, I mean, for the record here, for those who will be watching this way into the future, this is 2017, we're a month into Donald Trump's-- Speaker 2: Yes, we are. Speaker 1: --presidency and a lot of people are very, very nervous about him so that's why I brought that conversation-- Speaker 2: No, it is. It's very nervous. I can't tell you, I think the last time that, I really can't tell you the last time I cried about a political situation but I did when Mr. Trump won and I did again when just a few weeks ago his executive order on the travel ban. I, you know, it was just, it was heartbreaking and sickening to see the leader of the free world, you know, executing such a ban that was in my best comments about it was stupid and ignorant and mean spirited (simultaneous). Story_ID: 614425 Speaker 1: Milwaukee [Wisconsin] has a very diverse community as, I think a lot of people would be surprised rather if they knew how diverse it was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's extremely diverse. I mean, this city is known for its neighborhoods, neighborhood names, you know. We know where we live and we take great pride in those neighborhoods that we live in, most of us that live here in Milwaukee and I was born and raised here so it's definitely a pride for me. Speaker 1: Yes, there's an African American community, of course, but then you've got, you got like two or three main communities of African Americans if not more (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) True, very true. Speaker 1: And then you have like various ethnic European communities or white communities-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: --you have Hmong-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --community here. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You've got, you have a-- Speaker 2: A strong Hispanic community, um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: Right, and you even have some of the Native American groups-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Chippewas and such, you know-- Speaker 2: And Potawatomi-- Speaker 1: Um-hm-- Speaker 2: --yes, that's very true. Speaker 1: --who used to populate Chicago [Illinois] years ago. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so it's a diverse community here. Story_ID: 614426 Speaker 1: How did, thinking politically, now when you were a publisher of the Milwaukee Courier, how, did you have an editorial board to help decide like who the Courier would endorse? Speaker 2: We had a editorial team, not necessarily an editorial board at that time and the decisions and the discussions were made with the publisher, the owner and the editorial team. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what criteria would, you know, basically used to determine who the paper would endorse? Speaker 2: Well that's interesting. I think it had a lot to do with the economics of Milwaukee's black community [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], who would serve us best in office as, not only as a media organization but as a small business and who was in the best interest for Milwaukee's black community. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now did, did, well, I'm tempted to think, because you're only publisher for three years-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --that that wasn't as much fun as what you were doing before or not as satisfying (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's a lot of hard work, it was a lot of hard work. I'd been doing the job of the publisher before I was named publisher so in all fairness I'd say I was probably publisher for about five years but wasn't named for that role until three years before I left in 2007 but it, it was quite different. It's, it's, it's, there is a huge difference between being an associate publisher and being a publisher. I'm pretty much the buck stops with you. You, you have to manage all areas of the business. It's a business, you know, it's, there, and the business of print is crossing the Ts, dotting the I's, literally, and making sure the bills are paid, making sure your team is paid, making sure that the reputation of the newspaper stays intact, that it grows, relationships are built, new relationships are built, old relationships are maintained. There, it's constant. It's, I would say it's like, what's, juggling. You're juggling a lot of balls in the air, yeah. It's totally a circus. Story_ID: 614427 Speaker 1: When you look back at your years with the Milwaukee Courier, what would you consider the, your highest point and lowest point? Speaker 2: I think the lowest point, not just for the Milwaukee Courier but for the black press in general, is revenue. How you generate new revenue. How you can get a larger piece of the advertising and marketing budgets. How you get in front of people, I think that's always been a low point. I think it's still, is a low point for the black press today. Speaker 1: Okay, now one thing we discussed at the last interview was the, the change in dynamics in the black neighborhoods in terms of the business ownership and the, I mean, with business owners that were in the community that weren't of the community. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. The dynamic of the, Milwaukee's black community [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] probably changed as much as it has across the country, you know. Ten years ago, fifteen years ago, twenty years ago, it changed and people that weren't African American, aren't African American, just populated the community and, and I think they didn't understand and we are still making, it's still a great challenge for black business owners and especially black media owners to help people understand how critical it is that when you come into a neighborhood, you just cannot continue to take business out. The money is being spent with you but you're not making any investment in the community where you're around. You turn around and you make that investment in security and I'm not saying that you shouldn't but just imagine that if you took that dol- some of those dollars and you reinvested it into the communities that you're around, that people would start to feel a little more valuable, that it's not just all about dollars and cents. Speaker 1: Right, right. Was there ever a time when the Courier faced collapse? Speaker 2: I don't know that we faced collapse but I do know we were on hard times quite often and, again, it's a small business, it's a black business, it's, you know, the kind of business that, when you can look at the daily newspaper and know if you could just have a quarter of what that print media organization would bring in, I mean, for us, that would have been hitting the lottery but when you have to go into marketing businesses and talk to their marketing and advertising team and you have to convince them that black people do, black families do eat cereal, before you can even get down to business, it's ridiculous. When people say, you know, oh, no, we don't do business with black newspapers because black families don't eat cereal, you, you just, you can't believe that you're hearing this but these are some of the conversations in my time, not just as the publisher but prior to that, just being in the room with some of the great publishers of our time and listening to them dialog and debrief about meetings that they've had, you know, with mainstream businesses that need to be doing business with the black media. If, as a business owner, it's just good sense, it's great public relations to do business with the communities that are your consumers, it's smart business, it's very smart. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what about the high points? What would have been some of the high points of your involvement with the Courier? Speaker 2: Well I think some of the high points have been all of the people that have come through the Courier that I've met, in terms of our staff and where those folks have been able to go from here. Some of, for example, there's a young man during my time there who was a high school intern, worked there after school, went to a historically black college [HBCU] and now he and his brothers own one of the most lucrative minority owned construction firms here in Milwaukee. So those are high--those are high points. When you know that you're impacting people, having people come and work with us and help us make the newspaper a much better print vehicle was a high point. Speaker 1: Okay, what was the biggest story you covered during that period of time? Speaker 2: I think one of the biggest stories we covered was Dahmer, was the Jeffrey Dahmer case. I think that was, that was huge. I also think the biggest story that we covered was Norquist [John Norquist] passing the baton to [HistoryMaker] Marvin Pratt as mayor. That was a very special moment for myself as well as for the City of Milwaukee. I know it was for my [maternal] grandmother, Lucille Berrien, who was the first African American woman to run for mayor in the City of Milwaukee. She ran for mayor against Mayor Maier [Henry Maier] who didn't have a great relationship with Milwaukee's black community. I'm not sure that the power structure during Mayor Maier's tenure had a great relationship with Milwaukee's black community. I think they were just beginning to understand that they should and that they needed to and they were really forced to. I mean, you can't live in a city with people that don't look like you and not service them, not communicate with them, not think that they're important to the growth of your city. Story_ID: 614428 Speaker 1: Now you were co-host of MPT's [Milwaukee Public Television; Milwaukee PBS] 'Black Nouveau'-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) we'll get there and talked about that the last time, began in 2005, were you, what was the nature of the show? Did you have like, guests, or topics with-- Speaker 2: Yes we did. We had guests and topics a lot like I am with The HistoryMakers today, news magazine format that highlighted the African American going, how would you say? The African American community leaders, issues that are important to the African American families and living in the City of Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. That was what 'Black Nouveau' did and still does. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Who were some of the significant guests and what were some of the significant topics? Speaker 2: So, Anthony Anderson, who's now, you know, a lead star on 'Black-ish.' That was one of my favorites. I love his current show and I always loved watching him and his career but that was about diabetes. So, health was a, health was a focus on 'Black Nouveau.' Arts was the focus, politics, most definitely was the focus. I remember how we tried really hard to get an interview with [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis some years when she was in Milwaukee and that was such an important interview for me because the first time I met Angela Davis I was nine years old. My [maternal] grandmother [Lucille Berrien] was one of her bodyguards when she came to Milwaukee to speak. And so I was just so excited about the possibility of interviewing Angela Davis and it just didn't work out. That particular day, I was also on my way to Washington, D.C. and in the airport I ran into Angela Davis. And so, it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about that. Speaker 2: --that was just great. She was in one of the shops in the airport and she was getting ready to buy some breakfast and I was going in to buy a banana and I just saw her out of the corner of my eye and I thought, this could not be possible, that I could just have an opportunity to just be in the same space with such a wonderful and outstanding individual as Angela Davis. So, I did introduce myself to her and told her who I was and that my grandmother had been one of her bodyguards when I was nine years old and this was just such a pleasure to meet her and I told her about the story that how I spent my entire childhood, all the way to high school, trying to wear an Afro but my hair was too long and too straight at that time and it was just impossible but it was, it was a thrilling moment for me. Story_ID: 614429 Speaker 1: Let me, let me go back and ask you more about your [maternal] grandmother. Now this is, Ms. Berrien [Lucille Berrien] ran for city council [sic. mayor], the first black woman to run for city council. She's, she was one of [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis' bodyguards? Speaker 2: She was. She was one of Angela Davis' bodyguards and, like I said, I was nine years old and I met Angela Davis and there used to be a theater, it's a church now, it's located on King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive] and Locust [Street]. So on the corner of King Drive, Dr. King Drive and Locust Street, there is the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Library [Martin Luther King Library, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and next door to it is a church now but then it was a theatre and that's where my grandmother was and that's where Angela Davis spoke. I wish I knew more details but those are, you know, some of the highlights. I recall working on my grandmother's campaign with her, passing out literature, going door to door, you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Now I was asking you about, off camera about her organizational affiliations, whether she was in the Black Guard or the Republic of New Afrika or something like that, and you said she was a part of that. Speaker 2: Well I know my grandmother had some close relationships, if not, involved with the Commandos and the Black Panther militia [Black Panther Party] here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. She was a member of that. She probably still is a member of the Black Panther militia here in Milwaukee. Speaker 1: Okay, your grandmother's still alive? My grandmother's still alive. She's eighty-eight years old. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she's still quite a spitfire. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So she's, yeah, Milwaukee, one of the, I know Mike McGee [Michael McGee, Sr.], I guess, the founder of the Commando group was on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show' years ago discussing what the Commando group was. Speaker 1: Well I don't know if it was Oprah Winfrey. I think it was Jerry Springer. Speaker 2: Jerry Springer? Speaker 1: Springer, yeah. I think he was on 'The Jerry Springer Show' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). To tell the truth, it may have been Phil Donahue. Speaker 1: That could be, it could be. It could have been Phil Donahue. Speaker 2: Now Jerry Springer was not that dignified. He slipped off the table early. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, yeah, because it was a serious discussion about black militia and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --'cause there were these white militia groups, I think, his group came to light right after the Posse Comitatus out West-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --had the tax problem with the federal government, I think there was a shootout out there. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: They, you know, then the focus started being, who are these militia groups-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --somebody found a black list, wait a minute-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --(unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, there are two groups here in Milwaukee now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they distinguished themselves some kind of way, I'm not sure, but there are two Black Panther. One is the militia group, the one that was organized and founded here in Milwaukee by Mike McGee, Sr. and then there's another group that I'm not very familiar with at all but I just know there are two of them. Speaker 2: Is that the, what they call the New Black Panther Party? Speaker 1: I believe so, yes. I believe so. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's not a direct descendant of the old one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 2: --it's a different thing all together, again, is what they say. Speaker 1: Right, it is. That's what I understand it to be as well. Speaker 2: Okay, now I've cleared that up because people hear, so she's a bodyguard of Angela Davis, what the--your grandmother, she's a, you know, you think of somebody a lot older than Angela Davis. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, well that was years ago. Speaker 2: Yeah, but she was much younger then, as well as Angela Davis (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, yeah, she was. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, and Angela Davis reached prominence in the news, her case and everything was around 1970, '71 [1971]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, yes, and she's, you know, a well sought after professor, you know. As a matter of fact, she'll be here in Milwaukee next month, I believe, you know, and it's, it's really wonderful that she has come full circle because she is someone that committed herself to the struggle of making life better for black people in America. Story_ID: 614430 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about the radio shows. Now, 'What's Going On?' [ph.] No, 'Back Story' [ph.] was produced, well, was hosted by Eric Von, right. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And how did you all meet? Did you meet on the show or did you meet-- Speaker 2: Well Eric and I met in 2005 at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] convention. We were both coming out of the communication center and we hadn't, and the most interesting thing about, well let me even back up further than that. Because I listened to Eric on the radio for ten years before I ever met him, never knew what he looked like, never bumped into him, could have been in the same room with him many times and just never knew it and so we were familiar with one another in terms of our professionalism, in terms of our professions but in 2005 at the NAACP convention here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], we met just outside the communication center. I was sitting next to Martha Toran who is an outstanding individual in Milwaukee. She was just a pillar and a pioneer in her own right in many lanes and many avenues and she introduced Eric and I and from that point on, we just started working together. At that particular time when I met him, Eric said, you know, I'm looking for a female voice to join this panel of other journalists for a show that I'm calling 'Back Story.' You know, I said, oh, it sounds interesting. So, he sent me the information and next thing you know, I was doing the show. So I did the show with him for about two years. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and you all were married in, what, what year? Speaker 2: We were married in November, Thanksgiving Day, 2010. Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't that long ago? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't that long ago. Our relationship spanned ten years from the, and so, it was so interesting because we always said, let's just include the time that we, from the moment that we met and we started working together until the time that we trans- transitioned from professional life to a personal life to marriage. So, in, ten and a half years, Eric and I were together. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now at the, most of that time you were working for Salvation Army [The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin], right? Speaker 2: Yes, all that time I worked for The Salvation, well, yeah, no, you're right. Most of that time I did work for The Salvation Army, absolutely. Speaker 1: All right, but you continued to appear on the show? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I continued to, well during my time at The Salvation Army, I worked with 'Black Nouveau.' I didn't do radio any longer. Story_ID: 614431 Speaker 1: Okay, and his show was on WMCS [WMCS Radio; WZTI Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: His show was on W--WMCS, 1290 AM station which changed their format several years ago. Speaker 1: And, well, and then he, he left the show at that point, right, when they changed the format? Speaker 2: Well, everybody was let go, yeah. Everybody was terminated at that point when they, pretty much everybody. I think they kept three or four people and they moved those individuals to the FM but 90 percent of the staff, 95 percent of the staff were terminated. On that day, we heard Eric's [Eric Von] last show on 1290 and they were all let go. Speaker 1: The Tom Joyner show ['Tom Joyner Morning Show'] used to do a April Fool's gag where, I think it was Tom Joyner, one of the great, national radio hosts would do a gag where on April Fool's Day they would play country and western music to a black community and say now, did you know about country and western music (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh wow. Speaker 1: And people would call in and say, what, I've been listening to this, is this what happened? Speaker 2: Well, they played, well they played Elvis. So when Eric signed off, you know, on his show, "Be good, be careful and bye, bye," the next voice you heard was Elvis Presley singing and it just threw everybody off. People were calling, texting, you know, but Eric had told me that he had a feeling that year, you know, that things were going to change and the station was going to go, just turn upside down and he said it's just a gut. I've been in this business a long time and after a while you just get a feeling about things and he had that feeling. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a period of time from the 1980s through, through today even, I mean, though most of the black talks, stations are-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --shot down now. Speaker 2: Right, they are. Speaker 1: But there was a time when, I know, when Harold Washington ran in Chicago [Illinois] there was a black talk radio that pushed him over the edge. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean, Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker "Lutrelle" Lu F. Palmer, II] was-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --the one they called for it-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --in the first place and then pushed it, way through. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Similar stories in other cities. Speaker 2: I, that is the value of black radio, it really is. It's the value of black radio, the black press, you know, black journalists. It's, you have to have diversity. It has to be mixed up, you know. It can't just be all white male any longer. It just, that's not realistic. We don't live in a world made up that way any longer. In Milwaukee [Wisconsin], African Americans and Hispanic individuals make up the largest population of people, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe we were told earlier today that the black population is about 40 percent of the city. Speaker 2: Right, that's huge, that's huge and-- Speaker 1: And if you consider those other minorities we were talking about. Speaker 2: Right, if you consider them and add everyone in, we are the largest citizenship here in Milwaukee County [Wisconsin], yeah. Speaker 1: So, let me, WMCS changed format and so your husband, Eric Von, and we're talking a lot about him, he passed this year, right? Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: He did, and he went on to WNOV [WNOV Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], right, for a couple of years? Speaker 2: Right, he was, so about a year or so, April this year, well 2016, April would have been a year, so a year and a half, Eric worked at WNOV, hosting 'The Eric Von Show' and to his credit, created, you know, 'The Man Show.' He brought that over with him from 1290. I mean, he was just a creative genius when it comes to talk radio and the formats that he created, 'Back Story,' [ph.] 'The Man Show,' [ph.] the 'Morning Magazine,' [ph.] these are all things that Eric created and while he was here, off air, he created 'Essential Voices.' So, a lot like what we're doing here today with HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers], Eric would do one on ones, face to face at a small black business here in Milwaukee and he would interview key individuals, not just African American people but people that everybody in this town should know who they are, you know, from Dan Bader [Daniel J. Bader] to Howard Fuller, he interviewed those individuals. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, yeah. He's a voice for many years now or was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, more than twenty five years and a lot of that his, his health conditions, his health conditions just kind of moved him into creating Brain, Brawn and Body, a health and wellness website which started out for African American men but it's for men in general and for their families. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so do you still maintain that brand (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes I do. Speaker 1: It's called, once again, Brain-- Speaker 2: Brain, Brawn, Body. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Brain, Brawn and Body, um-hm. Story_ID: 614432 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your career with The Salvation Army [The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin]. How did you come to take a job with Salvation Army in the first place? Speaker 2: Well, it's something that I noticed in the industry. A lot of my friends that were working in mainstream started looking elsewhere for work. You know, when the Internet came on the scene and social media came onto the scene, it really changed the look and feel of newsrooms and if the mainstream newsrooms were changing, you know exactly what was going to happen with, you know, African American newsrooms for the black press and so they started to change and then you started thinking about how can you take the skills that you have and transition them and, you know, repurpose them, if you will, and make yourself valuable in another arena. The work-- Speaker 1: Was it an economic decision? Speaker 2: For me, it was. For me it was an economic decision, absolutely, you know, my future. Speaker 1: Because I know if you work that hard, that long in the black press (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean, I know your heart is in it. Speaker 2: Your heart is in it, it was a tough decision. It was a decision that I had been thinking about three years or more before I actually made the transition, you know. I mean, it was very painful. It was painful for me, emotionally. I put a lot of work into it. I wanted to retire from the black press but economically, you know, when I looked around at what other professionals were doing and what the industry was looking like, for me, I saw the writing on the wall and it is tough. The black press, I'm still in communication with Jerrel Jones who owns the newspaper [Milwaukee Courier]. His daughter died, I want to say, maybe four or five years ago and she was the editor, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, Lynda Jones [Lynda Jones Reyes], right, that's right. Speaker 2: Lynda Jones, yes. And so, I, you know, I understood what that, what that could mean for the newspaper not having the editor, not having someone that could juggle all of the balls as Lynda did and I guess I consider myself just blessed that I listened to that little voice on the inside, I want to call it the Holy Spirit, that said, you know, it's time for you to go, you know, I have some other things for you to do. I just took my passion. I took my ink in the blood and I just repurposed it to do more things in Milwaukee County [Wisconsin]. And so I used those skills that I learned at the newspaper to become the community relations director for The Salvation Army in Milwaukee County and use those, took my relationships and just leveraged them for my new role here. Speaker 1: Okay, so is that part of, you know, what attracted Salvation Army to you? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. It's, it's really interesting. My supervisor said to me after a few years of working, you know, shared with me that he just threw my name out wherever he went in the City of Milwaukee [Wisconsin], you know, dinners or lunches or business meetings and that's how he got, you know, feedback about me. My reputation, stellar, people said great things about me and so they wanted me to part of The Salvation Army team, yeah. Story_ID: 614433 Speaker 1: So what was your, what were your responsibilities? Now you helped, you cover the Upper Peninsula of Michigan as well as Wisconsin (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, so when I was hired with The Salvation Army [The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin] in the role as community relations director, my emphasis and focus was on Milwaukee County [Wisconsin], media relations, community relations, government relations, all, all things under PR [public relations], that was my role for Milwaukee County. However, I would assist development directors and other leadership members of The Salvation Army in Wisconsin and Upper Michigan [The Salvation Army of Wisconsin and Upper Michigan, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin] with all of those areas that they might need assistance with that I just mentioned: government affairs, PR, media relations. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, so what, so you promote the, or you write about, from the public of the program of The Salvation Army basically? Speaker 2: Absolutely. That's, that was my main role to write news releases, to focus and, to focus on The Salvation Army programs and services, to let the community know, this is what you, when you make a donation to The Salvation Army, this is what your donation does. And so I set about creating a plan where three to four times a month I would send out news releases on what we were doing, not just at Christmastime when that's our Red Kettle Campaign season, from November through January-- Speaker 1: Yeah, most people see The Salvation Army (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, they see us ringing bells-- Speaker 1: --just ringing the bell with the kettle. Speaker 2: Right, so they know but then what, what happens in February? So people need to know The Salvation Army, 365 days a year, twenty-four hours a day, we are somewhere in Milwaukee County doing something for some family in need. And so, I was able to raise the bar in our media relations and create just wonderful relationships with the media and continue to build those relationships with our government and our public figures. Speaker 1: Okay, now Salvation Army has an old history, goes all the way back to the 19th century, right? Speaker 2: Eighteen hundreds [1800s]. Speaker 1: Eighteen, yeah, well that's 19th century, the 1800s in England, there you go. Speaker 2: Yes, that's our international headquarters, we're located in London [England], that's where we started. Speaker 1: And George Bernard Shaw even wrote a book, 'Major Barbara,' about a Salvation Army major. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, I mean, it's been a-- Speaker 2: Well, and William Booth was the founder, or is the founder, of The Salvation Army, yeah. Used to go into the taverns in the lower part of, I want to say, lower East End of London and helped people and ministered to people and collect money. I mean, he, he had this, it was a ministry. I think what people don't know about The Salvation Army, it's a church, as well as a social service organization but it was his belief in God that drove him into helping people and it became The Salvation Army as we know it today. Speaker 1: All right, so do, as a, when you were hired by The Salvation Army, did they vet you in terms of your church membership and that sort of thing to see if you were, you know, to see how strong your Christian roots were or, or-- Speaker 2: You know, it's really interesting because I am a Christian and I do believe in God and I am a, I am totally a woman of God. I believe in prayer, I pray all day long, walking and talking and all that but I had to do a little homework because like most people at that time, I knew The Salvation Army to be there when there's a disaster or a fire and at Red Kettle season. So I did do some research and I did read their mission and it was perfect for me, it was just perfect. We, we meet, basically, we meet human need in Jesus' name without discrimination. It's just perfect. And so during my interview, the then Milwaukee County commander, Deb Shelgren [ph.], she slid the mission statement across the table to me and asked me to read it and asked me, is this something you could support. I actually thought it was a trick question 'cause I thought, who would apply for a job and not read the mission statement of the organization or the business that they're applying for a job for. I guess some people must do that. And so, I absolutely told her, I, I can definitely do this, I can definitely support the mission of The Salvation Army. Story_ID: 614434 Speaker 1: What are, or what were and what are some of the programs in the black community which we're more concerned about today that The Salvation Army, you know, propagates? Speaker 2: Well, The Salvation Army's programs and services are tailored for the community that they are located in and in Milwaukee County [Wisconsin], we have an emergency lodge which is located on 7th [Street] and Walnut [Street] so that's where it's a twenty-four hour, seven day a week emergency lodge. Men, women, children, families can stay in the lodge that are homeless. We have four community worship and community centers in Milwaukee County and we have a distribution center where we operate several of our programs out of our toy shop. We operate there. Our Feed the Kids summer meals program, our Coats for Kids program and partnership with FOX 6 [WITI-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Our Backpack Back to School program [Back to School Backpack Distribution Program] that we operate in a partnership with WISN 12 [WISN-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], their class act program. So we have, we have several organizations and, that we work with in the City of Milwaukee [Wisconsin] as partners and media organizations. CBS 58 [WDJT-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], they are a partner for us with our toy shop, as well as, TMJ 4 [WTMJ-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and Kapco [Kapco Metal Stamping] for our Kids2Kids program and we've built, you know, in my role as community relations director, building on relationships with the chambers in the area. In Wauwatosa [Wisconsin], we created a partnership for Tosa for Tots and that impacts our toy program as well. So my job is, I know I raise the bar on the relationships that we have here in Milwaukee County. Getting the elected officials and our public figures to come in and tour and remind them of the work that we do, being present when they, when the mayor gives his state of the city address, I think it's really critical for the mayor to know that The Salvation Army is here to support him in any way that we can to make life better for the families here in Milwaukee. You know, poverty will be with us all the time. The Bible tells us the poor is always with us but it doesn't have to look the way that it looks. And so, we're really committed to building families and making families stronger. Speaker 1: Okay, now in, now I want to skip over and, I think, but in 2010, there was the Haitian, the crisis in Haiti with the-- Speaker 2: Right, the earthquake in-- Speaker 1: The earthquake, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. And so we did a Million Meals for Haiti event here in Milwaukee that, was hosted by The Salvation Army. We put the word out and we, we did a million meals in a weekend and we sent those over to Haiti. The Salvation Army has a strong presence in Haiti 'til this day, before the earthquake, during the earthquake and still now. I think what people need to understand, because the media moves away from an event, that event is still happening and the people still need help. And so organizations like The Salvation Army, we're there until the very end. Speaker 1: Okay, so Haiti is, has had so many disasters. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Earthquakes, hurricanes-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and other things over the years. Does The Salvation Army maintain like a permanent kind of a-- Speaker 2: We do. We have a permanent presence in Haiti. Speaker 1: Yeah, and where else around the world is The Salvation Army? Speaker 2: Africa, South America, we are in 130 countries. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a worldwide organization (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is a worldwide organization. Salvation Army is international. Story_ID: 614435 Speaker 1: What have been, what, I guess, have been the most challenging aspects of working for The Salvation Army [The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: I think the most challenging aspect working here at The Salvation Army is that as much as people learn about us and know about us, there's still a lot of people that donate to us, they love us, they love us, but they don't really know what we do. So, because we do so much and I think a lot of that has to do with the people on the frontline, they're so busy, there are more people on the frontline, busy, helping families and individuals than there are people like me telling the story because eighty-seven cents of every dollar that's donated to The Salvation Army goes to a program or service. So, there are not a lot of PR [public relations] directors. We don't have a ten person PR team or community relations team that can, where we can just crank out information constantly or a huge, you know, half a million, million dollar budget for marketing where we can constantly keep that name going. So, I think that that's the most challenging piece, how we can do, what we need to do for people to raise the bar for them to empower them to have better lives but having the resources to tell the story like, you're a mean, you know, communications machine, that's the challenge for us. Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, Salvation Army not only raises money with the kettles but they have to, they have significant donors, right, for them? Speaker 2: We do. We have significant donors. We have, you know, people that, generational donors. We've served people from, you know, the 1800s through the wars and people donate to us. They're in, we're in their wills, you know, so there's planned giving that's available and then, and then there is fundraisers that we have throughout the year. Speaker 1: Now is there a local Salvation Army board of directors here in the Milwaukee [Wisconsin] area and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We do, we do. We have an advisory board. Speaker 1: Are we, is the African American community well represented? Speaker 2: It's, it's become more diverse in my ten years. Since I've been with The Salvation Army, the board has become diverse. It's still heavy white male, but there are people of color and women on the advisory board and young professionals, millennials on the board. So, The Salvation Army understands how important it is to be connected to communities of color and have people of means to be part of helping us drive this machine, helping us help people, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 614436 Speaker 1: Tell us about your experiences with your grandmother. We were talking about resale shopping-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --off camera. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: You said she went to a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The treasure hunts. Speaker 1: Yeah, the treasure hunts with your grandmother-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and the influence of both your grandmothers on you in terms of-- Speaker 2: Right. Well one of my grandmothers, my father's mother, Lucille Cooper [Lucille Thomas], very religious woman and I would always get such a kick out of her, cards that she would send to me because they would start off, "My dearest Faithe [HistoryMaker Faithe A. Thomas-Colas], I hope this card or letter finds you doing well," and the entire card or however many pages were in the letter, were full of scripture and, you know, front and back, tiny writing. And so, I learned from that grandmother the importance of reading the Bible and being focused and having God in your life. My other grandmother, Lucille Berrien, I learned, I learned some valuable things about how to remember people in need early on. We would go see the sick and shut in. There was always someone older, an older person that couldn't get to church or needed a visit or we were going to the grocery store and so we were going to pick up something for Ms. Mary [ph.], too. So I learned that lesson. Grandma taught me how to collect tea, how to collect tea sets, the value in valuable things and older things. She taught me how to sew and I went on many treasure hunts with her, in and out of rummage sales, estate sales, you know, every Salvation Army [The Salvation Army], Goodwill [Goodwill Industries International, Inc.] store, St. Vincent de Paul [Society of St. Vincent de Paul], she taught me the value in taking my time, being patient and you can find things where nobody else would look. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to call my grandma my best friend. We did everything together. Wake me up early Saturday morning, come and pick me up before everybody, except my dad [Floyd Thomas, Sr.], got out of the house, and put my hair in one ponytail and off we'd go for all day, treasure hunting. Speaker 1: Okay. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a great experience. Story_ID: 614437 Speaker 1: Yeah, and in ten years with Salvation Army [The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin] now, you started in 2007. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now what's been your matriculation 'cause you're now in a position that the person that hired you is, I think, right, is that true? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell us what happened that you were promoted. Speaker 2: So, so I am, about, about two years ago, maybe a year and a half, two years ago, an opening came up for an assistant divisional director of development and my supervisor encouraged me to put my name in the hat and so I did and went through a series of interviews and up against some really outstanding candidates but at the end I won out for that position. And so, what that position is, it's kind of, I see myself, Scottie, like a Scottie Pippen to a Michael Jordan, Salvation Army, of course, being Michael Jordan, our major gifts department, being the Michael Jordan. And so I see myself as the assist, the person that tells everyone where everything is, who you need to talk to, what steps needs to happen, where you need to go to make that basket and so that's my role now. I also work with some dynamic women. I work with some really dynamic women. Our special events director [Marcy Stutzman], our media relations director [Amy Burke], our grant writer and a volunteer director [Nancy Zompolas], all of these individuals report to me now. So, I kind of manage all of those things. Speaker 1: Okay, so do you like that better than what you were doing before or-- Speaker 2: I'm still getting used to it. It's a lot of work but it's, everything that we do here, no matter what your role is at The Salvation Army, is gratifying, I think, because at the end of the day, you know that you've crossed the T and you dotted the I because you're helping a man, a woman, a child, a family get on their feet and, and live a better life. Story_ID: 614438 Speaker 1: So what are your future plans? Are you going to, you're still young and you're, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what they tell me (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, I'd like to retire from The Salvation Army [The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin]. I love the work here. I, you know, I've been, I've been all over the country, you know, for The Salvation Army. I've been the national spokesperson for the Joplin [Missouri] disaster for The Salvation Army as a PR [public relations] person. I'm talking about the disasters there and here's something that I've learned, you know, about race. In the middle of the craziness and the madness, in the middle of a real disaster, when you have nothing, people don't see the color of your skin, they're just happy that you are there to hold their hand, to give them a hug, to pray with them, to provide a meal, to give them, you know, information and resources and I know that I've taken my twenty years of working in communications and those skills just transition so well in the middle of a disaster when people are looking to you for information. And so I'm, I'd like to think that I can stay here. I don't know what God has planned for me but Faithe [HistoryMaker Faithe A. Thomas-Colas] plans on staying at The Salvation Army and retiring and continuing to make people's lives better in the way that God has blessed me with my communication skills and my people relationship skills. Speaker 1: Had you ever thought about starting, getting back in the newspaper business or starting a paper? Speaker 2: No, I have not (laughter). You know, my husband left a really great legacy in Brain, Brawn and Body and so as now the president of Brain, Brawn and Body, the website, I will be continuing on that, that legacy that Eric [Eric Von] started and that's an information piece. I think that's probably as close as I will get to a newspaper, again, because newspapers have changed so much. You know, everything's on the website. I was just talking to my daughter [Paige Colas] the other day and I was saying, I remember when I used to say to her, "How come you don't read my newspaper [Milwaukee Courier]?" and she'd say, as soon as you get online, mom, I will, you know, so everything's that way. Everything has gone online, it's website, social media. So I see myself in this dual way with these dual roles, The Salvation Army helping people, Brain, Brawn and Body helping people with information, hoping to create a nonprofit for Brain, Brawn and Body as well and continually, continue to support the W--UWM [University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], Eric Von Broadcast Fellowship. So they created a fellowship after my husband and what I love about it is it will provide a graduating college student of color, African American, male or female, to work in public radio and be paid for a year or so, something that's really kind of unheard of. The percentage of African Americans in broadcast is dismal, it's ridiculous, it's sad, after we've, you know, we've been in this field for so long-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I would guess and correct me if I'm wrong, if you have the information but, I would guess that the percentage is much lower than it was in the 1970s. Speaker 2: Oh, I believe it's 21 percent, you know. Of all the journalists in this country, African Americans make up 21 percent, that's insane. Speaker 1: Well if you think about it like that, it might not be so bad but, I mean, but 21 percent of all the journalists, that's bad, that's a higher percentage than we are in the population, you know, but, but-- Speaker 2: And you know what, before we leave, I'm going to share some of that with you, so maybe in your dialogue, in the editing of it or something, there's something that you can make note of. Speaker 1: You mean, it's 20 percent lower than it was then (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly. Speaker 1: That's what you mean. Speaker 2: That's exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: It now makes more sense. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so-- Speaker 1: I think we've lost since then, we've lost-- Speaker 2: We've lost a great deal, yeah. Speaker 1: Even the local stations have gone out of existence in many markets and those that remain are the ones that deal with white people, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, and not just in black radio but I just mean in general with, with media, the presence of African Americans in, in radio, it's less than 20 percent, yeah. Story_ID: 614439 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Hm, let me start it off by saying, last summer here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], there was a civil disturbance. I live six blocks from where that civil disturbance took place. I live in Sherman Park [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Where people would call a riot? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, they called it a riot-- Speaker 1: It was a rebellion or-- Speaker 2: It was, it was a disturbance. It was not a riot. We've all seen what riots look like, that was not a riot. It was definitely out of control behavior and-- Speaker 1: So what happened? What, was the cause of it? Speaker 2: So, there is, during that time last summer in the Sherman Park neighborhood, an officer, a Milwaukee police department officer [Dominique Heaggan Brown] killed a civilian [Sylville Smith]. And so, there's been an ongoing investigation and, of course-- Speaker 1: Now this is a black man? Speaker 2: This was a black man that, it was a black officer that killed another black man and it was the death of that young man that sparked ongoing days of just grief and frustration with the process and I'm not really sure, I, you know, what started all of that, that day but this family and this, and people around in the neighborhood and, and let me just be very clear. There are some, there are people that are opportunist for people's misfortune, for people's sadness, for people being, you know, frustrated and angry that just add fuel to the fire and I believe that that's what happened that day, too. I believe there was a mixture of this family being very upset and just being, and people that they know and the community and the neighborhood and there's just a lot of things that are going on that took place and there was a fire and there was a bomb and there were fires, several fires that were set in the neighborhood. There were some negative interactions with the customers, the people that live in the, in the neighborhood with some of the businesses, mainly the gas station that was located on Burleigh [Street] and Sherman [Boulevard], you know, but here, here again, if people feel like that business was theirs, even if it wasn't literally theirs, if they felt like they were vested somehow in the businesses surround--you wouldn't have that kind of behavior, that's one thing. People would say, no, that family there, they're good to us. Those people there, they're polite to us. No, man, this guy, he took care of my mom. I remember my mom came in, she didn't have enough money, he took care of her, let us come back and pay. So there's that and, and then there's the, there's a population of our people who, who have experienced crack [crack cocaine]. These are crack babies in many cases and not necessarily this family that I'm talking about but we're looking at this really bad behavior across Milwaukee and other urban areas that nobody wants to address. Let's not forget, crack was brought into the urban areas and these individuals, now they're young people. Their parents gave birth to them and they were crack babies and nobody took care of these folks. Nobody took care of these individuals and these families. Now they're all grown up, they have, there's no decorum. There's no moral compass, if you will. The day that wearing your pants down on your buttocks and showing your underwear is normal. I mean, what kind of behavior and mindset goes with those kinds of activities, you know? And so, yeah, it's, it's not just tight jeans. Back in the day for us it was tight jeans and long hair, you know, and marijuana smoking but there's, there's a population of people that are in great need of help, health help, mental help, drug addiction help and every family in some way is impacted by that. And so I think you have all these dynamics and then you add into economics, poverty, nutrition, lack of education and no hope, that is a perfect storm, that is a perfect disaster and Milwaukee saw the beginning of that disaster last summer in Sherman Park. Story_ID: 614440 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes? Speaker 2: Some of my hopes is that the leadership will be real, that they'll be realistic about calling a thing a thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We have this conversation in the city now about opium and heroin and that's because it impacts more people that don't look like us. I don't recall that same conversation when cocaine and crack cocaine hit communities of color's neighborhood. I just don't. Speaker 1: I think it hit up here like it did in Chicago [Illinois] in the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: In the early '90s [1990s], you know, and there is just this unfair, it's obvious, there's just this unfair way of going about resolving issues that impact white communities different than they impact black communities and those conversations are different and the strategies for dealing with them are different. I understand now why my mother [Helen McCray] and my [maternal] grandmother [Lucille Berrien] don't have a filter when they are talking because they've seen it all and they're frustrated and you can, you can't have a conversation about really resolving issues if everybody's gotta be, have polite conversation about it. This is, we're not talking about polite issues, we are not talking about polite issues. People are frustrated and when they're frustrated, you know, they're tired and when they're tired, they have tantrums, that's what children do. Just imagine now these children are adults, they have mental health issues and so my hope is that our leadership will be realistic, that they'll take one of these things and they'll really impact it and make a difference, that they'll have some real conversation about it, that it just won't be politics as usual. These are people, these are real people that we're dealing with and what happened in Sherman Park [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] can be, can happen in downtown Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. It can happen in Wauwatosa [Wisconsin]. It can happen in your neighborhood and you think it can't, it can. You know, when it rains it doesn't just rain on one side of town without eventually coming to the other side of town, that's what happens. The sun shines, it doesn't just shine on one area; it shines on the entire city. And so I think that's what we have to think about when we're really talking about resolving problems. I can't tell you how many times my husband [Eric Von] and I were awakened in the middle of the night by somebody screaming for help, by somebody needing help, by just bad behavior. You know, people just, they, people just are hopeless and the only way that they're going to get some hope is our leaders need to be very realistic. I think our leaders have to stop thinking about where they are as just a job, it's not. You made a commitment to serve. You made a commitment to help people. Story_ID: 614441 Speaker 1: Now you were, worked for Salvation Army [The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin] during the administration of our first black president. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you, what were, what are some of your thoughts about his, I mean how a president can impact community issues, you work for Salvation Army and you're up close to a lot of these issues as you were with the paper [Milwaukee Courier]. So what did you, what are some of your thoughts? Speaker 2: Well first of all, I couldn't, I was so proud that Barack Obama became the president of the United States. I think it scared mainstream white America, old mainstream white America, white male mainstream, white America. I think it scared them. I think that he provided a great deal of hope. I think as a black American and I often time heard this, people were thinking that he was just going to be a president for black people and, and that just showed me how much people don't understand what a president of the United States is supposed to do. He's supposed to, or she's supposed to be there to move us all forward, not just black people or just white people or just white males. I think that the president, I think that President Obama did a magnificent job. I was very disappointed with the Republican elected officials who spent all of their time just getting in his way and dividing this country. They, they did, they were really focused as far as I was concerned on dividing this country more and not serving the people that elected them, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, does he have a legacy of any, I mean, any positive changes towards some of the conditions we were talking about before? Speaker 2: I do. I think that President Obama's legacy was definitely committed to people, all people: women, LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender] individuals. I think he spoke as well as he could have spoken about black male deaths and police relationships, community relations across the country, not just here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] but just across the country. That's historically been typically a strained relationship, communities of color, black, black communities and police departments. I think that he addressed things head on. I think he was very transparent. I think that's his legacy. He was transparent and he really cared about the people of this country. He reminded me of why people should get into politics, should become public servants, to serve the people, to help people, to make it better for everybody. I think that people that run for office nowadays, I real--I think they're selfish. I think they have no idea, I think that they don't believe that it's a service job. I think that they need to pay their bills, too and that's why they're running for office, yeah. I, I, it would be, I think Barack was just refreshing in that way for me, someone that really ran on service committed to helping people. He and Michelle [Michelle Obama], that first family were outstanding. Story_ID: 614442 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: Not a thing. Everything that I did, good and bad, right or wrong, has brought me to this point where I am in my life right now, content. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Likewise, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I don't know what that would be. To the community, I, I, you know, I guess I never really have given that much thought but I'm most proud of the work that I've done. If there's any one thing, it is connecting people. The ability to connect people across the aisle, if you will, gender, race, the ability to be transparent and honest, the ability to serve, I think it is noble to serve and that's really what I've wanted to do all my life and I really believe that I've done that in my time at the newspaper [Milwaukee Courier], serving people with information, providing information that's critical to them, to have a better life and at The Salvation Army [The Salvation Army of Greater Milwaukee, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin], serving people and reminding people of an organization that is committed to service. Story_ID: 614443 Speaker 1: Now tell us something about your family, now. I know your husband of ten years just passed away. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You have a daughter, right, and-- Speaker 2: Yes, so Eric [Eric Von] and I had, have a blended family. Both of our daughters are thirty-two. Erica [Erica Boardley] lives in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] where Eric was born and raised with our grandchildren, Domonic [Domonic Patten] and Erielle [Erielle Taylor] and my daughter [Paige Colas] lives in California and she is now, has a career in the movies. She was eight years, she's a graduate of University of the Arts in Philadelphia [The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. She had a bachelor's degree in, in dance performance. She spent two years as a Philadelphia Eagles cheerleader her junior and senior year in college and then from there she went to Las Vegas [Nevada] and she worked there for eight years, nonstop in the dance industry, traveled all over the country and the world. Dance, who knew that dance could take her but that was something that she had dreamed of since she was five years old, of having a career in dance and she was able to do that. She was so good that when she landed in Vegas, whenever she went for an audition, she was told, oh, so you're the new black girl in town that everyone's talking about because black professional dancers were rare, you know, in Vegas and so she worked there eight years and she's been in California for two years and she's done some movies and she's done some acting and now this is her career. So, we were so happy about both of our daughters. Erica's a professional and works for GM [General Motors Company] and, a car dealership that she's done since she graduated from high school. So they've both made their way in their own lane in their own industry and we couldn't be more proud of both of them. Story_ID: 614444 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Oh, geez, not that I can think of (laughter), not that I can think of. Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a wonderful mother, a wonderful wife and a great member of this community. I love Milwaukee [Wisconsin], this is my home, I grew up here. I want to be remembered as someone who did her share in trying to make it a better place for people of color, for black families and for this city in general, that's how I want to be remembered, that, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, well thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you...