 Story_ID: 633979 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Ollie, O-L-L-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R [HistoryMaker Ollie Taylor]. Speaker 1: And what is your maiden name? Speaker 2: Thompson. Speaker 1: Thompson (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 14, 1937. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: Tallahassee, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, ma'am, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm a retired teacher. Speaker 1: And you taught for Chicago Public Schools right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: August the 14th--August the 13th (laughter) 19--2012. Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At our--we are in Bryan-College Station. Speaker 1: Texas right? Speaker 2: Texas. Story_ID: 633980 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Fish. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yeah, black. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: (Pause) St. Lucia, that's where I would like to go. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, St. Lucia (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--okay, St. Lucia. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Scoot the boot. Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) all right. Speaker 2: That mean hurry up. Story_ID: 633981 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Major Thompson, Sr.] side, but separately so we get 'em, you know, we don't get 'em mixed up. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: Maryann Davis, that's her maiden name and then Thompson [Mary Davis Thompson]. Speaker 1: Okay. That's the regular way you spell Mary and Ann and Davis. Speaker 2: Right, Mary and then yeah, Mar- and Ann go together. Speaker 1: Oh, in one name. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So It's a small A for Ann. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So M-A-R-Y-A-N-N. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know what put a capital letter (laughter), Ann, there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. All right, and what was her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth was November 2nd, and I have to look and see for the year. I think she would've been a 108 so we count back. Speaker 1: Is that 1904 [sic. 1914]? Speaker 2: I--yeah, I think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's the--November 2nd. Speaker 1: Okay, 1904. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And where was your mother born? Speaker 2: Tallahassee [Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Tallahassee. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace your mother's people? And what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather, which was my mother's father was a city worker. My grandmother, she stayed at home. Speaker 1: Now what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Samuel Davis [Samuel Davis II]. Speaker 1: What kind of work did he do for the city? Speaker 2: Streets, he worked in, you know, streets. Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandmother, what was her name? Speaker 2: Emma Barnes Davis. Speaker 1: Okay. And she basically was a housewife? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories in your family about like the end of slavery or Reconstruction or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --any of those trial and tribulations in those days, you know. Speaker 2: No. Not that--they didn't talk about it, you know, I never heard of them talking about slavery as, you know, reference to their family or anything like that, no. Speaker 1: No stories about Africa that are passed down or anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I don't remember, you know. Speaker 1: So do you suppose they didn't know or they just didn't wanna talk about it or what? Speaker 2: I really--I don't--I can't say they didn't know but I don't remember them talking about it. Really I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did your parents talk about what race relations were like in Tallahassee when they were growing up? Speaker 2: My parents? Speaker 1: No, yeah, no (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grand-- Speaker 1: Your grandparents. Speaker 2: My grandparents? Speaker 1: I'm sorry your grandparents, yes. Speaker 2: They talked about it--as far as, you know, us going to school, you know, they wanted us to go to school because that was the only way that we would, you know, but they didn't talk about, you know, they didn't talk about slavery too much. I mean, they didn't talk about--I don't remember them saying it at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Talking about slavery. Speaker 1: Did they talk much history at all at home about, you know, black people building things or doing things or, you know. Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So they would've been born right afterward, almost, either that or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --or pretty close to--if your mother is born in 1904, I imagine they were born around 1880. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's just twenty years after the, you know, pretty much-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --after the demise of slavery. Speaker 2: You have to remember too, my grandparents died when I was very young. Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't hear-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --those kinds of stories? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And all--they died all su- sudden- died suddenly. All heart attacks, both. Story_ID: 633982 Speaker 1: Did they share anything with you? Stories or songs or ghost stories or anything? Speaker 2: My grandfather [Samuel Davis II] used to say all the time when he would get all us together, "Ants don't bite during the summer." And so we figured it out af- my cousins and I--we figured it out that no, they don't bite in the summer they bite you as an individual. So that was one of the things that I, you know, that really stood out. And sometimes my cousin and I we would laugh about it now, you know. But that's my, you know, that's my mother's family. Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you mother [Mary Davis Thompson] say about growing up in Tallahassee [Florida]? I know you grew up there too but, you know, time changes experiences sometimes, you know, so-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Let's see--she--I don't, you know, they talked about school a lot. The importance of school. That's what I remember. They'd drill that (laughter) you know. The importance of school. And not having babies (laughter), you know, that was, that was the thing. They didn't--drugs was not prevalent at that time, at least we didn't know it. But I'm trying to think. Unh-uh, I don't really remember. Speaker 1: In terms of the education did they--I know the schools are segregated in Tallahassee so, did they talk about who started the schools or who were the major educators in town or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well some of my family taught school, you know, my aunts and uncles. Mr. and Mrs. Robinson, they taught school there. And what happened is they went to college every summer, you know, they started teaching when they were young. I remember this part. They were young, about seventeen or eighteen. But then after that, it was like out of high school, but every year they went to college, you know, during the summer and they taught at the middle school and junior high school that I attended. Speaker 1: So these are your aunts? Speaker 2: My aunts and uncles. Speaker 1: Aunts and uncles, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You have some names for some of them? Speaker 2: Mayola Robinson. Speaker 1: That's--what was the first name? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Mayola, M-A-Y-O-L-A. Speaker 1: M-A-Y-O-L--oh, Mayola Robinson, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Her husband was A.W. Robinson [Augustus Robinson]. Speaker 1: Okay. So they taught at the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The junior high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was that part, part of FAMU too? Part of Florida A and M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was the community. Bond Junior High School [Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Bond. Did you know who that was named after? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. There's some famous Bonds in the South so I just thought-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Horace Mann Bond and some others. So I just thought I'd ask. Story_ID: 633983 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mary Davis Thompson] have a chance to go to college? Speaker 2: No, she went to ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did she do? Speaker 2: She worked at the TB sanatorium [W.T. Edwards Tuberculosis Hospital; Sunland Hospital, Tallahassee, Florida] for--with children and worked in the laundry area. Speaker 1: Okay. And worked in-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now TB, that's tuberculosis we're talking about right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: What they used to call consumption back in the old days. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, so she worked in the sanatorium? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's what it was called (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, yeah. All right. Is there a name of the--for the sanatorium? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: I don't remember, gee whiz. Speaker 1: Now did your mother have--did she wanna go to college, or did she have any aspirations or talents that, you know, went beyond her work? Speaker 2: You know, I think--sitting around listening to her and her cousins and her aunts, they all wanted to go to school. They all, you know, they all wanted to go to school. But they were not, you know, able to go. Either because they got married at a very young age. 'Cause at that time, you know, they got married very young. But I think all of 'em wanted to go to school. And that's why they just, you know, pushed us, you know. And although I didn't go to school until after I was married. But they did--they all wanted--'cause I think--just talking to my cousin, and her mother was my mother's aunt, but she was about the same age, something like that. And this was a thing that all of 'em wanted to do because they felt that it would be a way out of what--help--they wouldn't have to be in the same predic- they didn't want us to be in the same predicament that they were. Story_ID: 633984 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mary Davis Thompson] grow up in the same house and the same neighborhood as your grandparents [Emma Barnes Davis and Samuel Davis II], you know, lived in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my grandpa- my grandparents lived at what you would call in the country. Which is now the city--they lived in the country. Speaker 1: Like kind of on the outskirts of Tallahassee [Florida]? Speaker 2: Yeah, three miles outside of Tallahassee (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Now it's part of the town, you know. Speaker 1: So she--did your mother grew up out there right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And then when she--did she live like in the city or the town herself? Speaker 2: Then we--when she got married then we moved to the town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Bond subdivision [Bond-South City, Florida] where the school was. Speaker 1: Okay. Bond subdivision, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hm, right down from Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, all right. So--okay your mother went to the ninth grade, so she, so she started high school and then, you know. Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: Did she have children or something before she got out or-- Speaker 2: Let me see (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or getting married or--? Speaker 2: Let me see, how long was she married before, I don't remember. Story_ID: 633985 Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side, and I'll bring your mother [Mary Davis Thompson] up again later. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Major Thompson [Major Thompson, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. No middle name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind that 'cause we often--I've often heard when I was in school-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --a lot of black kids they have the names of titles, you know, like Major or there's a kid named Lawyer, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Meaning stuff like that so, is there a story behind his name that his mother him or what? Speaker 2: I really don't know because my youngest brother name's is Major [Major Thompson, Jr.] alto, also, my (laughter)-- Speaker 1: I'm talking about the antiquity of it, the origin of it. Speaker 2: I know--I really don't know, I really don't. Speaker 1: Is there some Major they idolized or something that--or did something nice in the family or-? Speaker 2: No, I--I never thought about to even ask to be truthful, you know, 'cause there was several kids named Major--I don't know if it was because--I don't know. Speaker 1: It's interesting since it's a southern thing and you--the black folks bring up north with them to, but the fella that had the song in Atlanta [Georgia] couple years ago, 'Pants on the Ground.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: His name was General Larry [Larry Platt] somebody, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: His name was General so, I just, you know. Speaker 2: I know my brother his name was--named him Douglas [Douglas Thompson] but he was born during the time, General Mac- what was his--Doug McArthur [Douglas MacArthur]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So it seemed like everybody was naming their kids born that year, Doug--I mean Douglas, that's the only thing that I--you know. Speaker 1: So Major Thompson, now he would've been born--now what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His was March 5th. Speaker 1: And--? Speaker 2: And I really don't know, but I just put it like he was about four or five years older than my mother. Speaker 1: Yeah, that'd put him around 1899 [sic. 1911]. Speaker 2: Or something like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Something like that, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: We'll just put 1899, circa 1899. Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: And was he born in Tallahassee [Florida] to? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Can trace them, can you trace them any further back than your grandparents or? Speaker 2: No, nothing but my grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you--any stories about what they were doing back in-- Speaker 2: Well, my grandma [Fannie Holloman Thompson] was a--she stayed at home--they lived in the town and my grandfather, he had a lot of property. He had property, he was the property owner that's what I remembered. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Hinton [Hinton Thompson]. Speaker 1: Hinton. Okay. Speaker 2: H-E-N-T-O-N [sic.], I think it is. Speaker 1: H-E-N. Okay. Speaker 2: Or either H-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay--well, okay, well, either way, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And Thompson right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Hinton Thompson. And he owned a lot of property huh? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now was the property developed or farmland or what was it? Speaker 2: It was in--he bought this property in Bond subdivision [Bond-South City, Florida]. It was vacant and, you know, he built homes on it, you know, several homes. Story_ID: 633986 Speaker 1: Can you tell us anything about Bond subdivision [Bond-South City, Florida]? What is that really? Is that, was that a project of the city or the federal government or was it some private developer named Bond started it or--? Speaker 2: I--you know what? I really don't know. The thing that I do know about Bond subdivision--about Bond. You know, the school, the school was in the subdivision, that it was a close knit, you know, the kids, we were, you know, all of us was very close and like of Bond Junior High School [Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida]. We have a very good memory of Bond 'cause when we go back to our class reunions, the ones that went to Bond--well, the two high school, it was FAMU High [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida] and Lincoln [Lincoln High School, Tallahassee, Florida], but we have our reunions together, so we went to--the ones--we went to Bond, but some went to Lincoln and then some went FAMU High. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I really don't know what-- Speaker 1: So you don't know if Bond was black or white or--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I might have to find out. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so--but Bond was a tight community? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a very close community. Story_ID: 633987 Speaker 1: So your [paternal] grandfather, Hinton Thompson, he owned a lot of property and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you were saying he was developing this--homes on his property? Speaker 2: Yeah, he b- he had some homes built, I do remember that part (laughter). Speaker 1: That's important. He had homes built and--so he was--what would you say--would you say fairly well to do man, important man in Tallahassee [Florida], in the black community anyway. Speaker 2: I, you know, I think so, I--yeah. I think so, he was--yeah, but, you know, I never really thought about it. Speaker 1: Well, that's a--it's something, it's significant I would think in a, in a time when, you know, he probably was doing some of this work in the 1930s (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thirties [1930s]. Speaker 1: --during the Depression [Great Depression]. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in the '30s [1930s] or the '20s [1920s]. Speaker 1: People didn't have money to build, you know, and a lot of black people were sharecropping and, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: For a man to be able to not only own his own place-- Speaker 2: 'Cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) but to build property is important. Speaker 2: I never remember- I never remembered him living it--like my grandparents lived--you know, my [maternal] Grandpa Sam [Samuel Davis II] and Grandma Emma [Emma Barnes Davis]. They lived out in the country, but I never remembered him and grandma Emm- Fannie [Fannie Holloman Thompson] living in the country. They always lived in Bond subdivision [Bond-South City, Florida], you know, and that's where he had some homes. Speaker 1: Well, that's inevitable. Speaker 2: And I'm quite sure he probably ha- you know, came from the farm or whatever have you and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he had like a rural-- Speaker 2: He had to acquire the money, but I've never known him to work, you know. Story_ID: 633988 Speaker 1: I know he died at an early age though--I mean, I know--I was a little girl when he died, 'cause he died of grief. Speaker 2: Of grief? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Now what is the story? Speaker 1: Well, my cousin went to--she lived in Detroit [Michigan]--I mean she went to live, you know how they go north and she went to Detroit. Speaker 2: So this would be one of his grandchildren? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she got pregnant by a white guy and she brought the baby back home. And what he did--he raised, you know, he and my [paternal] grandmother [Fannie Holloman Thompson] they raised the baby until it got a certain age. But then--what my cousin did--that family, the white guy or whatever, they, you know, they took the fam--they took the child and, so, you know, they always say, "Well, Hinton [Hinton Thompson] was never the same after they took the child," that's how I remember that part, that they would say he was never the same after they took the little boy. Speaker 2: So this is unusual in a lot of ways so they had--so she wasn't raped or anything, she had a relationship with a white guy is that the way the story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. I don't know if she was raped or what, you know? Speaker 2: But they felt that they wanted the baby? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And came and got the baby. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: She took it to them, I remember. Speaker 2: Oh, she took the baby to them. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right. That's different than them coming to get it, you know, so she actually stole the baby away and took it to the white people (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. And that's what--I think that's when you say it like that, that's probably, you know, that all of a sudden, she was going back to Detroit and then she didn't bring the baby back so that, you know. Speaker 2: So did she stay with the baby her--too, herself? Speaker 1: No. She came back. Speaker 2: Oh. Now that's--now Detroit to Florida. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Is the same distance now as it was then, except the transportation was slower. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You weren't flying. Speaker 1: Right. I don't know maybe she went on the bus or--but, you know, how you hear them talk about it, and they always say, "I think that's probably what carried Hinton away so, you know, her taking that baby back to Detroit, and leaving it there." Speaker 2: How old was the, was the child? Speaker 1: I don't know. He would sit in the--he would be sitting, you know, sitting in the-- Speaker 2: High chair or-- Speaker 1: No. He would be with my--everywhere my grandfather went. I remembered he would--the little boy would be with him. So I don't know--he must've been about three or four years old. He could've been five. I don't think he was going to school. He was a very--I remember he was a very fair little boy. Speaker 2: That's an unusual story. So your cousin stayed in Tallahassee [Florida]? Speaker 1: She came back. Speaker 2: Yeah, came--okay. After that incident she came back to Tallahassee without, without the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm and nobody, nobody never really knew where she--who, you know, the family was that she gave the child to. She never did let that, you know. They might--I don't know. They said that the people gave her money. Speaker 2: You think the child was raised as white child? Was it that--was the child that fair? Speaker 1: I really don't know. But the child was very fair, very, very fair. Speaker 2: You think that the child could've passed as a white baby? Speaker 1: Could've been. I mean if he had a choice, you know. Speaker 2: Well, they had a choice (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying, they had a choice. Speaker 1: Choice. But this is what happened. Speaker 2: That's an unusual story. Okay, so that's Hinton Thompson. He passed away when you were about how old--how old were you? Speaker 1: He passed away before Grandma Fannie and I know I was in sixth grade when Grandma Fannie died. Speaker 2: So you were about eleven or so? Speaker 1: Um-hm. I was about ten or eleven (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen forty-eight [1948] I guess or something like that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Now what about your grandmother, now what was she like and what's her story? Speaker 1: Grandma Fannie? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She was-- Speaker 2: It's Fannie Thom- well, what was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fannie, Fannie Mae. Speaker 2: And what was her maiden name (unclear)? Fannie-- Speaker 1: Holloman. Speaker 2: Okay. H-O-L-Y-M-A-N? Speaker 1: H-O--is it, H-O-L-L-I-M-A-N [sic.]? Holloman, M-O-N. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, Fannie Mae Holloman. And so--what- what's her story? Speaker 1: She was a housewife. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. And-- Speaker 1: She had a heart attack too. Story_ID: 633989 Speaker 1: How did your dad [Major Thompson, Sr.] grow up, I mean, what was--what did he say about growing up in Tal- Tallahassee [Florida]? What'd he like to do or what, what were his goals and aspirations, and did he reach 'em? That's a big question (laughter), a lot of questions. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: But that's, yeah, but that's, yeah. Speaker 2: My father (laughter) he was, he was a--I thought he was a brilliant man. Everybody always said that he was really brilliant. It was before his time--he did things before his time. Now he worked as an electrician for an ice cream company, you know, where they used to have those refrigerator boxes, and, you know, in the stores. So he repaired those. And he was an interesting guy--my father (laughter) very racial--outspoken, he was very outspoken on race at the time. But it--I can't give you a definite thing. He just always said you don't let, you know, person--rule you, you think about it. Now in my household, my mother [Mary Davis Thompson] taught love. My father taught street and he taught us how to survive, how to live with other people, whatever. But then sometimes he was quite physical with other people. So that's--he was an interesting guy, my father. Story_ID: 633990 Speaker 1: Now was your father [Major Thompson, Sr.] a member of any black organizations, like the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] or he sounds like he might have been a Garveyite (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, he was, he was not a member of--I don't remember him being a member of--in the organization. But he was an activist, okay. When the people--when the bus--when they--the bus of--what's the names? Speaker 1: Boycott. Speaker 2: Yeah, in Tallahassee [Florida]. He was right there too, you know, to help transport people. And at that time he had left the ice cream company, and he was working at the university [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] at the heating plant. So, you know, everybody was pretty, you know, they were taken--he had to take off. And they took divided up shifts, you know, if he took--if he worked at night then after that--what happened during the day he would trans- help transport people especially in the morning for the people that was going to work. So I don't know if he belonged to an organization or not. Speaker 1: Well, that was one he belonged to right? Speaker 2: But it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Boycott organization. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But it was, you know, the group that came--it was a group that was formed in the church. Speaker 1: Yep. That's an organization. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And was there a name for the group? Speaker 2: Unh-uh 'cause at that time it was Mount Zion Primitive Baptist Chruch [Greater Mount Zion Primitive Baptist Church, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: Now what is a Primitive Baptist church? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I thought, you know, some, you know. Speaker 2: Primitive Baptist, I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. It's all kinds of Baptist. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: Some are Missionary Baptist and some are, you know, are different kinds of Baptist. They have-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Progressive Baptists, you got like-- Speaker 2: Boy, this is gonna make me look up stuff. Speaker 1: Primitive Baptist, you know, there's a reason why these things are named that, so I just-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) wanted to ask. But he was a member--is this church that you grew up in too or--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 633991 Speaker 1: But you, you were saying before that, he [Taylor's father, Major Thompson, Sr.]--I--he would actually get into altercations with other people, and by these other people we're not talking Indians [Native American] or Chinese, we're talking about white people right? So-- Speaker 2: Well, he voiced his opinion. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 2: He was very opinionated. But I never remembered him going to jail about it. Speaker 1: Is there a story about him getting into an altercation with somebody? Speaker 2: 'Cause see, you know, he discussed race. That's why I guess--I don't--and he would get, you know, I never remembered him saying fight but by the time he cursed you out and all this, you would--felt like--that maybe you had been fought with, you know, it was-- Speaker 1: Well he didn't take any of the racist-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: He didn't take any of that. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. So is there a story you can tell us about a time when somebody slighted him and he spoke up? Speaker 2: Well, this was not, this was, you know, when the slavery end- like around here June 15th, I think it's when got the word. Speaker 1: Yeah, they call it Juneteenth in Texas. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And so in Tallahassee [Florida] was May 20th and then, he would, he would keep us home, he would keep us home 'cause, you know, all the family came from all over, and this is when they gathered, okay. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, now this would be a story-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --about slavery. In a lot of ways It'd be a reflection or acknowledgment of the end of something awful, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So he actually celebrated this? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the family--our--the family came from all over whatever they--you know, lived--especially around in Florida--whatever. They came and we would have, you know, it would be a big picnic, and we had that Kool-Aid from the barrel, and what kind of cake was that? Pound cake. But I remembered that part and then--but when we went to school [Bond Junior High School; Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida], the principal would--she would, she would--Ms. Spencer [E. Lilyan Spencer] would have everybody that stayed home wrote up on the door, you know, on the hall, and she would get your butt, give you a lick. And my father went and talked to her and told her to never put her hand--I never will forget--to put her hands us about be- staying home. He kept us home so we can go and celebrate. Now that part I remember. Speaker 1: Did she understand that or did--? Speaker 2: Because she said it's not a holiday. I think you're supposed to celebrate July 4th, you know, so-- Speaker 1: Now this is a black teacher right in a-- Speaker 2: Principal. Speaker 1: --segregated--yeah, black pri- principal in a segregated school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All-black school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, but she didn't--the school system didn't celebrate May 20th I guess. Speaker 2: Right. The school system didn't celebrate it, you know, just like here in Texas they don't celebrate black history. My daughter is running down to her children's school right now. Every--when it comes to black history, what are you gonna do, you know. Speaker 1: Black History Month you mean? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This date. But this was a black principal at Bond Junior High School [Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida] 'cause all the parents kept they--most of the parents kept their kids home and, you know, they celebrated. And my father went to the school and told her never to put her hands on us again about--he kept us home. We didn't stay home, you know, playing hooky or anything like that. Story_ID: 633992 Speaker 1: Now did your dad [Major Thompson, Sr.] finish school himself or--? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He only went to about sixth or seventh grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was really, you know, how it was--long time ago people were gifted, they was smart. Speaker 1: Right, yeah--so he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And sometimes you didn't go, you know. Speaker 1: Did he work with his-- Speaker 2: He was a self made person, huh? Speaker 1: Yeah, did, did he work with his father [Hinton Thompson] on the development of those houses or anything? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh, unh-uh. Speaker 1: He didn't? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh. Speaker 1: What--did they have--way you're sha- shaking your head, they may not of had a close relationship, is that-- Speaker 2: No, they didn't. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. What happened? Was that-- Speaker 2: I don't remember, I don't, you know, I don't know what happened. I was close--not what you would say--'cause I was a lil' girl. I mean, you know, I had more dealings interactions with my Grandma Fannie [Fannie Holloman Thompson] than I did with Grandpa Hinton. 'Cause they always said that he was really smart also, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he would if he had all that property. Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean (unclear) so--but your father and your grandfather had some kind of a falling out or something? Speaker 2: I don't know. 'Cause my father was headstrong. And I guess he didn't do the--what--he was the youngest. I remember that part, and he didn't do what was--things that family expected him to do so-- Speaker 1: Now did your father come from a big--was there--did he have a lot of brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Let me see. Alec, Solomon, Alice, Effie [Effie Thompson Rogers]-- Speaker 1: You can name 'em out loud if you want to. Speaker 2: Oh! Speaker 1: 'Cause this is for your family on tape, so-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay, it was Alec [Alexander Thompson], Luke [Luke Thompson], Alice [Alice Thompson], Stella [Stella Thompson Collins]. Did I say Solomon [Solomon Thompson], and my father he was the youngest [sic.]. So it was--I remember six of them, I think. Speaker 1: Six, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. And I didn't ask you this but what--did your mother [Mary Davis Thompson] have a big family too or were there-- Speaker 2: She came from--her family--I think it was five. Speaker 1: That's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's see-- Speaker 1: You can go ahead, name 'em. Speaker 2: Son [Nelson Davis], Buddy [Randy Davis], my mother (unclear) Rainse, Edith [Edith Davis Brim], Samuel [Samuel Davis III], it was five of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And those really aren't big families for those days (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: It's just-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --pretty ordinary families, but. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Nowadays it might be considered a big family but (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: In those days people were at like ten, twelve kids. Speaker 2: Kids, um-hm. Story_ID: 633993 Speaker 1: Now did your father [Major Thompson, Sr.] serve in the [U.S.] military at all? Speaker 2: No, not that I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So I guess he would've been eligible for World War I [WWI]. But I know they didn't recruit that many black people for it. Speaker 2: Oh, I remember. Now he didn't serve in the war. But then he went away to work at the, you know, if you took a job like at the--working at the shipyard or something, and so he went to North Carolina to work in the shipyard. And that was to keep from going to the service. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is this for World War (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't which one. Speaker 1: --I or II? Is this when you were coming up or when? Speaker 2: That was a little girl. Speaker 1: You were a little girl? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was World War II [WWII]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, yeah. Yeah, he would've been a little old for active service then. Speaker 2: Um-hm. But then I know that he, you know, he didn't wanna go to the service. So then he went and worked at a shipyard--I mean, in North Carolina or South Carolina, one of 'em. I remembered that. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's probably be, yeah that's probably better, yeah, he would've been in his forties during World War II. Story_ID: 633994 Speaker 1: Tell me this now, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: (Pause) Unh-uh. Speaker 1: You know, whether they met at school or church? Speaker 2: They met at church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The church that they got married in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They met at church. 'Cause I remember, you know, people talking about Major [Major Thompson, Sr.] and Mary [Mary Davis Thompson]. Speaker 1: So at Mount Zion [Greater Mount. Zion Primitive Baptist Church, Tallahassee, Florida]? Speaker 2: No, this was not--Mount Zion is where (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --we as a family belonged. But, now don't ask me how to spell this--it's Testerina [Testerina Primitive Baptist Church, Tallahassee, Florida]. That's where--they--I can get the name of it 'cause we had-- Speaker 1: Testerina Baptist or Testerina-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I think it was Testerina Baptist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause what happened about for or five years ago, we had a family reunion, and they all went back to the, you know, everybody went back to Testerina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All of her family. Speaker 1: Um-hm. So did they talk about how they fell in love or anything or they ever talk about that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. No, they didn't. 'Cause it was--see they separated after--I think after about seventeen--sixteen or seventeen years. And I sort of blocked a lot of stuff out, you know, after they separated, it was sort of--it was sort of difficult for all of us at that, you know, so I just blocked out a lot of stuff. Story_ID: 633995 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Mary Davis Thompson and Major Thompson, Sr.] personalities, their talents, their looks, how they walked, their temperaments, their dispositions, their intelligence, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My father. Speaker 1: Okay. Why is that? Speaker 2: Outspoken. And talked to, you know, I talk to people. He did also, you know, nobody is really ever a strange person, stranger, you know, we could just be walking down the street and we see somebody. And if, you know, we felt like talking, we talked. And I still do that, I don't know if I can say that being smart in school (laughter) I don't know how smart I was 'cause sometimes I don't think, you know, I was, I was okay, 'cause I went to school after three kids were born. Um-hm. And I- I'm okay being black, okay. My father taught me that, I'm okay being black. I don't, I don't want to be any other color. Speaker 1: I'm just I didn't think about--I didn't know this before but was there a--was there really a conflict around--between your father and his father around the baby? You know, it seemed like that would've-- Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. About the baby that the cousin took? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I don't really know. I just knew--you know how--my cousin teased me now that--you sat around and you listened to certain things that the old people said. And she say, "And I didn't." But I just remembered them saying, "It just really grieved Hinton [Hinton Thompson] to death. That's the reason he died so early." And it could not have been. But they say, "Oh, he was never the same." After the, you know, the little boy, you know, they took the little boy--she took the little boy. Story_ID: 633996 Speaker 1: What do you mean by race consciousness, and are there people you think that are really not conscious of how to deal with the world we live in in terms of who they are as a, as a person, you know, as a, as a member of a race? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Or do you--I don't know, you know, do you under- well-- Speaker 2: Well, like I said I'm comfortable being black. 'Cause I've never been any o- any other color, you know, but I don't, I don't like--I don't wear the black problems on my shoulder, you know, I don't try to go out there and take on everybody's problem, you know, I don't know if this is the answer that you're looking for. Speaker 1: No, I was--I'm just asking you for what you, what you think, not what I think. Speaker 2: I don't try to go out and try to prove to people that black people are this way or that way or whatever have you, you know, just accept what you, you know, with me you have to accept what you see. But (unclear) you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, but does it mean to say you're racially conscious as opposed to somebody who you would think is not racially conscious? Speaker 2: Well, maybe I could just sit down and help, them. I could tell--you know we could discuss race we--you know, on a one to one. Maybe if I ran into a child, no an ad- one adult, would it be one adult. I don't know if could do this with a white person, I really don't. I don't know if I could sit down and explain--'cause my feelings are until you walked into my shoes, you don't know how I feel. So I really don't know if I could explain that to them. But with another--like with my children, we sit down and we talk about race sometimes and it's not too--especially here it's not too pleasant sometimes (laughter) 'cause I'll ask the kids, "Did that boy hit you? You hit 'em back if they do," whatever have you, you know. I don't know if this is answering your question, I think I'm going off, but I really don't--ask it, ask it a different way, maybe I can-- Speaker 1: What does race consciousness mean to you? You said you were more race conscious so, I'm just asking what does it mean to you? Speaker 2: Well, I've never been any other color so, as they've said, I'm black and I'm proud. Is that an awareness? I really don't get the question I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're telling me, that's what--you were telling me you were race conscious and I'm just asking what does that mean to you. Speaker 2: Well, okay. I think race conscious, that you can do anything another person--I mean a white person can do, you just have to sit--you'd have to try, you know, you have to stay focus. You can do this, you know, and don't sit up and always think that the white person is the smartest, you have to, you know, think and do, you know, and to be like, if you can do it, I can do it too and (gesture) I think that's, that might be it, you know. Story_ID: 633997 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Like what? How old? Speaker 1: Earliest, the first thing you can remember (laughter). Only you know what that is, I don't (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. My aunt always--I have an aunt that's living and she used to always say when I was three years old--no, I was not three, I was younger and--'cause she lived with us until I was three and she say I used to walk around and I talked to everybody and she said I always say, "My name is Ollie Thompson [HistoryMaker Ollie Taylor], what's yours?" And then after that it was, you know, I'd go around to all the adults and I guess I talked all the time (laughter) and that part I remember, well, she always remind me of it. Speaker 1: So you were a precocious little girl who liked to talk. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Story_ID: 633998 Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters, and where you fit in the order? Speaker 2: Okay, I don't have a sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had three brothers. Speaker 1: Start with the oldest and answer. Speaker 2: Albert Thompson, January 10th and that's the oldest brother. And the, and the next brother is Douglas Thompson, August the 14th, which is tomorrow, he's--he was killed unfortunately in a acci- car--died as a result of a car accident. And then my youngest brother, Major [Major Thompson, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So you're just before your youngest brother? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Oh, you're the oldest, okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I'm the oldest and I'm--I don't have any sisters. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I never remembered having any. Story_ID: 633999 Speaker 1: Now you were born in Tallahassee [Florida] right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you were, you were raised in Tallahassee. And can you describe--were you raised in the same neighborhood the whole time, in the Bond [Bond-South City, Florida]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Community. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Okay. There was no restaurants in that area. But we lived not too far from the university and the sound would be the marching band. You could tell when the school's about- about to start because they would be there practicing at five o'clock in the morning, you know, the Marching 100, that was one of the, you know, the sounds. Speaker 1: Now this is a famous band. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You're talking about the Marching 100. This is a famous band. This is the first band I remember seeing on national television, about 1960 or so when Bob Hayes was playing-- Speaker 2: Football (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) for Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And they never allowed girls-- Speaker 1: And the fast step, the real fast step. Speaker 2: Right, they made a hundred and something steps per minute. They never--they didn't allow girls in that band. Speaker 1: They didn't? I didn't know that. Speaker 2: They do now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then at that time they didn't it was an (unclear) what they say. Speaker 1: I know when I watched them, I thought everybody in Florida must run fast-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --'cause the band, the band was marching fast. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, I mean, Bob Hayes was the world's fastest human in the Olympics [1964 Summer Olympics, Tokyo, Japan] in 19-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, '60 [sic. 1964]. Speaker 2: But the band is not this year, because of the problems they had. Speaker 1: The band actually, oh, they had an incident-- Speaker 2: A hazing. Speaker 1: Hazing of a gay fella right (unclear)? Speaker 2: Right, that band used to be full of gays. Speaker 1: It seems ironic that that would be the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. The downfall of it, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I don't think it can perform this year. Speaker 1: Okay. So they were suspended by the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] or something or? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Or the-- Speaker 2: So some people are saying, "I'm not going to the game this year." 'Cause my husband [HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] and I used to go down when they played Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], um-hm and then they would have the battle of the bands near. Everybody was walking around the--when the bands played, everybody sat down, old, whatever, you know, all the older people went to the games just to see the band. And, so that, I think that was a sound, the sound that I heard when I was a little girl, to know it's almost football season 'cause they would start practicing about five o'clock in the morning, you know, because of the heat and they would be, you know, it was an interesting time. Speaker 1: Now I heard at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical University] here, at down in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], the people would actually show up to watch the band-- Speaker 2: Practice. Speaker 1: --practice, crowds would come-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Southern and Florida A and M used to have battles, football and the battle of the bands. I know my cousin that lives in Baton Rouge right now, he, you know, he and my brother they'd get together and they'd talk about, you know, when--if the team wins, if A and M beats Southern or whatever have you, you know, it's one of those rivalry things and, but the band--I think the band was it. The football team was also, you know, Jake Gaither was one of the greatest coaches there was. And although, you know, this is what I was saying it was a great community. I didn't go to school at the university, but then it seems like to me we were involved--the community was involved with all the activities, you know, so-- Speaker 1: So it was more than just a college, it was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a community. It was a community and, now that most of those people have died off, it's really, it's really different. When I go home now, it's really different, like the last time when I was home, it was--my brother [Albert Thompson] and I went to--this wasn't the last time, it was about six or seven years ago. My brother and I went over to visit Mo- (pronunciation) Mobley [Sybil C. Mobley], you know, the one that used to be over the business department of the--A and M 'cause, you know, A and M had one of the most--well, one of the best departments, business schools and it was the pharmacy. But we went to visit her and to see such a dynamic woman--to have known such a dynamic woman and to see her going into dementia was altogether different, you know. It was really sad and to see, you know, it was, it was a community. Story_ID: 634000 Speaker 1: Other sights and sounds and smells of growing up, you talked about the band, you could hear the band, and what else? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells. Speaker 2: Let's see and the sight was, the college students going to vesper. They had to go to vesper once a month, I think it was once a month. Even FAMU High [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida] had to go. But it would be where they--the boys, you know, their dates, they would have to attend vesper, you know, they have concerts and all this. Then after that to see--they would pass by our house to go to this nice restaurant and they would walk, you know, and to see them holding hands and everything, that was really, you know, interesting. And I said, "You go to college to get a husband" (laughter), you know, and that was, that was real interesting. I guess we lived in the, in the right place, you know, for this, until my parents [Mary Davis Thompson and Major Thompson, Sr.] separated and my mother bought a house a little further out. But that was--it was really, that was interesting. Speaker 1: Would they, would they dress up for vesper (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, you had to--this was the time you dressed, you would be dressed, and they would go, they would have different famous people there like Marian Anderson. And this little guy I remembered--now we had--this was when I was in high school 'cause we had to attend. It was--he was a genius, he played the piano, but he died at a early age also. And Cannonball and his brother would always come back. Speaker 1: Cannonball Adderley? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Nat Adderly? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was my third grade teacher [Bond Junior High School; Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida], his mother. They would always come back and do a concert. Story_ID: 634001 Speaker 1: So Cannonball Adderly's mother taught you third grade [at Bond Junior High School; Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: The great saxophone player and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, third grade. And it's, it was the two of them. The brother and then-- Speaker 1: Nat Adderly the trumpet player (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, so great, great musicians. So you said like the, for vesper that students [at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] would be dressed up. And this seems to be a feature of black college campuses [HBCUs] in those days that you don't see anymore. It's not like that, it's even the pictures of the sit-ins, the kids are dressed up. They're sittin at the counter with glo- white gloves on. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Continental suits. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: They would be dressed in the, you know, they would have the lady on the side and the girl. And they would walk the female, and they would, you know, they would be walking. And then they had--they would go to this restaurant--it was El Chico [Tallahassee, Florida]. And it was in, you know, it was one of the nice restaurants of the area. And it was owned by a group of people from Boston. I don't remember their names. Speaker 1: They were from Gloucester [Massahcusetts]? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: They were from Gloucester you said? Speaker 2: No, Boston. Speaker 1: Boston. Oh, Boston, Massachusetts? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And then they would go and eat inside, or either they would eat outside, you know. Speaker 1: So this is a black restaurant (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, any other sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: Well, smell of people frying fish (laughter). That I always said, 'cause my father [Major Thompson, Sr.] used to fish. That was one thing, he used to fish, and he, but he fished at night. And he would always come and kiss me on the forehead before he went to fish. And he would, he would catch trout and he always had a lot of fish. And I always said, "When I grow up I'm never gonna eat fish." Because, you know, like if food was short he would always, he rented a freezer at the ice house, you know, to keep a lot of frozen food, but it would be fish. And they used to have a lot of fish fries in Tallahassee [Florida]. We had fish with mustard, that you don't see, you know, if you ask for mustard here they say, "Where are you from?" But mullet fish, trout fish and bream fish. And I never had cat- fried catfish. We had the little catfish 'bout this big, and then they take it and put flour on it and let it, smothered it. And then they take it and put it on rice. And that was with onions, that was good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, they did a lot of things, you know, because of football, they have football games. And that was a time when family would get together, you know. Speaker 1: Something like a fish fry, you know, at the, during the game? Speaker 2: Yeah. Fish fries. Story_ID: 634002 Speaker 1: Oh, you were talking before we had the break about Marian Anderson coming to campus [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], and some of the other people. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. It was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who else, who else came to campus? Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember the, I'm trying to remember-- Speaker 1: And did you get a chance to go and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and participate? Speaker 2: When we were in high school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida] we had to attend some of the vesper services. I think we had to go once a month. Oh, god, I do remember this little guy Clay- I think his name was Clayborn [ph.]. And he played the piano he was ge- it was a lady too. Speaker 1: Now the lady is probably Philippa Schuyler, okay. Speaker 2: That's who it was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's who it was, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's who it was. Speaker 1: She was a piano prodigy. Speaker 2: Yeah. She was a genius, was--right. That's who it was. Speaker 1: There's a book about her that was written about ten years ago. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. That's who it was and, but it was another one too. It was a young man. Speaker 1: I don't know him. But, you know, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm trying to remember--I do remember seeing her 'cause she was so young. And who else--well, like I said Cannonball [Cannonball Adderley] and those would come back. Speaker 1: Did people like Benjamin Mays [Benjamin E. Mays] come or I don't know. Speaker 2: The speaker? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I really don't-- Speaker 1: James Weldon Johnson. Speaker 2: Johnson. Speaker 1: Walter White [Walter Francis White] or I don't know it could be any number of people in those days-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that could come, but. Speaker 2: But I don't know, I think I was leaning toward the music part, you know. Story_ID: 634003 Speaker 1: So where did you go to grade school? Speaker 2: Bond Junior High [Bond Junior High School; Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So Bond Junior High didn't mean junior high the way we think of it today. It was all of grade school too right? Speaker 2: It was from, it was from first through ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. You know, nowadays they think of junior high as just being sixth, seventh, and eighth grade. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But it was--That was there too. But it was the whole, the whole thing. Speaker 2: First through ninth, I went to preschool--would you believe at Florida A and M University preschool N.B. Young [Nathan B. Young Hall, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: It's N.B. Young. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the name of one of the dorms and they had a preschool there. And my teacher's name was Ms. Abby Campbell [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's, so you had, you had a chance to go--how old were you when you were in preschool, did you start at three or four or--? Speaker 2: No, I went, before I went to first grade one year. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were five, it's like kindergarten. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, 'cause I don't think they had kindergarten too much, so I went to N.B. Young. Speaker 1: N.B. Young, okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And started first grade at Bond? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I later found out when I was doing some research in preschool education. They used to come over, you know, we used to see the people from Florida State University [Florida State College for Women; Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] used to come over there. They were doing research, you know, writing up observations. And, you know, I looked in my book, it's raggedy now, but I have so many, they have so many resources from Florida State University, but they came--would come over to Florida A and M at N.B. Young and observe us. Speaker 1: Now just to set this up for people who don't understand what these schools are. Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] is a state supported black school [HBCU] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black school. Speaker 1: --in Florida. But it's in the same town as Tallahassee [Florida]-- Speaker 2: --hassee-- Speaker 1: --as Florida State which is a white school. Speaker 2: Right, which was white, which was predominantly white. It was the white university, Florida State and then Florida A and M was the white--black university. Speaker 1: And a similar situation is in Louisiana with LSU [Louisiana State University] and Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --being in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Speaker 2: And when you go to visit there, you see altoge- it's altogether different. LSU, beautiful campus, Southern to me, you know, I think the alumni need to do a little bit more for that University, you know. Speaker 1: Are you saying that FAMU looks a lot better than Southern? Speaker 2: Sure it does (laughter). Speaker 1: I wanted you to say it (laughter). Speaker 2: But their alumni is, you know, they are--but see I didn't graduate from--I graduated from Florida A and M High School [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida]. Story_ID: 634004 Speaker 1: Now you said the students from Florida State [Florida State College for Women; Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] used to come and evaluate-- Speaker 2: You know, observe. Speaker 1: Observe. And was this--now thinking that, just reflecting that none of them would ever teach in a black school or had--didn't have those ambitions in those days. What were they evaluating or observing? What was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think they were evaluating our behavior. I think that's what it was. Speaker 1: There was a white school administration that controlled all the black schools right, anyway? Speaker 2: Right, but I think they would come over and they would evaluate our, you know, our behavior to see how we were on the same level as the white kids five years old. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. It's interesting, that would be an interesting study to find out like what exactly they-- Speaker 2: Found out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) were writing and talking about. But, so did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed home economics and I enjoyed, and I enjoyed social science part, you know, the sociology, you know, somewhat--well, what it was I had an interesting young teacher in high school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. I didn't wanna get you to high school yet. Speaker 2: Oh, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was talking about first grade. Speaker 2: A favorite. Speaker 1: Yes, first grade, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, the choir, I used to be in the choir. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A capella choir. Speaker 1: Yes, Florida is the home of the Negro National Anthem ['Life Every Voice and Sing']. I believe, yeah, or James Weldon Johnson was actually teaching in Florida, teach- teaching school and-- Speaker 2: Not at A and M, no. Speaker 1: Not, no--maybe not at A and M, but he was--but Florida is the home of the anthem. But, you know, he had a choir sing for him. Speaker 2: And we had another, we had an author that was, what was that-- Speaker 1: Zora-- Speaker 2: --the one that wrote the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a question I had. Have you read the works of Zora Neale Hurston and do they-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: --seem to--yeah, Zora Neale Hurston is a black writer that wrote about growing up in Florida--about Florida, life in Florida. 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' or 'Jonah's Gourd Vine' and all that? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, forget it (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. But it's another author you were talking about that--? Speaker 2: What was his name, he wrote--it'll come back. Speaker 1: Not Jean Toomer or--he was from Louisiana I think. A Florida author. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think he taught English at A and M. Speaker 1: I don't know where Sterling Brown [Sterling Allen Brown] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --is from but, okay. Speaker 2: And what I enjoyed most was home economics in gr- in Bond, at Bond Junior High [Bond Junior High School; Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida]. Story_ID: 634005 Speaker 1: Now you were in school I guess during the war basically right? World War II [WWII]. For the most part, I guess right? You're born in '37 [1937] so, you started school in it was six- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Forty-three [1943]. Speaker 1: --bef- yeah, '43 [1943] that's in the middle of the war. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But you were a little kid, though, you know. Speaker 2: I was a little kid and I remember when my uncle [Samuel Davis III], my mother's [Mary Davis Thompson] youngest brother, he was going to, he was leaving to go to the [U.S.] Army and he came by to tell me that he was leaving--I don't know now when I think back on it, I was really special with all my family. I was really a special talkative child, you know, with all of 'em, 'cause he came--I never will forget he came on the bus and it was raining to tell me goodbye and that he was going to the Army, and I don't know how old I was, but I remember that part. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he come back all right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he came back, but he, he died at an early age, heart attack, forty something--my mother's family. Story_ID: 634006 Speaker 1: So what did you like to do when you were a little kid? Did you like to read, or did you like certain games to play or did you go to movies? Speaker 2: Well, I played, I participated in a lot of sports and I would read but I, you know, it was sports. Well, I had three brothers so, and the only sport that I didn't really participate in was swimming, um-hm. But it was basketball. I attended a lot of football games. Speaker 1: Now is there reason why you didn't participate in swimming? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What is it? Speaker 2: A group of, group of kids with a teacher that I was--we were with, they drowned in a suck hole, on of the-- Speaker 1: In a what? Speaker 2: In a suck hole. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, it was in a lake (laughter) but they drowned and since then I had no desire to swim. Speaker 1: Now could they swim to drown, I guess, they-- Speaker 2: You know, well, he had too many kids on--in that little boat. Speaker 1: Okay. They--I know just before the Olympics they were talking about black people, not swimming. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We're the popula- population in the country that's least likely to know how to swim. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Now my brothers, they all became lifeguards and, so--cause my older brother [Albert Thompson] retired from the [U.S.] Navy well, you know, he needed to know how to swim (laughter) and Doug [Douglas Thompson] was a physical education teacher. He, you know, all--everybody could swim except me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they still tease me about it. Speaker 1: Now Tallahassee [Florida] is--Tallahassee is, is not on the coast is it, or is it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It's not, I didn't, I didn't think it was. Speaker 2: It's up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's up near Pa- what--Panama City [Florida] is close to it, you know, Panama City has become a place that, you know, we didn't think about Panama City when we were younger, but it was, what it was, it was segregated. I think they had the beach, you know, we couldn't go to the same beach that they did, so we went down to Wakulla [Edward Ball Wakulla Springs State Park, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you say you liked all the sports, you played basketball. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Did they have a girls basketball team? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that same principal [E. Lilyan Spencer] that beat your butt if you didn't come to school [Bond Junior High School; Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida]. If you played a bad game, she'd get your butt. Speaker 1: Seems that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, she would discipline you. Speaker 1: That really sounds unfair. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we thought so too. Speaker 1: That sounds like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father [Major Thompson, Sr.] did. Speaker 1: Sounds like Iraq. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When the soccer keam- team loses they-- Speaker 2: You, if you played a bad game, you know, you don't play medi- no mediocre nothing. You had to be top. Story_ID: 634007 Speaker 1: We had some r- we had some rough teachers growing up, and we had some who, when we think about it going back, we had some pretty prejudiced black teachers growing up. Speaker 2: Prejudiced. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: In what sense? Speaker 1: Color. Speaker 2: Okay. So these are light teachers that didn't like-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that didn't like dark students or-- Speaker 1: Well, I mean-- Speaker 2: Or-- Speaker 1: They treated us different. Speaker 2: So was most of your teacher light skinned? Speaker 1: So many of 'em were. Um-hm, so many of 'em were. Speaker 2: Wow, okay. Speaker 1: 'Cause I remember when I was in--well, you say you aren't going to high school now [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I--we can, go ahead and tell the story. Speaker 1: When I was I think it was tenth grade and I was nominated to be most likely to succeed and the principal said--I mean the teacher said, you know, when you look at this picture years from now, you don't want a faded picture, you know, so they, you know, this was her--you know, you don't want your picture--'cause I don't know if Ms. Lang [ph.] was under the impression because you were dark skinned it would fade or whatever have you, but, you know, needed someone with a little bit more color. Speaker 2: So, or less color, you said, more (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, less color. Speaker 2: --or less color? Speaker 1: Less color. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Dark--lighter. Speaker 2: So she was saying you shouldn't have your picture taken is that what happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I shouldn't, I shouldn't be the one to run for most likely--was it--Ms. FAMU High--yeah was Ms. FAMU High that it was. Speaker 2: So you, did you-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: You didn't run because she said that? Speaker 1: Yeah. I didn't run--you wouldn't--I don't think, you know, I don't think anybody, you know, would. Speaker 2: There's--I know [HistoryMaker] Armstrong Williams believe it or not told a similar story, about him running for class president at Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina]. But he was advised not to run 'cause he was too dark. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: By a light skinned person. Speaker 1: Teacher? Speaker 2: Teacher, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: This is something that-- Speaker 1: That happened--it happened a lot in the South. Where's he from? Speaker 2: South Carolina. Speaker 1: Um-hm. It happened a lot in the South. I think Spike Lee did a movie on it. I don't remember the name of it. Speaker 2: Well, it's the theme of a lot of Spike Lee movies, is color, prejudice within the black community. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know, hear, you know when I grew up--I heard a little bit about it. Speaker 1: Where did you grow up? Speaker 2: Dayton [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: There was some of it, but not--it wasn't as dominant a theme, right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But I did hear it, you know, which, you know, baffled most of us. Story_ID: 634008 Speaker 1: I've heard that a lot of the teachers in, in small schools in the South had advanced degrees, which is--made them in some ways more qualified than the white teachers in the white schools. Speaker 2: Right. 'Cause most of my high school teachers went to New York University [New York, New York] to get their master's. Most of my high school teachers did, you know, 'cause that was like in--well, it--in order to teach at Florida A and M High School [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida] I think they had to--even the secretary, Ms. Berry [ph.], had, she had a master's degree in business. Speaker 1: NYU. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now those are the days--I think when the State of Florida would pay you to get a-- Speaker 2: They would pay--they would go during the summers. Speaker 1: To keep you from going to one of their schools--they'd pay you to go to a Northern school. Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know why they all selected to go there, you know. Now my aunt went to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. But I don't know why most of the teachers that Florida A and M High School. It could've been a, you know, 'cause they were a clique--little clannish little people at Florida (laughter), you know, but I think they were, they were qualified, more qualified. Speaker 1: Were they still-- Speaker 2: But then they used to think that it--becau- if you went to college in the South, you didn't know anything. So you had to be trained all over. Speaker 1: Which is not-- Speaker 2: Which is not really true. Story_ID: 634009 Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite teacher in grade school [Bond Junior High School; Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida]? Before I leave grade school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Let's see, Ms. Lucile Williams. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Then, and what did--was she your--what grade did she teach? Speaker 2: She taught, she taught fifth and sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fifth and sixth grade but then it was--we just took a liking to each other and Ms. Alice Macklon [ph.]. She used to walk, she used to come at my house and then I would walk to school with her. I was in second or third grade. And she taught dance, I mean, you know, like we had do the maypole thing (laughter). And she would prepare us for that. Use--what we--the song was summer time. We used to do creative dances but, you know, Ms. Alice Macklon, Ms. Lucille Williams, Ms. Spearman [ph.], she sort of spanked me about talking all the time. Story_ID: 634010 Speaker 1: So you talked in school a lot I guess? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: (Pause) Now, well what about high school? Now when you entered high school where you, where you thinking you were gonna go to college when you graduated or what were, what were your thoughts? Or did you have any thoughts about it at that age, you know, about what you were gonna-- Speaker 2: I--well, I knew I was gonna go to college. I knew I was gonna go to college. I mean that had been, you know, instilled in me. And then after I got married, then my husband [HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] went to school first. Speaker 1: Well, I know--okay. We gonnna get to that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm just saying in high school what were you thinking that you wanted to do? Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to go into nursing, you know, but as I grew older I didn't think that was feasible 'cause I'm scared of blood. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did they have like a tracking system where you take a college prep course, or a business course or general course? Speaker 2: Not at Florida A and M the high school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida], no. But at the--Lincoln [Lincoln High School, Tallahassee, Florida] was a vocational school and people went to take nursing and--not nur- you became a practical nurse. And beauty--beautician and stuff. But not at FAM- FAMU High. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: Because I guess all of us was gonna go to college. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is--it makes sense it being a college or the high school of Florida A and M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. So were they, would they expect that you would go to Florida A and M at some point? Speaker 2: Well, some of the kids did and some of the kids didn't. Story_ID: 634011 Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite teacher at FAMU High School [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida]? Speaker 2: Yeah. I have to think of her name. She (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: She was one of my favorites--I could always go--'cause I think at that time--was when my parents [Mary Davis Thompson and Major Thompson, Sr.] were separating and that I used to go in and sit down and talk to her a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, she just passed last year. Speaker 1: So you had your--you said your parents were married seventeen years when they started to--they separated. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So you would've been a sophomore or junior? Speaker 2: By the sophmore--ninth grade or something like that. It was-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Do you know what the issue was or do you--can you talk about it. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I--but I had several, you know, at school the tea- all the teachers were nurturing, you know, you could go and sit down, and talk to the teachers, you know, you knew the ones that you could go and talk to. My home arts teacher--I used to--Doris Madison [ph.]--I used to go and talk--and my favorite teacher again her name is Ms. Ree- was Ms. Reeves. Speaker 1: R-E-E-- Speaker 2: --V-E-S. Speaker 1: --V-E-S. Okay. Speaker 2: She came to our last--not this past reunion but the last one. And, so, you know, how you be in line to talk to the teachers, and, so I said, "Hello, Ms. Reeves this is [HistoryMaker] Ollie Thompson," I said, "Ms. Reeves now, you know, you don't remember" (laughter). She said, "Girl, as much as you used to talk" (laughter). But I enjoyed, I enjoyed, my teachers, I think they sort of like shaped our lives to be the type of people that we are, respectful, you know, we respected life. We had conscious--We were afraid of certain things. We, I think we were afraid of drugs. Well, our parents talked about that. We were afraid of drugs. I'm not saying all of us, I'm, you know, that is one thing that I think so many of us shied away from. Speaker 1: Were drugs a problem in Florida in those days? I mean, in Tallahassee [Florida]? Speaker 2: We didn't know that. But see the kids--because it was a university town, and they came from all over, they--it was not like now 'cause they couldn't afford it. But it was some drugs there. Speaker 1: I mean, were they doing--I know that all colleges in those days were drinking, you know, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, drinking. Speaker 1: Were they using-- Speaker 2: It was--it was a lot, it was a lot of drinking. Speaker 1: Wine and such? Speaker 2: No, I don't know about the wine, it was beer. Speaker 1: Beer, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know about the wine. Speaker 1: And was there anybody using hard drugs like heroin or something like that? Speaker 2: We didn't hear too much about that. Speaker 1: Okay. But marijuana? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is between 1952 and '56 [1956] when you're in high school? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, so-- Speaker 2: But beer was it. Story_ID: 634012 Speaker 1: What kind of music did you like in high school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida]? Speaker 2: It was all kinds. Well, it--we enjoyed blues, would you think--the young kids--blues. Speaker 1: Like who? Speaker 2: Well, [HistoryMaker] B. B. King is my favorite. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Now was he a favorite in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. We used to listen. It was--who is this little song that we used to dance off all the time--and I don't remember the name of it--I mean, the person [Hank Ballard] but it was 'Work with Me, Annie.' Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I remember that, yeah, right, I remember that. Speaker 2: Oh, and Johnny Ace, 'The Clock.' Who else, 'cause we used to go the fountain then and dance in the morning, and come to the class smelling like bugs. And the teachers told the man who owned it, that he would have to close it in the morning. We couldn't go over there, it was just right across the street, you know, from the school. And who else did we-- Speaker 1: Was Ray Charles big then? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, Ray Charles. Let's see who else. Speaker 1: This is the beginning of what they call rock and roll or, you know, R and B [rhythm and blues], you know, as such I guess right. Sort of the, kind of transitioning from the band music to, you know, more bands--I mean smaller bands. Speaker 2: But smaller bands. Story_ID: 634013 Speaker 1: Did you have a absolute favorite musician or singer? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. I guess I enjoyed 'em--most of 'em. Speaker 1: Could you dance? Speaker 2: A little, a little, you know, it was a lot of swinging and stuff like that we, you know, it wasn't a lot of close dancing. It was a lot of bop, plus we had, they had dances at school at least once a month 'cause we had the dance at the university [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]--at the gym, you know, when they were trying to teach us to be, you know, socialization. Um-hm, and that was interesting. I didn't know--let me see if I had known this I would have brought up all the (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Did you--was--I mean, did you go to movies and such in those days or was it to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to movies, but they had, you know the blacks sat upstairs and the white sat downstairs. So really we went--and on Saturdays, we would go see 'Superman' or whatever. Speaker 1: A serial like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now was there a--we were talking about the musician. Was there, was there, was there a black venue for music in town or, you know, special theater or something people go to see Ray Charles or somebody if they would come through. Speaker 2: Yeah. What was the name? Sometimes they would be at the, at the university and then I remember we've gone to the football field, you know, where you saw-- Speaker 1: Okay, so they would use that as a venue? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'Cause it would stay warm down there really pre- pretty much year round right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And what else? That was about it. Yeah, we would go--I know--I've known--I've gone to the, you know, football field to see a couple of concerts, but I tell you, you did a lot of stuff at your house. Speaker 1: House parties and--? Speaker 2: Right, because you, you know, they didn't have it where, you know, where you were free to go this place or that place, so as a result black people just--they had their home. They had parties at their house. They had get-togethers at their house or whatever. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were like that in Chicago [Illinois] and, you know, I guess it just stems from, you know, where I came from 'cause Taylor [HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] and I used to have a lot of get togethers at the house, cookouts, whatever. And being at Sonicraft [Sonicraft, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] we had, you know like a lot of people over. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. At the home, you know, as far as me going to a lounge, I didn't really--that wasn't my thing and still not. Now if you say you wanna go to a concert I'll go, but to go and sit up in a lounge, to me is a waste of my time. Speaker 1: I understand, I mean, what you feel like there- there's a--that a lounge is more likely to have some trouble or something? Speaker 2: I don't know, it just, it--sometimes when I drink I work (laughter) so I be mopping floors and stuff like that (laughter), you know, so--I mean just to sit--now Taylor and I can go and sit down and have a drink or something, but we've never been to a lounge here. Oh, something, little thing down there they call the Club [ph.] and he always mentioned, you know, I haven't been to a lounge since we been here (laughter), but I never did, I just--maybe it was fear that something would happen and you didn't wanna be--'cause I know when I walked in there, I used to always say, "Let me see where the exit sign go--is," and I know as teacher, we used to, you know, all the teacher would get--in Chicago would get together and the last day of school or something like that and I never did go to the big thing, you know, where all the teachers were 'cause they used to have a big--I would go--it was three or four of us we used to get together and we'd go out and have a drink or something like that, but it would be early and I, and, you know, it was like a bar that you felt sort of safe or lounge that you felt sort of safe in, but I'm, never been a lounge goer. Story_ID: 634014 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now back to high school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida] here, now they say you, you ran, you were gonna run for--what was the office you were gonna run for as a senior? Speaker 2: I think it was the jun- my junior year--I think, it might've been the senior year 'cause she's in there. They were nominating me to be Ms. FAMU High, I think it was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, hold on one second. Speaker 2: And then she said, that you want your ticket, you want your picture--when you look at your picture twenty-five years from now you don't want it to be faded. Speaker 1: So she told the other students that, or just you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She told the other students that? Speaker 2: The whole class, the whole class. Story_ID: 634015 Speaker 1: So you, you played basketball in high school, you said? Speaker 2: No, we played at Bond Junior High [Bond Junior High School; Bond Elementary School, Tallahassee, Florida], not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, junior high, not in high school? Speaker 2: Right. When we went to FAMU High [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida], we played, what was that Ms. Moore [ph.] had us down there kicking the ball? Soccer (laughter). What else did they call it? But I didn't play on the, on the girls' basketball team. Speaker 1: Okay. What activities did you do in high school? Did you-- Speaker 2: What did we--well, we played on the--we was soccer and we did a little tennis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were bourgoise now I'm telling you (laughter), tennis. Oh, I did a little golf and, but there was, see there was a sec- like our class was made up of--every six weeks we had a sport, like one had baseball, one we had maybe it was, what was that--I don't know if it was really soccer, but we kicked the ball and one was golf and then one, you know, but I never participated in swimming and then it was, what else. Speaker 1: Okay, but you weren't on any teams or anything like that in high school? Speaker 2: No. I think at that time they cut out girls basketball teams because they had, they had problems, you know, girls, the girls had a problem with living conditions like if they went away to play basketball or something like that, you know, living conditions were not good. I think they cut it out when I came to high school. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know I've talked to a lot of people much older than you that played basketball as girls down South in high schools, you know, they had teams and all that, but it seem--yeah, it does seem at a certain point it-- Speaker 2: They--uh-huh. Speaker 1: It ended. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think so, I think so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or it slowed down. Story_ID: 634016 Speaker 1: Now did you run for class office at all, or were you involved in any clubs in high school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida]? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were, the home economics club (laughter) again. And what else? The--it was the reading, it was some dramatic, you know, and then what else was I involved in? I have to look in there and see. I did go out one time for cheerleader. Oh, I did play in the band. Speaker 1: Okay. What did you play? Speaker 2: The French horn, but I only played at Christmas so I could play 'Jingle Bells' (laughter) and what else. I didn't go out for a lot of afterschool things 'cause after my parents [Mary Davis Thompson and Major Thompson, Jr.] separated I used to babysit in the evening. Story_ID: 634017 Speaker 1: Did that disrupt your, your high school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida] life outs- I mean, it must've caused some kind of prob- I mean, you know, when your parents sep- separated--did you, did your grades suffer or did you have a-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Were you very distracted by it? Speaker 2: I didn't like it so I just blocked everything out and I did what it took to, you know, in order to, you know. Speaker 1: Now this meant, the separation meant your father [Major Thompson, Sr.] moved or your mother [Mary Davis Thompson] moved or who moved? Speaker 2: My mother, um-hm. And she went back and she lived with her mother [Emma Barnes Davis] and then she bought a home. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so. Were all the--were you and your siblings all in school at home with your father? Speaker 2: No. 'Cause I moved, that's why I had to work in the evening. Speaker 1: Oh, so did you move with your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it was just like--I mean, it was distracting, my junior and senior year because I worked in the evening. Speaker 1: Okay. What did you do or where you work? Speaker 2: Well, I baby si- well, at first I was the little salad girl at the steak house. Then after that, I got a job in the af- afternoon. This lady recommended me to work for--to--for the Millers [ph.]. They owned the shoe store in Tallahassee [Florida] and I would have--they had this big estate and when the people brought little George [ph.] home, I would be out there to pick George up and then walk George home (laughter), walk George to the house and then sit down and read to George while he ate his chicken livers. He's Jew- the family was Jewish and I never will forget I read--I started reading the book and I saw, you know, I had to read him a story and I said, "Hallelujah," and he said, "Nursey, it's not hallelujah, it's Hanukkah, it was Hanukkah," (laughter) and I said, you know, how you'd have the book and I saw the H and I said, "Hallelujah," or something. He said, "Nurse, it's not hallelujah it's Hanukkah," but anyway, I babysat in the evening and she was--I did it for two years with little George. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now, so, so you moved with your mother--where--now where were you when your parents split up? Were you with-- Speaker 2: I moved with a-- Speaker 1: You moved with somebody else altogether? Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. I moved with someone else. Speaker 1: Was this a relative or--? Speaker 2: No. It was Ms. Abby Campbell [ph.]. My preschool teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's who I wound up with for about a year or so. Then after that I--well, I got a room with a group of girls that was in the home. And my Aunt Mayola [Mayola Robinson] she monitored everything, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, it sounds like it was a tough period of time then. Speaker 2: It was, it was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I didn't let it stop me. Story_ID: 634018 Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida] what was your--did you have a plan, did you think you were going to college or what did you--? I mean with your parents [Mary Davis Thompson and Major Thompson, Jr.] separated I don't know if you had access to enough money, any money or to go or wha- I don't know, what was, what were you thinking at that point? Did you have a counselor, or? Speaker 2: I think when I, when I graduated from high school, I left and my thinking was, I wanted to go to school and I was living with my aunt in New York [New York]. I even went down and took some courses--a course in the high school in Brooklyn [New York]. I rea- I wanted to go to school. But I worked in a factory at that time, so it was only like for a year before I met him. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know you said you went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] first and you didn't like it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Pittsburgh first, but I didn't stay because my aunt and I didn't get along too well. Speaker 1: This is your mother's sister? Speaker 2: No that was my mother's brother [Samuel Davis III], youngest brother, the one that-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, his wife is-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I didn't, I didn't stay there but about a month or so, and then I went to my aunt in New York (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) New York. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 634019 Speaker 1: Now can you tell us how you met your husband [HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] then in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Fifty-six years ago (laughter), no, he was coming, he had been stationed in the [U.S. military service] service with my cousin. Speaker 1: Can you--well, this--now you graduated in '56 [1956]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So this is like 1957? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, or was it '56 [1956] or '57 [1957], yeah. But, anyway we--he was, he came to my aunt's house to return some books. 'Cause he and my cousin was stationed in New Jersey,which was right across the bridge. And then he was on his way back to Chicago [Illinois], you know, he was being--he had been discharged. And he came to visit and that was it. We went to see [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Price. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "Lawdy, Lawdy Miss Clawdy" ['Lawdy Miss Clawdy'] that was Lloyd Price, right? Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: Went to Ap- the Apollo Theater [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, go ahead--well, tell us, you know, that you went to the Apollo (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then after that, we saw each other for two days. Then we saw each other again at Thanksgiving. And then we didn't see each other again until June when we got married. Speaker 1: So you must've made a good impression on each other, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think so. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See what he thinks (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, so it happened just like that? And, so what made you think he was the right one? Speaker 2: He seemed to have been kind, plus he was quiet (laughter). He didn't talk that, he didn't talk that much but then when he talked it was, you know, it made sense. Like I could go rambling on and on and on, and on, and on, you know, and he enjoyed music and different types music, you know, like we used to watch opera together, don't ask me the name of it, please. But we used to watch opera and we'd talk about, you know, we always enjoyed going to plays together. But, I mean the thing that impressed I guess, it was just, he was, he just appeared to be a very nice person. Story_ID: 634020 Speaker 1: So after you got married, you all moved to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, we were in Chicago. Speaker 1: Oh, you're in Chicago, oh, you got married, you got married in Chicago (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. I--we only saw each other the two days that we met like in September and then I think he [Taylor's husband, HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] came back to New York [New York] for Thanksgiving and I came--went to Chicago for Christmas and then he asked me to get married. And then I didn't come back anymore until I got married in Chicago, at his family house. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't, you stayed in Chicago after that? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So, now I know you started to have children. But did you work in Chicago at all before you had children or--? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I worked, I think I got married on a Saturday and I went to work that Monday (laughter). I went to work for a doctor. Speaker 1: Okay. Is this is a black doctor? Speaker 2: Doctor Dillard [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Is this on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] or West Side [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. South Side (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) South Side, okay. Speaker 2: 47th Street. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you like the reception person or what did--? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And then after that I went to--I worked at Spiegel's [Spiegel Inc.]. Everybody works at Spiegel's in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It all makes you go to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Now Spiegel's--tell us about what Spiegel's is and where it's at? Speaker 2: Spiegel's was on 35th Street. It's a mail order house. And I worked in the filing department where we had to file orders. Okay, and I worked there for years. But I had three kids though before I went to work at Spiegel's. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had your kids while you were-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --working for Doctor Dillard, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: Now, you know, no--after--no--after that--just thought--after I had the first child I went to work at The Fair Store [Chicago, Illinois], which later became Montgomery Wards [sic. Montgomery Ward]. That's-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That's where I had my second child. Speaker 1: Okay. First child was born--that's Anthony [Anthony Taylor]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Was born in 1958. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And then the second baby is born in '63, [1963], right that's Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Taylor]. Speaker 2: Angela [Angela Taylor]. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, Angela? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Oh, that's '61 [1961]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961] and then oh, so you got three and then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. After I had Anthony, then after that I went to work at Montgomery--at The Fair Store which was considered Montgomery Ward, Montgomery Wards owned it. And I worked there until I had Angela. Speaker 1: Okay. Then your third, your second daughter--third offspring was born in '63 [1963] that's Valerie. Speaker 2: Right, I left after I had Angela, then I got pregnant with Valerie, and I was working--where was I working with Valerie-- Speaker 1: Must've been Spiegel's I guess right, by then? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I went to work after Valerie was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I think Taylor was working for Illinois Institute [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois]--I'm trying to think was I working--maybe I took off a year 'cause I've always said I've worked all my life. Maybe that's the time I took off, I don't know. 'Cause it's only two years between. Yeah, maybe, yeah, like, maybe I did take off a year. Story_ID: 634021 Speaker 1: Spiegel's [Spiegel Inc.] is one of the-- Speaker 2: Big. It was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The world's biggest mail order. Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I didn't go to work there until after Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Taylor] was born. And I really got--what happened is I say, "I'm going to get me a job 'cause I cannot stay in this house, you know, any longer." So I went and I talked to this lady, name is [HistoryMaker] Ora Higgins, a black woman that was over personnel at Spiegel's. And I told her my feelings and she told me that she say, "Now what I want you to do is go home." 'Cause Valerie was like two or three months old. And she said, "I want you to go come and take care of your baby. And I will call you one year after." Do you know she did that? Speaker 1: Yeah, when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When Valerie became old--about a year in a half older. I went to work and she said, "I'll give you a schedule," and that's when she gave me the schedule. I had to go to work at one o'clock in the afternoon. That way I was able to do what I had to do with the kids and then Taylor [HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] came. Speaker 1: Now Ms. Ora Higgins we interviewed her back in 2002 [sic. 2003] I believe. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think I did it. Yeah, I remember the story. She's one of the first-- Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: --black women to be in a position of authority in a major white firm in the United States. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And she was there at Spiegel's in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the nicest people. But when I, you know, and when I walked away from her, I felt--I said--I was satisfied. I went home and I stayed home and then all of a sudden she called me. And say, "I have the perfect job for you starting at one o'clock in the afternoon." And I was working with a group of high school kids. And teaching them how to file those orders in the what's the name. And that's what I did and I got off at I think about six or seven o'clock in the afternoon, um-hm. Speaker 1: That's something. Now--yeah. You have any stories about Ora Higgins. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no 'cause you know what she was in personnel. But that one--that to me was enough for her to say, "You go home and you see about your baby for a year and I'll call you back." And she did and I was saying--and I don't know--I believed her. Because I went home and I was sort of satisfied for a year. And when she called me I was, you know, and that's when my cousin came. I know I had one of my cousins to come from Florida to help me with the kids, you know, and everything and she cried about going home all the time. So anyway, then my cousin that lives in Chicago now, my mother [Mary Davis Thompson] told her, say, "Ollie [HistoryMaker Ollie Taylor] is trying to work and she has all these children, and she needs some help." I only had three, but "She has all these kids and would you go and help her." And so then she came and she stayed with us. And then she got married, now she's a widow, and-- Speaker 1: Okay. So that's how you managed to be able to work and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --raise your children? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 634022 Speaker 1: Spiegel's [Spiegel Inc.] is located in Bridgeport they call it in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right on 35th Street (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the historic Irish community? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The Daley's [Richard J. Daley] from Bridgeport. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And it's-- Speaker 2: And you get smells there. Speaker 1: What does Bridgeport smell like? Speaker 2: Stockyards. Speaker 1: Okay, in those days it was like a-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. And you get--those are (laughter) those are some smells that you don't forget. Um-hm. But anyway that's where I worked for and then-- Speaker 1: I guess what I was trying to get at was were there any challenges in terms of--I know in Chicago if you go up under the viaduct the wrong time of day or in the wrong direction or something you're in trouble. Speaker 2: Trouble (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I know as late as 1999, a boy was beaten senseless. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, by riding his bike up under a viaduct to go into Bridgeport. Speaker 2: Port, right. Bridgeport was a pa- an area that no black people invaded--you don't go. If you work for Spiegel's I guess you gotta--they didn't bother you or something, 'cause you know Spiegel's was right there in the heart of all of it. But you'd be concerned--and then they had shifts, so it would be a group of you that if you had to take the bus, it would be a group of us that would take the bus, you know. Speaker 1: So you'd catch it right in front of Spiegel's? Speaker 2: Right, right in front of Spiegel's. And see--and then the bus company knew the shifts, you know, 'cause Spiegel's was a big place, a big thing and they had shift going around the clock, so you know, never, I never had a problem there, you know, that's entering from Halsted [Street] to go down 35th Street, no, I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: I don't think so, but it was a lot, you know, I was lucky, though, I didn't--I never had--I was really lucky. Story_ID: 634023 Speaker 1: Now you were in Chicago [Illinois], so you were on the South Side when the riots took place in 1968 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty something. Speaker 1: Yeah, '68 [1968] right after the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Speaker 2: King, um-hm. Speaker 1: Now did you get a chance to hear Dr. King when he was living in Chicago in '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: We went to see, we went to--I don't know if he was--no, we didn't go--we wasn't living there, but we did go to see him speak at the Amphitheatre [International Amphitheatre, Chicago, Illinois] and Mahalia Jackson performed, again music, she performed and then when the riots broke out after his assassination. The people just tried to--they--are you paused? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Oh, they destroyed, you know, they destroyed stores in the--they destroyed the black neighborhood in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. So Englewood was a-- Speaker 2: That's where they did all the, you know, the furniture stores--I mean they destroyed their own, you know. Speaker 1: Now, Englewood is on the South Side on the-e Speaker 2: And hasn't been the same since, hasn't been the same since but-- Speaker 1: So do you remember where you were when you heard about Dr. King's assassination? Speaker 2: I think I was at home, I think at home. Yeah, I think, I think I was at, you know, the house. Speaker 1: Now where did your family live during those days? Speaker 2: We lived on--our first apartment was at 6948 South Dante [Avenue], which is over near Stony Island [Avenue], and then the second apartment was at 7708 South Lowe [Avenue] and our home--then we bought a home. And then we were at 2153 West 82nd Place. That was over near the Dan Ryan Woods [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, but near the dur- around the time of the King, Dr. King disturbance where were you living? Speaker 2: I lived in--I lived--that was in '60 [1960], like about '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], 1968. Speaker 2: Well, I liv- we lived in an apartment over on Lowe. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were like maybe ten blocks-- Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) from where some was burning up actually. Speaker 2: Right. Because it was like in the '60s [1960], you know, where they really destroyed the furniture stores, you know, the grocery stores everything. And we live at 77 [7700 block] and it was like-- Speaker 1: So you were in Auburn Gresham [Chicago, Illinois] I guess, you know, that what you would call that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess that's what you call it. Speaker 1: Yeah, further north would be Englewood. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, about ten blocks north? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, okay. So you were close to-- Speaker 2: It was close and it was, did I say that it was frightening? It was to see and that's when Daley [Richard J. Daley], said shoot to kill or something that. But my--at the time I got a little angry because, I say well why--I wonder why they are kill- destroying our very own, you know, in this community? I really, you know, that was the question I asked myself. I wonder why, I still don't know, I never got an answer. Story_ID: 634024 Speaker 1: The 1968 per- period's a period of time when there's a lot of consciousness in the black community. People starting to rethink what they had been doing before. And I noticed you have a natural hairstyle. Did you get that in those days or did you or is it something you, 'cause everybody was getting an Afro in those days. Did you have one then or is it recent? Speaker 2: No. I didn't have one. No, I had--the reason my hair is this way was my daughter [Angela Taylor] got married what we--my oldest daughter twenty-seven years ago. And she used to roll my hair up and after she got married, she left so I didn't know how to do it, so she--I had it cut off. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). It's as simple as that, huh? Speaker 2: Right. I had it cut off. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did you, you remember, you know, that per- period of time the cultural changes that were going on and were you a part of those changes? People were starting to do--there were a lot of black bookstores opening up-- Speaker 2: It was a lot of black book- theaters--they tried to develop some pride, you know. Black people got key jobs at that time. They--like you said, there was a lot black bookstores. What's his name, guy name, Bo, Shabooty, that's the one that was here? I forget the name of his bookstore--I mean he wrote some books and his wife [Safisha Madhubuti] teaches English now I think at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Are you're talking about Haki Madhubuti [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti], Don L. Lee, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, but I think they're divorced or something like that. Speaker 1: No, they're still together. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I thought they were divorced. But anyway she taught at--but anyway--that's when, you know, people began to also say I'm going to get something to make me, you know, I think that's when black pride developed and it looks liked people found out that they could do something like on their own and everything, you know. But it was, it was a trying time. Story_ID: 634025 Speaker 1: When did you start going to Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois]? I know you graduated in '72 [1972] it says here, but when did you, when did you start? Had, did you start-- Speaker 2: I left Spiegel's [Spiegel Inc.] on Friday morning in 1970 and I went to Kennedy-King to register on a Monday morning and that was--and I was at Kennedy-King for two years. Speaker 1: Kennedy-King had been Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College] I think before the assassinations in '68 [1968] of both Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and-- Speaker 2: And Kennedy. Speaker 1: Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]. Speaker 2: So I went there, you know, two years. Speaker 1: Who were--what did you major in and who were your-- Speaker 2: I majored in, I majored in child development. I got an associate arts degree in child development. And my favorite teacher's professors were Hannah Hogan, the Japanese lady and a black woman named Susan Keys--her name was Gertrude Keeys. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause the first test I made--took, I looked around everybody had eighties and nineties. I had sixteen and then I came up and talked--and she asked me to stay afterward and, so I told her I said, "Well, I don't think college is for me." And she said, "Where do you live?" And I said, "7708 South Lowe [Avenue]." And she said, "And if you stop I will come and get you." And the class was nutrition and so that sort of like inspired me, I say I can talk to somebody so at the end of the semester I got a what--A minus in her class. And you know why I got a A minus in her class because I spelled black eyed peas wrong. I spelled black eye p with--not ed, with A-E, just black eye p, and she gave--I got a--but then, you know she had sort of like supported me all the way through, even afterwards 'cause she then put me on the board at the preschool that they had at Kennedy-King and everything, I, you know, kept in touch with her for a long time. Speaker 1: Now, okay, so she was encouraging and-- Speaker 2: She was encouraging and very supportive and the little Japanese lady was very supportive and Elizabeth [ph.], oh, I forget her last name, she was very supportive, 'cause, you know, they knew I had children. Story_ID: 634026 Speaker 1: Your husband [HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] had--had he finished IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] by then, or? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he finished 'cause I didn't go start--really seriously start until '70 [1970], '70 [1970]. He finished in '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: During the big blizzard 'cause we never saw him graduate 'cause he couldn't go. Speaker 1: That was the great blizzard of '67 [1967] in Chicago [Illinois], the worst in history (unclear), yeah. So had he start working with Sonicraft [Sonicraft, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] yet? Speaker 2: No, he was working at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] when he first started. And then what happened, they worked at--he did research at Illinois Institute before, you know, but he had--before they went in--it was a group of them from IIT left to do, to form Sonicraft. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it was about four or five of 'em. And then all of 'em had finished college by then, you know. Speaker 1: So this is in the--they started this in the-- Speaker 2: I don't know the year. Speaker 1: It was in the '70s [1970s] I know that, when it was started. Speaker 2: It was in the '70s [1970]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 634027 Speaker 1: So you went on to National Louis University [Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: After I graduated in '72 [1972], I went to National Louis University, and I finished there in 1975. Speaker 1: Okay, you mean, okay. All right, so you finished Na- National Louis in '75 [1975]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And I worked full time for a preschool and what I did in the evenings--I mean, when the kids went to sleep, the director allowed me to go and take my classes. Speaker 1: Okay. Was it tough finding a spot in the Chicago Public Schools? Speaker 2: Because I went to National Louis College and I was in an area that was needed. No, it wasn't. It was, you know, well, the Chicago Public School accepted National college teachers because they felt like we got top notch education and so, you know, you had to pass the examine. Speaker 1: What, what area were you in- involved (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From National? Speaker 1: Yeah. That, that made you attractive to Chicago Public Schools. You said you were in an area that made you attractive too, to them, to them. Speaker 2: Right, I didn't start out with Chicago Public School at first, I thought it--I went and worked in special ed [special education] at Abraham Lincoln Centre [Abraham Lincoln Centre, Chicago, Illinois]. Have you heard of it? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I went there and worked. Speaker 1: Okay. So it was special education you were in? Speaker 2: Right, I worked at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: See the area that I went into was primary education, but we had to take special ed courses because we had to rec- be able to recognize kids that, you know, was a challenge or whatever have you. So then I went to work at Abraham Lincoln Center under Dorothy Neal. But then I went, they went to camp and I didn't like what was really going on while we were at camp and, you know, you'd be with all these people challenged children. So I stayed there for a couple of years. Then after that, I left and went on to public school. Speaker 1: Now, what didn't you like about the camp--I mean what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean they sat and drank at night and everything, you know, and you didn't-- Speaker 1: You mean the supervisors? Speaker 2: Teachers and everything and I just, I couldn't, you know, say if you'd be responsible for someone's children. So I say, "Oh, well, this is not the place for me." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So then after that I went on down and applied to, you know, work and it wasn't, wasn't easy 'cause they'd have you to sub [substitute] first. But I didn't sub but a little bit. Speaker 1: So this is like 1977 then or so? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 634028 Speaker 1: So you started with, with the Chicago Public Schools (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Public Schools, right. Speaker 1: --as a sub [substitute teacher]? Speaker 2: Oh, let me see. Nineteen seventy [1970], I subbed in the Catholic school for one year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then went on to the public school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it wasn't the easiest thing because where I subbed was out by my house, and the, and the white kids would say, "Oh, we have a black teacher today." And I say, "Yes, you have a black teacher today and I will not be called black teacher. I will be called by my name Mrs. Taylor [HistoryMaker Ollie Taylor]. I am a black teacher--I mean, I'm a black person, but I am Mrs. Taylor." So, but let me tell you, the thing that--when I was graduating I did my student teaching over at Ogden [William B. Ogden Elementary School; Ogden International School of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] downtown under Margaret Harrigan. And that was in the wealthy, wealthy, super wealthy neighborhood, you know, the kids over in where--this project. They came there in the upper grades. But in the primary grades where I was under Margaret Harrigan. And she said, she asked me, she say, "Would you be interested in a position here at the school?" And I said, "Oh, no, I'm going to work at Abraham Lincoln Center." And my professor told me, he said, "Ollie, that's the reason I sent you over there because you were qualified (laughter) and you sit up talking about you going to work at Abraham Lincoln Center." He said, "Where is Abraham Lincoln Center?" (Laughter) I said, "It's down there on 39th Street." But, you know, I was seeing if I was gonna give something, you know, I'll go down and work. But then it didn't work out. And he said, "That's the reason I sent you over there at the school 'cause I figured you would get--," and that was during the time when they needed black teachers in schools in Chicago [Illinois], you know, to fill the quota, you know, so then I went on someplace else and got a black position. That's what we used to call it (laughter). They called it that and well can we have a black--is this a black position or white position. That's the way they filled us, you know. Speaker 1: So this is a court ordered school desegregation in Chicago when they had to hire some black peo- people (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, and they might still have to do that. Story_ID: 634029 Speaker 1: So 1977 you started as a sub [substitute teacher] or thereabouts and then when did you become a full time teacher with Chicago Public Schools and have an assignment at a regular school? Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978]? Okay, what school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to, I went to--first one was right there on 71st Street. What was the name of this school? Speaker 1: 71st and--? Speaker 2: It was 71st and Loomis [Street]. Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: It was on Loomis. And I was close to my house. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And guess what. One of my professors was the principal. So then he tried to, you know, to keep me there and then after that, you know, I had him as a independent study and, so then after that I said, "Oh, my god," I did a paper but Taylor [Taylor's husband, HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] wrote the paper, so I had to go and read the paper, so I'll know if he ever asked me something about it. Taylor helped me write the paper so, but anyway, that's where I started and then when they got really--because it was on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and they said that it really wasn't a black position, so you sort of like float around then. Then after that in '78 [1978], I think it was the big, big turnaround. It was a big lay off, it was, it was a lot, you know, 'cause that was--at one point there we didn't get paid. They ran out of money, I think it was '78 [1978] during that big snow. Speaker 1: So this is when Jane Byrne was mayor? I think. Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: Or Bilandic [Michael Anthony Bilandic] is that-- Speaker 2: That's who it was. Speaker 1: Michael Bilandic. Speaker 2: 'Cause he ran off and he left the city when it was--all the snow was piled up. It was during that time that we were not getting paid. And see Daley [Richard J. Daley] died--when Daley died he, he ran the city on a handshake and come to find out we didn't have--he didn't have any money down there for the teachers (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, mayor died in '77 [sic. 1976] so in 1978 Michael Bilandic-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And there was school--wasn't there a school board issued too in terms of the number of black on the school board? Speaker 2: Right, and this little lady, it was a little lady on there, and she wanted to be called by her husband's name Mrs. John Sue [ph.] or who--whatever his name. And then after that, they got rid of her. And 'cause it was all-white at first I think. It wasn't but one or two. Speaker 1: I think it was [HistoryMaker] Ruth Love the first black superintendent of Chicago? Speaker 2: That--while I was there. She was one of the best. Then they got another black one--the man. I don't think he opened his suitcase. Speaker 1: Is that--yeah, I-- Speaker 2: They have a street here named the same as--I forget his name. but anyway that--then after that they had Michael Scott [HistoryMaker Michael Scott, Sr.]. He was president of the--but that was later. Story_ID: 634030 Speaker 1: Did you enjoy teaching? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it, I enjoyed it, I enjoyed it. I en- I was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] for thirteen years. I enjoyed the, you know, because I don't know if it was because the tea- the parents and I got along very well, you know, I had young parents and it was so many of them that, you know, they had potential and they wanted to watch soap operas. And I said, "Why are you wasting your time watching soap operas, these people making their money." I say, "You gonna have to go and do something for yourself, you know, go back to school." And most of these kids and gone to school at Westinghouse [George Westinghouse College Prep, Chicago, Illinois] over there with whats his name--that basketball player. Speaker 1: Mark Aguirre. Speaker 2: Mark Aguirre and Isiah Thomas. Speaker 1: He was at St. Joseph's [St. Joseph High School, Westchester, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. But he went to school at Westinghouse. And, you know, it was--I enjoyed working over there. Speaker 1: Now what--were you dealing with special needs children or--? Speaker 2: Not at that time--see that's why I looked around. I had double certificates, if I got tired of working in one area, then I could switch, and then, you know, and then the National college [National Louis University, Chicago, Illinois] also on a primary level we had to take so many special education courses which prepared you for, you know, to be able to recognize if I child had a challenge or whatever have you. Speaker 1: So what was the name of the school you were teaching on the West Side? Speaker 2: I taught at Melody [Genevieve Melody Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], Goldblatt [Nathan R. Goldblatt Elementary School, Chicago, Illinoi], and J.N. Thorp [James N. Thorp Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. But then too--I have to tell you. I made, you know, if I got tired of the school I left and went to another school and then came back (laughter). I had a history of staying at a school for two-three years and then leave. And then I would come--but I always left with good standards with the principal. And they would ask me to come back and I say, "Yeah." Like the last school I retired--Ray Graham [Ray Graham Training Center High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I left there and then after that, they wanted me to come back so I went back. So about every three years--four years--I think the school--although I taught over there all those years--but I was not at the same school. I was Goldblatt twice, I was at Melody twice. And then when I became a supernumerary, you know, when they lay you, you know, when you get--they change you. I worked at this school on--it was on Loomis [Street] and (unclear) her husband was a dentist. She was the principal at this school at that time. I forget--Libby [ph.] or something--I was there only six months, though. 'Cause I went back to the West Side. Story_ID: 634031 Speaker 1: Now do, do you have a philosophy of teaching? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What is your philosophy? Speaker 2: That all children can learn, they're unique, they, although they might not learn at the same rate, and the teacher has to respect them for that. I don't love all children, I like children. But basically, I enjoyed children. 'Cause even when I came here I deci- you know, I had to 'cause I retired in 2003. And then all of sudden in September, I said what--I don't have--these things to do. All the IEPs [individualized education program] and everything, you know, you sort of like get mixed up. So I said, "Well, okay. I'll go out and sub [substitute teaching]." So I went to sub and I did that for about two years. And then I looked around all of a sudden they didn't really pay enough. They don't pay anything and to deal with some of these little kids in--I say wasn't worth it and I wasn't gonna jeopardize my pension. So I volunteered one year, last--not this past school year, but the year before in a kindergarten classroom. Speaker 1: Here in Texas? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they don't pay anything here. They pay subbing sixty dollars a day. So the first year was fine 'cause I said, you know, I was trying to get adjusted and the second year I questioned it. And after that in 2008 I said no. So I, you know, now I belong to the Gold Medallion [St. Joseph Gold Medallion Club, Bryan, Texas] and I belong to the Retired Teachers Association [Retired Teachers Association of Chicago], and they meet once a month and have lunch. And they talk about all their legislature in Texas. And I'm, you know, and Chicago [Illinois] they have big problems too with pension. They don't even give retired teachers a raise. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now you taught school for how many years? Speaker 2: Let me see, I went to the board-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I think we have it here twenty-eight years is what we have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. 'Cause see what I did I bought some years too. Speaker 1: Okay. Twenty-eight years and you mai- did you mainly teach elementary school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh (unclear). Speaker 2: I taught kindergarten for several years and I taught first grade--I taught--when I went to the school I taught first grade and recognizing that the kids did not have the skills that, you know, that they needed to have and I complained a couple years to the principal. So then she said, "Would you consider taking kindergarten?" And I say, "Yes." I said so now--and that's what I did. About seven or eight years I did ki- about seven years I did kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now-- Speaker 2: I stayed there, that was my second go round there. Story_ID: 634032 Speaker 1: Now is there a, is there a highlight of your teaching career that you point to? Speaker 2: Yes. When I was at Ray Graham [Ray Graham Training Center High School, Chicago, Illinois] with the--we had a music department, you know, what it is, is city schools sponsored music teachers to come into the schools to teach the kids music after school. It was when they took music out of the schools and then put it in the evening, you know. Anyway, I had the only choir in the City of Chicago [Illinois] that was--they were challenged, you know, kids. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we used to go and appear at nursing homes. And we would join in with the--all the other city schools and sing. We would go to the library during Black History Month, and we would perform and that was--oh, I used to edit the newspaper [Graham Gazette] and that was interesting. Speaker 1: What newspaper? Speaker 2: At the school. Speaker 1: Oh, at the, at Ray Graham? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was very interesting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And also (laughter)--I had a computer lab. I was the only one that had a computer lab. You wouldn't know it by--now that my computer skills are really poor, but I had one and we worked--I had seventeen or eighteen computers and it was, it was a tutorial thing, you know, I didn't have to--the kids it was with math. 'Cause at Ray Graham it was not just severely retarded children. It was kids also--we had kids that were trainable, mentally handicapped. And we trained them and they went to work like at the car dealers, know, washing the cars and then they went to work--some of 'em were able to work at restaurants and then they--oh, many of 'em were able to work at horticulture 'cause that school was really, you know, high on the scale with the horticulture, horticulture and also, I also taught home arts with the kids during the summer. So that was really--I enjoyed teaching, I really did. Story_ID: 634033 Speaker 1: Is there any tough period of time when you thought about quitting or--? Speaker 2: When they had a su- when I was subbing [substitute teaching] a little bit, you know, I thought about, oh, my god is this the way it is. And then after that, I would, you know, I always tried to maintain the classroom and then the principal would approach me if I wanted to stay for a while, but then with that black--if they tried to put you into a position permanent that quota thing would always come up, especially on the South Side. 'Cause I remember one year when they were shifting teachers around I was sent all the way up to the end of--near Evanston [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Rogers Park [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Armstrong school [George B. Armstrong Elementary School; George B. Armstrong International Studies Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and it was basically a Jewish school. I think they had three black teachers. And, so when the principal interviewed me, he ask me, say, "Well, you're the one I talked to on the phone and you said as long as I'm fair," (laughter) I didn't know he was gonna bring it out, you know, I did say, "Well, I'm coming, I have no other choice but I would sure like for you to be fair with me." And then after that I think what happened is they--on the early childhood list to be assigned, they reached my name, so I left there within the school year and I went to work at J.N. Thorp [James N. Thorp Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a lot of going around. Story_ID: 634034 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about the Harold Washington campaign in 1983. That was a big, that was a big deal for a lot of Chicago [Illinois] pe- people (unclear). Speaker 2: It was, it was a big deal because, you know, we got our first black mayor. And everybody was all, you know, also, again a lot of pride came out of people. How they interacted with each other and the--it was--we did--well, we did a lot of fundraising at that time. And we attended a lot of his, you know, like a lot of the benefits because he appeared at our--for our church and at St. Leo's [St. Leo the Great Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And we did, you know, we just thought it was, really it was a great time, you know, when he became mayor. Then we went back and we voted for him again, but then that was the end, you know. But-- So he won right? The second time. Speaker 1: He won the second time. Speaker 2: But what happened? What--? Speaker 1: You know, then after that he had a heart attack and passed. Well, for one thing, he gained a lot of weight 'cause he would eat at everybody's, you know, place. Somebody poisoned him, maybe I don't know. But anyway he was, you know, every time there was a fundraiser for Harold Washington or anytime he was appearing or something like that. Taylor [Taylor's husband, HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] and I would always go. It was, it was, it was a happy, really a happy time. Then after that I think they got Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] and then that--he had a reputation. He died a couple of years ago I think, but he had a reputation of some unjust things. And then after that we got the Daley [Richard M. Daley] legacy again, you know. Your arms okay, you okay about the arms? Speaker 2: I'm fine. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm fine, I'm just sitting a long time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know. Speaker 2: Makes me wanna stretch, you know, so I'm okay. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But it was, it was really a happy, happy time when Harold Washington was--and I think he got some things done for the blacks, you know. It was just so much--but then it was those two people down there Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak] and what's the other one's name? Speaker 2: You're talking about--it starts with a B. Speaker 1: I know he just ado- he adopted not too long ago a little black child. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Um-hm (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Burke--Ed Burke [Edward M. Burke]. Speaker 1: Yeah, and his wife [Anne M. Burke], did she-- Speaker 2: Two Eds, Ed Burke and Ed Vrdolyak. Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, they performed down at that--they performed, they performed because he was, you know, the mayor. It reminds me of with Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and the people, you know, the Republicans. They just performed and everything that he tried, but he did get some things, you know, through 'cause I think it was something to do with black businesses that he got through, I don't remember exactly. Speaker 2: He got some contracts for people that never had (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had contracts before. That was one thing that he did and, you know, like I say it was, it was a happy--and I don't think crime was on the ram- was rampant at at that time, during his time, I don't think so, unh-uh. But it was, it was a happy time for people. Story_ID: 634035 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I wanted to ask you about some of your volunteer activities. I noticed when I came in you recognized me from eta Cre- Creative Arts Foundation [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], where I think you and your husband [HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] had been involved in the board and other activities and so forth. Speaker 2: But see I was over there volunteering to sell calendars, that's what I was doing over there, selling the calendars. So then after that he came over to pick me up or something and was talking or something--and he got on the board. But, you know, then my friend Maryann King [ph.], you know, they put--but anyway that's what I did, I sold calen- (laughter) I sold calendars, you know, they had a fundraiser where each day you won money so then I would sell calendars and what else did I do? I would go over and like usher. I did that once or twice but I didn't, I have knee problems, so I didn't pursue that any further, but I did, I worked with the calendar group and where we raised a lot of money for-- Speaker 1: eta is like Chicago's [Illinois] largest African American theater group-- Speaker 2: It's not--I don't know 'cause the other, the other group has, went into a new building. Speaker 1: Oh, which one is that? Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Not Chicago Theater Company [ph.] or--? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. But any they've got they've got their new building. The eta has been, you know, ever since--we were back there years ago, have been getting, you know, they've gotten money and now they don't have Emil down there to help send money, you know, to give a little money to them, so-- Speaker 1: Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: State senator. Speaker 2: Um-hm, he helped, he was instrumental in helping them a lot. And I think the lot across the street from eta. This is where they wanted to build the new theater. But I remember when we started, they had the little chairs in the, you know, I don't know how many it could seat. But I think it seats about two hundred now, and, you know, 'cause they went on and added on, and added on. Speaker 1: Yeah, they built a new theater in '87 [1987], '87 [1987], '88 [1988] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: And intended to build a bigger one but-- Speaker 2: But that's the bigger one was supposed to be, you know, across the street-- Speaker 1: I think unless I'm wrong, it's still the biggest, it's still the biggest black owned theater company-- Speaker 2: 'Cause it is owned. Speaker 1: Yeah, by black people. Speaker 2: 'Cause that little honey Alvin [Alvin Ailey] didn't mind begging for money. Speaker 1: So why did you chose to be involved in a theater group in terms of fundraising? Speaker 2: Well, I like plays as I said before. And because it was a black theater, then I had a very close friend of mind was involved and she asked me--she say, "Why don't come over and volunteer with us, we sell calendars" (laughter) so I say, "Okay." And I went trotting over there. And that's the way I got involved. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I encouraged, you know, 'cause I--my teacher friends when a play was out, I, you know, have 'em make sure they take their kids to the plays. Well I took my school, my whole school 'cause I only had about a hundred--it was only about 150 kids in there, in the school. And I went--that was at Ray Graham [Ray Graham Training Center High School, Chicago, Illinois] at the end. And I would--we would charter buses and take the kids to eta. But it was a certain amount of pride I guess, you know, and then we--Taylor had his--would have his family reunion--I mean like fundraisers there. It was, you know, his church fundraisers there. That was a place that you--okay, you go and see a play. Then after that we would serve food, you know, it was like big time. You went to the big theater, you know, and we sit around and talk or whatever have you. It was really--it was nice. I miss that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I miss that. Story_ID: 634036 Speaker 1: Now you, you were saying off camera that you did a lot of volunteering at your children's schools. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, my kids went to Catholic school so, you know, that, you know, it's based on volunteering. So my kids went to St. Leo's [St. Leo the Great Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], see in the grammar school not in the high school 'cause they went to Maria High School [Chicago, Illinois] which is over in sixty- on 67th [Street] were no black people was gonna cross over. But over Ashland [Avenue]. Speaker 1: That's Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Marquette Park, yeah. Everything as you just mentioned and everything has a little history there. But I volunteered at my children's'--when they were in elementary school. Used to go over and we would do hot dogs, you know, sell whatever they needed, we did. On Sundays we have big dinners and things like that and, you know, to raise money for that. Story_ID: 634037 Speaker 1: Tell us about your children. I guess, starting with Anthony [Anthony Taylor], I guess (unclear). Speaker 2: Anthony is fifty-two, fifty-three, yeah. But anyway he is, he's finished college. He was in a severe car accident seven or eight years ago. And he's not, he's on disability but I think he could do a little better. 'Cause he can do--he's research. But he did get a degree in engineering also at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois]. So he's at home. And he's one that has changed jobs or changed careers. Okay, he went to--after he got out of IIT, he went to Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] to get, become a paralegal. So that, he has that, then after the he decided I'm gonna be a chef, and he has that. That's what he did a couple of years ago was a chef. So, and then my oldest daughter [Angela Taylor] is--she's an engineer for Boeing [The Boeing Company] in California. She's married. She married her college sweetheart, and they been married about twenty-seven, twenty-eight years and they have two children. One is fifteen was, went Wharton school of business [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for the early ID program [international development] this sum- this summer. She just got home a couple of weeks ago. And there's Alexis [ph.] who been--she's the little party girl. And then there is Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Taylor] who has a Ph.D. Okay, by the way Angela has a M.B.A. also. She got her M.B.A. from Univer- one of the universities of California. Valerie got her--and she went to school at IIT like her dad [HistoryMaker Willie Taylor]. And my son went to school at IIT also. Valerie was the only one--she branched out, she went to Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana]. Then after she left Purdue she went to U- University of Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], and that's where she had her Ph.D. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Them my three proud people. I'm proud to be their mother, um-hm. Speaker 1: And how many grandchildren do you have? Speaker 2: We have four. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. They're all the same age, thirteen and fifteen. Story_ID: 634038 Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think my legacy would be--well, I'm a good, I'm a good mother. Well, I'm [HistoryMaker] Ollie Taylor first, okay. Then after that I'm a good, I'm good--I'm a good mother and to be able to send three schools, three children to school, and all of 'em finished college in Chicago [Illinois]. I think that's really, really something great that Taylor [Taylor's husband, HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] and I have to say--well, you know, we didn't do it our own. But, you know, through the, through the help of God, so every--evidently there was something that we did that helped them along the way. And my legacy would be to--in education would be I was a darn good teacher. Story_ID: 634039 Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you wish you would've done differently if you could've gone back to change it? Speaker 2: Let's see. Not, you know what, I wish I had gone to school earlier. I really do. But as far as saying I--that I wish I had gone into something under some other area. No. Teaching has been really gratifying to me, so I'm glad I did it that way. And I think it was ab- I was able to appreciate it more. And by me going to school with my kids--having kids they were little when Taylor [Taylor's husband, HistoryMaker Willie Taylor] was going to school, so they didn't remember the, you know, the--what I had to read out loud so I can comprehend, and they say, "I'll never--I will go to school before I (laughter) before I get, before I get married and have children." So that, you know, maybe my going to school late might've inspired them. Speaker 1: Okay. Set a good example. Story_ID: 634040 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think young parents, I think parents period need to realize the value of an education, you know, and don't sit back and expect people to give 'em something, you have to get out and get it. And drugs is not the way out. It's not 'cause I know we used to talk to the kids in Chicago [Illinois] and they talking about the money. The money that they made and everything--but I, like I used to say, "You're out here on this street and it's sixty [degrees] below and the man that you're selling the drugs for is in the suburbs in his home, warm home." So drugs is not a way out. I think drugs is a early death. So I think education is--I don't care, you know, is a way to escape certain, you know, if you have an education, I think in most, most--many cases you can get a job, might not be paying what you want, but you don't have to be on the streets to sell drugs. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: What is your last question? Speaker 1: All right. The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Pause) Ollie Thompson Taylor [HistoryMaker Ollie Taylor] was very inspiring. Story_ID: 634041 Speaker 1: That's Anthony [Anthony Taylor], my son. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I can see-- Speaker 1: On the bottom? Speaker 2: The--to the right. Speaker 1: Bottom left? I mean, right here? Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: Like you read left to-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay. That's Angela [Angela Taylor], the oldest daughter. [HistoryMaker] Ollie Taylor, the mom. [HistoryMaker] Valerie Taylor, the youngest daughter. And Anthony our only son. Speaker 1: Okay. What--about what year is this, do you know? Speaker 2: Well, Valerie was an infant and she was born in, what time (laughter) sixty- what? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Three [1963], right? Speaker 2: About '60 [1960]. She's forty-nine so-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. That's Ollie Taylor. I think I was in--I had gone to Florida, Tallahassee. Ollie Taylor. I got my associate of arts degree in 1972. That's Farmer Brown. That's Willie--Ollie Taylor and [HistoryMaker] Willie Taylor. We look like farmers (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) American Gothic. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Oh, those are--that's my aunt in the background sitting on the couch. And that's my friend--that was before I got married. Doris [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Doris is on the left? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And that's me right there-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In the (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the center. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And then on the end of the couch is Elba [ph.], she was my aunt's next door neighbor in New York [New York]. That was before I got married. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What was your aunt's name again? Speaker 1: Josephine [ph.]. She's dead now. And, let me see. Our kids were born about the same time. That's Stephanie [ph.]. That's Anthony, when I think they were about nine months old. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This is--okay. You're on the left? Speaker 1: Yes, that's me! Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And Anthony, okay. Speaker 1: That's me and Anthony and then Francis [ph.] and Stephanie. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Who are the two gentlemen? Speaker 1: The gentlemen is--Let's see, let me look and see. I think that might be Tootsie [ph.]. Speaker 2: It's written on the back here. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: It's Tootsie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, Tootsie. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, yeah. It's Tootsie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And Bocker T.? Speaker 2: Booker T. [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Book- Booker T. All right, all right, good. Speaker 2: That's me pregnant with one of 'em. That's probably with Angela maybe I don't know. That's when we lived in an apartment. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. That's the two girls, Valerie and Angie, Ollie and Willie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) that's when we were putting on a variety show at Ray Graham Training Center [Ray Graham Training Center High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And the man is Mr. Jackson [ph.]. I forget the teacher's name in the middle, and that's Ollie Taylor. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 2: Oh, that's Taylor's, that's his first car I think. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So your husband, Willie Taylor? Speaker 2: Right. That's-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is he sitting? Speaker 2: Let me see it. Uh-oh. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oops, sorry. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. That's him standing right there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And this is Tootsie, that's their car. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 2: So you can give--oh, that's my son, Anthony, and my oldest daughter, Angela. That was the birthday party for Valerie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And I assume that's Valerie right in the front of the picture. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And that's a Sunday coming from church and I don't know what baby that was. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Speaker 2: Um-hm. And that is my mother, MaryAnn [Mary Davis Thompson], and my father, Major [Major Thompson, Sr.], and my bro- the brother--my brother is in my mother's arm. That's Albert [Albert Thompson], and the little girl standing down there is Ollie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Now that's a group that we were all--we went to the football game at Tennessee, and what's her name. That's my sister in law--ex sister in law. My brother Albert, my nephew Navera [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you start right over here, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where I start-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Let me see. This is Hattie [ph.], my sister in law. And the person in the sunglasses is my brother Albert. And I think that's Willie Taylor in the background and my sister in law, Inez, and that's Ollie Taylor, and this is Taylor's sister Theresa [Theresa Taylor Doughty]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. We're going to straighten. Someone has to listen to what you're saying and they're going to type up the caption. Speaker 2: Okay, now-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): They're not here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you--so yeah, Larry [Larry Crowe] you should probably point at-- Speaker 2: Okay. Hattie, (pronunciation) Navera, Albert, Taylo- Willie Taylor, Inez Thompson [ph.], Ollie Taylor and Theresa Doughty. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: All family. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thanks. Speaker 2: Here's another one with an award (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was in 1989 when I got my master's [degree]. And point, let me see. Speaker 2: You are-- Speaker 1: That's Ollie Tay-- Speaker 2: This is you here? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Right there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. That's Ollie Taylor. Linda [ph.], Ann [ph.], let's see who that is. Can I get clo- let me see, that's my husband (laughter) he has on glasses. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay (unclear). Speaker 1: Willie Taylor, Ann and I forget his name. All of us got our master's at the same time. Speaker 2: And who is this right here? Speaker 1: That's Audrey [ph.], she is our children's godmother. She lives in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: That's Valerie, Angela and Ollie Thomps- Ollie Taylor. We're at the airport. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Going anywhere special? Speaker 2: Go--Valarie going back to school. No, Angela was going to California--they were going to Cali- oh, you know what they had been home for our anniversary and they were going back 'cause Valerie is in school and Angela lives in southern California, okay. That picture is my older brother Al- oh, right here. I forget her name. That's her, his brother--I mean a sister in law of my brother. But we had been to a graduation at in Atla- Georgia. My nephew had graduated. And that's--wait a minute, that's, that's my brother Albert and that's me Ollie Thompson--I mean Ollie Taylor. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: In 1972, probably around-- Speaker 1: Yeah. That's when I was graduating from preschool [Nathan B. Young Hall, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and that's--I don't know who the kids are but that's, those are preschool kids and it has, it has the professor's name there doesn't it? Doctor-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, Dr. Joan Swift. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was over in the department and that's Ollie Taylor. On the-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, my god. This is a wedding. That's Valerie's wedding. Hattie-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hattie (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, there. And Sissy [ph.], Taylor's auntie, and that's my auntie Catherine [ph.] and that's my uncle, Alec [Alexander Thompson], that's Taylor's uncle and that's Audrey with the polka dot dress on. And then that's Willie Taylor and Ollie Taylor. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Standing. Speaker 1: Standing. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's Ollie Taylor at a hat show. Could you tell everybody has on those weird hats? That's here. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's in Texas. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's Ollie Taylor, that's one of her school pictures, I don't remember what year it was. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: But I had a little hair then, I had a Jehri curl, that's what it was (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: That's my yearbook, Baby Rattler [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University High School; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida], 1956. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) Rattlers, wow. Speaker 1: Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]...