 Story_ID: 628072 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Patricia Turner. And Patricia is P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, and Turner is T-U-R-N-E-R. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name at all? Speaker 2: It's Anzella. I'm named after my [paternal] grandmother [Anzella Claude], who was German. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it's A-N-Z-E-L-L-A. Speaker 1: All right. Now, that's interesting. So, your grandmother was German? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I guess we'll get into that story; that's interesting. Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: October 11, 1944, in Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, at the present time I am the director of Oakwood Academy [Oakwood Chapel Academy, Norfolk, Virginia], which is a private preschool. Speaker 1: Oakwood Academy. And you're an educator, primarily? Speaker 2: Educator, been one for many years. Also, a retired teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: May 14, 2010. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In my home in Norfolk, Virginia. Story_ID: 628073 Speaker 1: So, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management requires me to ask of everyone, and they only require a brief an- answer (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: They're kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The, the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: That's something I really have to think about. Do I have a favorite food? I guess it's, it's a crazy food. I like small carrots, the baby carrots. I love them (laughter). Speaker 1: Small carrots. This is the first time I've heard of that one (laughter). Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Bahamas. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Education is the key to success. Story_ID: 628074 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Turner, Sr.] side sep- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --separately. But we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's maiden name was Harrison. Her first name was Marjorie, M-A-R-J-O-R-I-E, and Harrison is H-A-R-R-I-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Marjorie Harrison Turner is her full name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Ten, thirty-one, twenty [October 31, 1920]. Speaker 1: Okay. And where? Speaker 2: She was born in Norfolk [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the family history on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Not very well. I don't know them very well. I know my grandmother's name was Hattie Harrison. I don't know what her maiden name--wait, yes, I do. Her maiden name was Jackson. Her mother was Annie Jackson [ph.], of whom I have a picture of. I don't have a picture of my grandmother, but I have a picture of my great-grandmother; I knew her very well. My grandmother--my great-grandmother was Cherokee Indian [Native American]. She--when I was a young girl, she lived with us 'til--I think grandma died in the late '70s [1970s]. She died in the late '70s [1970s], and I knew her very well. My grandmother lived in New London, Connecticut. I didn't know her very well, but I'd seen her a few times. My grandfather, my mother's father, Henry Harrison, was a retired military--my mom's--I believe he was in the [U.S.] Army. I don't remember ever meeting him, but my mother said I did when I was little. But I don't remember him. His last place of--when he died, I believe he died in California. But I don't remember ever seeing him. Speaker 1: But he was in the Army? Speaker 2: He was in the Army, uh-huh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Now, is Connecticut--now this is--? Speaker 2: New London, Connecticut. Speaker 1: New London. Is there a link between--I guess--now I'm starting to figure this out. Being down here in Norfolk, Norfolk has a lot of connections to-- Speaker 2: The military. Speaker 1: --New England and--well, you know, the coast, you know, because it's a sea town. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, a lot of people-- Speaker 2: He may have been in the [U.S.] Navy, I'm not exactly sure. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I think it was the Army. Speaker 1: And your grandmother is in New London, Connecticut. You've got people up and down the coast, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You know, so I guess that's pretty common-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --down here-- Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --to have relatives who live in-- Speaker 2: To--I have relatives on the other side, but that's on my dad's side. Speaker 1: Okay. So New London, Connecticut. And there's a--is the family--as far as you know, your mother's side of the family--did they--is there more story in Connecticut or in Virginia? Speaker 2: In Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: In Virginia. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what did your--did they--do they have any stories they tell about, you know, back in the 19th century about the--you know, any stories from the slavery period, of how they got their name, or any of that? Speaker 2: No. I don't know too much about that side. I know about my mom growing up. But I don't know too much about--aside from, that they were Cherokee Indian, because my great-grandmother was Cherokee Indian. And, I know that-- Speaker 1: Was she from Virginia, or was she from--? Speaker 2: She was from Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She--when she got married to my great-grandfather, whom I never knew, he brought her here. She married black, and he brought her to Norfolk, but I don't know where he brought her from. Speaker 1: Okay. I know a lot of them are in the Carolinas, but I'm not sure (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think so. I think she was brought from North Carolina, but I can't tell you what part or anything. I know very little about my mother's side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 628075 Speaker 1: Well, what did your mother [Marjorie Harrison Turner] say about growing up? I mean, how--what circumstances did she grow up in? Speaker 2: She grew up during the Depression [Great Depression]. So, she tells stories about when she was little and they used to walk out on the train tracks to pick up coal, because the coal--the trains would--as they bumped along the tracks, they would drop the coal on the side. And they would always take bags out, and that's the way they would get coal, because they had very little money. And she tells about working in the strawberry fields. And she tells a cute little story about she and her sister [Evelyn Harrison] would--they would go to school half the time, and then they'd work when it got warm. So they worked in the strawberry field, and they were very little. I don't know how old they were, but they were little. My aunt would always be tired, and she would go and get in one of the packing boxes, go to sleep. So, my mom would be working for both of them, but would watch out for her. And when the truck would come to bring their food for lunch, she would always have to run over to the packing boxes, because she was scared they would run over my aunt who was asleep in the boxes. And they had a very hard, rough, life. They grew up on--right off of Church Street, because she used to walk to Church Street. Church Street was the main street during that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course she graduated from Booker T. Washington High School [Norfolk, Virginia] and went on to--which is Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] now, but I believe it was a division of Virginia State [sic.] or-- Speaker 1: Right. That's what I heard (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or Virginia Union [Norfolk Unit, Virginia Union University], one of the two during that time. And she went to school one year before she met my dad [James Turner, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Attended Norfolk. Now what is the--now, I haven't asked this question. I was mad at myself last night. I haven't asked anybody what the name of the black side of town is in Norfolk. Is it-- Speaker 2: Now, that's good. I think it was Huntersville [Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what? Speaker 2: Huntersville. Speaker 1: Huntersville, okay. Speaker 2: I think it was called Huntersville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I've heard my mom mention that quite often. Huntersville still exists, and I think that's what it was called. It was a big section. Speaker 1: Yeah, because usually in every town there is-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And I was mad at myself for not asking. Speaker 2: I do believe it was Huntersville. Speaker 1: Huntersville, okay. So, you've got to carry the burden for everybody (laughter). Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. And that's the older black section over by where Norfolk State is now? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It's not? Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: Where would it be? Speaker 2: I don't know where it extended, okay. Speaker 1: But Church Street and all that--? Speaker 2: Church Street, right. Speaker 1: That would have been Huntersville? Speaker 2: Right. Church Street was the cutoff point. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So, and, okay, so did your mother talk about what they had going on over there in that neighborhood in those days? Did they have any black businesses, and--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they had plenty of black businesses. And the Jews had most of the stores. So, but the Jews were--she said they were very, very nice, especially to blacks. And they would give them jobs, and even give them food and stuff if they were short, on credit like. So the Jews and blacks owned the area. Speaker 1: Okay. But it's good relationship for the most part between the two (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, very good. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 628076 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about your father's information (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know more about them than I do-- Speaker 1: Okay. What is your father's full name? Speaker 2: My father's name is James--was James A. Turner, Sr. [James Turner, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know what the A stands for? Speaker 2: Atlas. Speaker 1: At- okay, Atlas Turner. Is there a story behind that name? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not that I know of; I really don't know. My daddy was the grandnephew to Nat Turner. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is interesting. Before I get--now I'm really excited about this. But at the same--because I was thinking that, you know, for some reason when we were sitting in there. But Atlas sounds like the kind of name that, you know--was that passed down through slavery days? Speaker 2: It (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because it seems like the kind of name that-- Speaker 2: That name was very strange. Speaker 1: --might be. Speaker 2: What happened is that my grandmother [Anzella Claude], when she had my daddy, she thought his name was Alexander, and for years, he thought his name was Alexander. When he got ready to go in the [U.S.] Navy to apply--because he was, you know, he was young, and it was in early '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] or whatever it was. They wouldn't let him in, because that wasn't his name. They found out his name was Atlas. The white doctor that delivered him named daddy after himself. So, I don't know nothing about that doctor, but they had to find out that daddy's name was Atlas instead of Alexander. Speaker 1: That's interesting. So the doctor's name was Atlas, I guess then, so? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right, that's an interesting story. Story_ID: 628077 Speaker 1: Now, you say your father [James Turner, Sr.] is related to Nat Turner? Speaker 2: Nat Turner (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is, yeah-- Speaker 2: I have a cousin who has done the research. He says we're direct descendants, but I don't know. He's done the history a lot. We were always told that daddy was a nephew. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, really, I don't know if we're direct descendants or if daddy was a nephew-- Speaker 1: 'Cause he would be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but we're in the family line. Speaker 1: Yeah. So Nat Turner died in 1831. He was probably about thirty-one or so when he was executed. So, we're talking about probably him being born in 1800, and then--so I'm just trying to think if your father's-- Speaker 2: Daddy was born in 1922. Speaker 1: He's got to be--yeah, he's got to be probably a great-great-great-great-great-- Speaker 2: In some way a nephew? Speaker 1: It's possible, because there are Turners. Speaker 2: It could be direct. Speaker 1: We, we-- Speaker 2: Because my cousin says that we are. Speaker 1: Yeah. History records Turners in Southampton County [Virginia] now that are--everybody acknowledges there are direct-- Speaker 2: That's our Turners. Speaker 1: And they're--are they, are you related to those Turners in Southampton? Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's us. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Because there was, a few years ago there was, there were a few articles in The New York Times about the discovery of the cave that Nat Turner-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: --held up in-- Speaker 2: That is us. Speaker 1: --when they were looking for him. Speaker 2: We, we, are, we are those Turners. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So then that's, it's pretty much established-- Speaker 2: So it's a direct thing, some kind of way. Speaker 1: --that you're directly related. There's also was information I read that a son of his named Gilbert Turner escaped to Ohio, to New Salem, Ohio, and he had a daughter there who died in the 1930s [sic.], you know, a direct descendant of Nat Turner in that sense, too. So these are--for anybody watching this, that's the Nat Turner information. Now, now Southampton County, in relationship to Norfolk [Virginia], is where? Speaker 2: About fifty-eight--we used to go all the time when grandma [Anzella Claude] was alive, of course. Maybe it took us--I don't know, I was a kid--a couple of hours, a couple of hours to get there. Because grandma--now my grandmother was married to my grandfather, of course, two hundred years ago, I mean many years ago. But grandpa died, Grandpa Herbert [Herbert Turner] died. Then grandma married Hobbs, and his name happened to be Hob- Herbert [Herbert Hobbs (ph.)] also. The grandfather that I knew was a Claude. He's from Southampton County, okay. So my grandfather, I never knew my grandfather, because my grandfather died when my daddy was eight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And grandma married twice after that. But she still lived on the Turner farm. And the Turner farm, we do know that the Turner farm, well, it's still there. One of my cousins owns it now. He doesn't go there, but he owns it. The Turner farm used to cover quite a bit of Southampton County. Speaker 1: There's a man named Benjamin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Turners owned it, basically. Speaker 1: --Benjamin Turner, a white family. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and that was how we ended up with that piece of land that we ended up with, that our family ended up with. It was that the white father--he was a grandfather somewhere back in the road--he gave it to his family, because he had children by the slave. But he loved his children, so he gave them this big piece of land; a big piece of land and a white mule. And they kept that land in the family all the way up until today. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is interesting history. Because there was--it was interesting to me when I read the articles in The New York Times that there were still relatives that--and--that they been allowed to live on this land. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because there was so much slaughter after the Nat Turner revolt out of fear of what black folks might do. Speaker 2: Might do. Speaker 1: All over the country, all the way to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and Ohio-- Speaker 2: All the way. Speaker 1: --there were riots where whites attacked black communities. Speaker 2: And it's very interesting, because you know, Nat never killed anybody. It was his followers that really did the killing. Story_ID: 628078 Speaker 1: And we, as family, we get a little upset, because the only picture that they show of Nat is a painted picture, and they show him as being a dark complexioned man. We always say, think about it. If this is true, look at us. Nat Turner couldn't have possibly been that of dark complexion. The reason he was able to go into the lands and everything was that he looked just like the people. Speaker 2: Well, he was-- Speaker 1: He did not look like that. Speaker 2: He was described by Thomas Gray [Thomas R. Gray], the white lawyer who interviewed him, as having a bright complexion. Speaker 1: Of course he was. He looked--he was white. He, he, was very, very, white. I mean he, you couldn't tell--in other words, he was what they call a mulatto. They couldn't tell him from the white man. And his followers were all people, of all people, and they really did the killing. But he was so strong. Speaker 2: Now, is that--now in the story that Thomas Gray tells--he supposedly interviewed him. But Thomas Gray doesn't--I mean who's to say whether he got it right or wrong, you know, but he claims to have interviewed Nat Turner. In 'The Confessions of Nat Turner,' the Thomas Gray version, not the novel ['The Confessions of Nat Turner,' William Styron] that came out later, which is different, describes Nat Turner as being bright in color. He said he didn't look white, but he looked bright; maybe your complexion even. Speaker 1: Well, see, during that time they wouldn't have said looked white. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They did say bright. Speaker 2: They said bright. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And there's a drawing of him that they supposedly drew. Have you seen the drawing? Speaker 1: The only drawing that I've seen is the one that makes him look extremely dark. Speaker 2: No, there's is a pencil drawing of him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From a time period, with a hat. He had kind of a (unclear) hat on. Speaker 1: Okay, I haven't seen that one. Speaker 2: And his features are full. They're not like, they're not the fullest we've ever seen, but they're--you know, he looks like--and Gray described him as being someone who had a certain amount of intelligence. When you looked at him, you knew he was intelligent, and he was, you know, someone who had leadership capacity. And he said that he saw somebody that would dare, you know, rise up, you know, had the courage to confront slavery. Speaker 1: I, I guess I really--well, I've never been much on history; I never cared. That was my brother's [James Turner, Jr.] field. And he, my brother, knew a lot. I, being a--I contributed it to being a girl, but it had nothing to do with that. I just wasn't interested in history, okay. Speaker 2: You're a mathematician, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes, I was more interested in why? Speaker 2: There's a lot, there's more literature on Nat Turner now than ever before. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: And the drawing appears in [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding. If anybody is listening to this who wants to know where you can see it, it's online. You can Google it online. Speaker 1: I'm going to Google it myself. Speaker 2: And the drawing also appears in Vincent Harding's 'There's a River' ['There Is a River: The Black Struggle for Freedom in America'], that drawing of Nat Turner that was supposed to be a contemporary drawing, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. I've got, I'm going to Google it myself, and look at it and see if I have any features (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact when I looked at you I thought that--yeah, I said this is quite possible, though people can change--we've seen families change from dark to light and back again-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --in our families. But, you know, you do look similar to what-- Speaker 1: To what the picture looks like. It's amazing, because the Southampton County [Virginia] Turners, you can tell us. You can tell us. There's something there that you can tell. Speaker 2: Okay, well, it's quite a legacy. Nat Turner, he was--he didn't do anything--with the number of people that were killed, there was never a mean act. No one was tortured or anything. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I mean, it was an expedient thing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They were moving on trying to get to Dismal Swamp [Great Dismal Swamp], is what I understand. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And some people lived on in Dismal Swamp for years as maroons, who were part of the--well, anyway, let me get on. I'm talking too much. Speaker 1: (Laughter) You're a history person. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: It's very--yeah, that story to me is a very important story. Speaker 1: See, if my brother were alive and here, you guys could talk all day (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. A few years ago, we actually interviewed a lady who started home economic programs for colored schools, and she lives in Southampton County. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I didn't realize that's where we were. And I saw a sign that said Southampton Middle School [Courtland, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Our county. Speaker 2: And I just felt that it was something, you know, that I was overwhelmed with, emotional about. Because this really-- Speaker 1: It really is. Speaker 2: --is a powerful chapter in American history. Speaker 1: It really is powerful. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So when we--so, what--does your family have any other stories about Nat Turner that they passed down? Speaker 2: My--well, what we hear is that when he started this--I'd always been looking for the reason of him starting this. And he was, he was looking for his mother [Nancy Turner]. It seems that the slave master was--as they were--they had, he had his mother. And the slave mistress, the mistress, knew of this affair. And one day when he was out on business, she sold the lady and left the children there. There were three children, and she left the children there. When Nat got old enough, he was looking for his mother. But as him being such a charismatic leader, this is how the revolt started. But basically he was looking for his mother, because they had to have a reason for it, and that was the reason; it's that he was searching for her. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's an interesting story. Story_ID: 628079 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how the family got from Southampton County [Virginia] to Norfolk [Virginia], or why did they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why we-- Speaker 1: Yeah, why your father [James Turner, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: --moved? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, daddy came here to work. This is before he met my mom [Marjorie Harrison Turner]. He had cousins who lived here. And Southampton County was all farms and everything, but they made very little money. So, it was him being the oldest in the family. And at that time, his father [Herbert Turner] had died. His mother [Anzella Claude] of course had remarried and had other children. But money was very low, and daddy came here to work. So when he came here, he lived with his cousin. He met my mom, and after he met my mom he joined the military; he joined the [U.S.] Navy. And my daddy was a submariner for thirty years. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, well--okay. So, so, did your father go to school here? Speaker 2: My daddy only had a third grade education-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when he joined the military. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He became--through the military, he got his education. And when he had retired, he went to college and graduated from Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's good. So about how old was he when that, that happened? Speaker 2: When daddy retired from the military, it was after thirty years. So, my daddy must have been fifty-- Speaker 1: Oh, I forgot to ask you-- Speaker 2: --when he got his degree. Speaker 1: --the year he was born, I think. Speaker 2: Daddy was born June 1, 1922. Speaker 1: June 1, 1922, okay. And so he was in his fifties before he finished? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Now, well, you told us how they met. Story_ID: 628080 Speaker 1: Tell me about your brothers and sisters. How many are in your family? Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: How many sib- siblings? Speaker 2: There are, basically there are seven of us. My father [James Turner, Sr.] had a son before he ever met my mother [Marjorie Harrison Turner]. His name was James Wright. And after he met my mom, there became six of us. My brother next to me, James, Jr. [James Turner, Jr.], is deceased now. He integrated the schools with me. My next brother, Keith [Keith Turner] is--he's an actor, and he rides bulls and he owns a horse farm. He lives in New Mexico. He's been married for twenty-five years. My next sister, Jacque [Jacque Turner], J-A-C-Q-U-E, Jacque is, she's a college professor for Stratford. She's an English-- Speaker 1: Stratford College? Speaker 2: Stratford, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Stratford University [Virginia Beach, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, is that in Connecticut? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's based here. It's in Connecticut, but you know, they have extenders. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Betty [Betty Turner Bray], Betty is a GS-11 for the government. She's in [U.S.] Secret Service for the government. And Jerree [Jerree Turner Eure], it's J-E-R-R-E-E, she's a postmaster general. Speaker 1: Postmaster general? For--? Speaker 2: She was for the City of Hampton [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Really? Okay. Speaker 2: Now, she is, she's stepped down. So she's now the manager for one of the big post offices, I think the one on Church Street [Norfolk, Virginia] now. They move her around because she trains managers. Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay, so every- and where do you fall in the order? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 628081 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't know how old I was, but I think it was--well, I wasn't ten yet; I know that. I was still little. Mama [Marjorie Harrison Turner] and dad [James Turner, Sr.] had taken us to [paternal] grandma's [Anzella Claude] farm. And it's crazy. I was always very hyperactive. And I jumped out the car and we ran to see the pigs. Grandma kept the pigs in a fenced in yard, and I always loved to go see the baby pigs. So the sow had had baby pigs when we went down this time, and grandma had written us about the baby pigs. So, I ran off to see the baby pigs, and oh, they were so cute. So, I climbed over the fence to get in the crate to get a baby pig for my sisters and brothers, because they were little. And I got hung up on the fence, because the mama was coming. (Laughter) So I tore my pants and tore my knee, trying to get a pig. And I--it was before I was ten, I remember that. And when daddy was home--because daddy was a submariner. And when he was home six months--and he was gone six months--he used to take us to the drive-in movie. And at the drive-in movie, he'd let us sit on top of the car, and he would always go get us popcorn and sodas. So, all five of us could sit on top of the car. And they had blanket they used to put on the top of the car, so we could see the movie. I remember that. I also remember daddy used to take us to the military beach. And they, it must have been when canned sodas first came out. We thought we had canned beer, and we were running around talking about "We have beer, we have beer" (laughter), but we really had soda. But I remember that. And I can remember having--because the sailors used to let us eat whatever they were eating. At home, you know, we had hot dogs and hamburgers, but they had steaks. And I remember them giving me a steak that was bigger than my bread. And I was trying to figure out, "How am I supposed to eat this?" I had to give my sisters and brothers some to make it small so that it would fit the bread. Mama said, "You're not supposed to break it down like that. That was yours." I said, "But I can't eat my bread." (Laughter) And I was confused on how to eat my bread. So, all of those things come back. Story_ID: 628082 Speaker 1: As you were telling the story about the drive-in, I was just wondering if the drive-in was a (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nothing was integrated. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah. So-- Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: Was it [U.S.] military, associated with the military? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. It was a drive-in; it was a South Drive-in [South Drive-in Theater, Norfolk, Virginia]. I remember the name of it. I do believe--now, don't quote me, because--yeah, quote me too. But it seems as if there was a wall--there was a wall that separated the blacks from the whites. I don't remember what we did, because there was only one place that you went and got popcorn and stuff. But daddy [James Turner, Sr.] always went and got the popcorn, so I don't know. But there was only that one building there. I don't know how that happened. I really don't. Speaker 1: But you think it was a wall up there or something? Speaker 2: I think it was a wall that separated us, because I remember the screen being very, very, large. But I think it was a wall, and that the blacks were on one side, and the whites were on the other. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's amazing. I just thought, so I wonder how they did that. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I think that's how they did it. Speaker 1: He took you to the military beach, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but most of the time we went to the military. Speaker 1: Was the military beach integrated, or was it--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I even have pictures. Uh-huh, it was integrated. It was a totally different world. The military was a totally different world from the real world. Speaker 1: The real world (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The real world. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's interesting that you describe it like in a real world, yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But, yeah, that's--yeah, I thought that it probably was different. And--you know. So by your father being in the military, it must have opened up things for you all that wouldn't have been possible if he wasn't. Right? Speaker 2: Totally, totally, totally. Yeah, we experienced a lot of different things. As a matter of fact, when they were--when the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was going around to ask children if they wanted to try this, because no one knew whether or not it would be going off, they didn't ask us because we were military. Mom [Marjorie Harrison Turner] took us down for the testing because of that. My mother couldn't drive, and with my daddy being home six months and gone to sea six months, it was very difficult for her to get around. So, we kind of lived in a sheltered life, because with her not driving, we had to go to the store closest to our home. And she had five kids at that time, so you don't just drag five kids around by yourself very far. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 628083 Speaker 1: Before we really get into the story of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], when you think about your parents' personalities and talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm three or four different people. So, I'm talkative like my mom [Marjorie Harrison Turner]. I'm caring and nurturing like my mom. And my daddy [James Turner, Sr.] was very strong, and I think there's a side of me that's strong like my dad. I look like my mom, but my head shape was like my dad. (Laughter) So, that makes me a mix of both of them, and personality-wise, I'm the same way. But I have changed over the years. As a young child, I was very introverted, very quiet. I was active, but I was quiet. Then when--in school I was, I was talkative, because I was bored. So, I'm a mixture of both. Story_ID: 628084 Speaker 1: So, you were bored because you already had seen the work before and knew how to do it, or--? Speaker 2: I, I learn very quickly. And as a matter of fact, early years, the early grades, it took them a while before they realized I couldn't read. I--if you would read me a story, I remembered everything that you said. So that, when it was my turn to read, I just repeated back what you said. So, it took them a while before they caught me. I was really--my mom [Marjorie Harrison Turner] knew it, because my mom had a hard time with my reading. Because I would--if she read it first, I said it back. But if she had me read first, she noticed that I wasn't saying some words correctly, or I would get to the word and I would stumble, or I would just stop. So, she always worked with me in the reading department, because no one caught me. I would recite anything you said. And during my early years, that was my problem. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was your first school? Speaker 2: The first time I went to school, I went to Titustown Elementary [Titustown Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia], because we lived in [U.S.] Navy housing on Matthew Henson Street. That was in Titustown. I went to Titustown-- Speaker 1: Is that here in Norfolk [Virginia]? Is that here in Norfolk? Speaker 2: Norfolk, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We always lived here. Speaker 1: Matthew Henson Street, now that's interesting. Matthew Henson was a great black explorer. A lot of people don't-- Speaker 2: And the Navy had housing named after him. Speaker 1: Even then? Speaker 2: Before I started school, we traveled. But see, before I started school, there was not five of us. So, daddy [James Turner, Sr.] got transferred to Connecticut when I was very little, and I only had one brother, and later on--when we went to Connecticut, it was just my brother and I. And then my mom had my second brother in Connecticut. But that made three children. So, when Daddy got transferred back to Norfolk--this all happened before I was five--she got pregnant again. That was the fourth child and mama stopped traveling, and we lived on Matthew Henson. So by the time I was ready for first grade--I went to first and second grade at Titustown, and we didn't travel anymore. Before I started school, we had lived in Panama; it was just my brothers and I. And Connecticut-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then mom stopped traveling. Speaker 1: Do you remember much about Panama? Speaker 2: I remember the people dancing in the street. I was telling mom about that the other day. I remember eating bananas, which I later found out they were plantains, but I thought they were bananas. And I remember the people used to dance in the street. I remember being on the ship. I don't remember if it was coming or going. But I remember the ship, because the bed came out the wall that mama used to sleep in. My brothers and I slept--I slept on the bottom bed and my brother slept in the crib. But I remember the bed coming out the wall. So, my memory of Panama is the people dancing in the street (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So, so, by the time you started first grade, you were here? Speaker 2: I was back in Norfolk. Speaker 1: In Norfolk? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you went to Titustown-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't travel anymore. Speaker 1: --Elementary School, the military school. Story_ID: 628085 Speaker 1: Where did you go after Titustown [Titustown Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Oakwood Elementary [Oakwood Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia]. That was when my parents [Marjorie Harrison Turner and James Turner, Sr.] bought our home. My mom still lives there now. And it was on Johnstons Road in Norview [Norfolk, Virginia] which was, at that time was Norfolk County [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. So there, your town is called Norview. And--yeah, okay. Speaker 2: The section was Norview. It was Norfolk County. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what-- Speaker 2: And I went to Oakwood Elementary. Speaker 1: So this is, well, what kind of neighborhood was this? Speaker 2: It was a black neighborhood, quiet, newly developed. We were the first people to move in the homes there, so they were still building homes. Speaker 1: Okay. It was a new home? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you started (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Third grade. Speaker 1: Third grade, okay, all right. Now, what was that? Now this is a colored school in those days? Speaker 2: Yes. There was no integration. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is, yeah, 1950--what, 1954 or '55 [1955]? Speaker 2: What grade was I? Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: I was, in third grade, I was seven or eight. So, if I was--it was '52 [1952], yeah, about 1952. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, so did you have any favorite teachers there, or--? Speaker 2: Yes, my fifth grade teacher, and I still see her now. She's so wonderful. Her name was Mrs. Kearney [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. It seems like, you know, Norfolk's the kind of place where you can keep up with your former teachers, and everybody seems to know each other. Speaker 2: It is, it is. I'm an Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star], and she's in my chapter. Speaker 1: Okay. So what were you interested in? You said you were kind of introverted as a little kid, weren't you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Interested in? At that time I guess I was, I thought I was interested in everything, because Mrs. Kearney is the one that discovered my math abilities. I was active. I would finish the assignments quickly, and go and get everybody else in trouble. So, she realized by giving me math problems, that I would sit and work math problems. As long as she gave them to me, I would work them, and that would hold me still. Then she assigned me as like a helper to the other students who weren't good in math. And before you know it, I was helping kids that were in grades higher than I was in math, because math was my God-given gift. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you could tutor the other students? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And it kept me from getting in trouble. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting, because, you know, a lot of women say they can't do math. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: And girls say they can't do it. And, but you, you know. Speaker 2: I was gifted, and she found it, fifth grade, she found it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, all right, so you were at Oakwood-- Speaker 2: Elementary. Speaker 1: Yeah. Was that all the way through to--? Speaker 2: No. I stayed there--I went to seventh grade at Ruffner Junior High [William Henry Ruffner Junior High; W.H. Ruffner Academy, Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: And how do you spell that one? Speaker 2: R-U-F-F-N-E-R, Ruffner. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was junior high. It still exists; it's a middle school now. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were there from sixth grade? Speaker 2: Just seventh grade. Speaker 1: Just seventh, okay. Speaker 2: I was at Oakwood in sixth grade. Story_ID: 628086 Speaker 1: It's about this time--now, did your family, like, keep up with the Civil Rights Movement basically a lot (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: I mean, did they talk about it? Speaker 2: We were military. We didn't--we were military. We didn't--I don't think I knew, really realized there was a difference. I mean, I knew when I wasn't on the base there weren't any white people, but I didn't pay attention to it because that was just the way it was. And I did not notice--it's funny, I can laugh about it now. I was a teenager before I knew my [paternal] grandmother [Anzella Claude] was white. My grandmother was my grandmother. I never noticed that she was white, I didn't know. Nobody told me, and she was grandma. So, I really did not realize a total difference in people until the integration started. That was when I really was awakened, that there was black/white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew I lived in a black neighborhood, but that was the way it was. And-- Speaker 1: Now, you didn't tell us the whole--I mean the story about your grandmother and how she-- Speaker 2: My grandmother? Oh, my grandmother was-- Speaker 1: Let's go back to--yeah, when she left. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. But see, we were talking about my daddy, my grandfather's side, which was the Nat Turner side. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My grandmother was German. Her father was full-blooded German. And she was German and Polish, or something. And grandma came--they brought her over here, very young age. And she--I don't know, I guess she went to school. I don't know, and nobody ever talked about it. But she met my grandfather, Herman--Herbert [Herbert Turner], at a very young age, and she had three children for him: my daddy [James Turner, Sr.], my Aunt Esman [Esman Turner (ph.)], and my Uncle Lawrence [Lawrence Turner]. His name was Lawrence Herbert. And then of course he died when my daddy was eight. The children were eight, six, and four. And there are two things that I remember about grandma, and I've never forgotten; I've never found it since. And to this day, I don't like cold potato salad. My grandmother used to make hot potato salad, which is--later on I found out is a German thing to have hot potato salad. Well, I thought that was the way potato salad was supposed to be. Now, mama made cold potato salad, but it wasn't cold in the beginning. It was only cold after the first meal. And whatever was left over went in the refrigerator, and then we ate it from there. So, I thought potato salad was supposed to be hot. And grandma made pear preserves. Nobody makes pear preserves like my grandma. Nobody can do it anymore. And my grandmother did one thing in my life that has always stayed with me. My grandmother killed a pig, a hog, she called it. And she just went out there and killed it, and there it was, and then we had all kinds of meat. (Laughter) But Grandma was very strong. Speaker 1: So how did she, how did she kill it? Did she just--? Speaker 2: She--at this--to me--I was young. So, to me, it looked like she went out and she wrestled it. And she had a knife and she cut it, and it died, and then she, she sent us away (laughter). And when we came back, there was meat. So, all I know is she killed a hog and the meat appeared (laughter). Something must have happened in between there, but she didn't let us see it. And I don't believe she meant for us to see her kill the hog, because we didn't see any blood or anything. I don't remember any blood. I remember grandma going out, putting her arms around the hog. She had a knife, and I know she had that knife. And he was dead. And then we came back, and there was meat. So what happened in between, I don't know. But I never forgot that, that she killed a hog (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now did-- Story_ID: 628087 Speaker 1: Did your [paternal] grandmother [Anzella Claude] and grandfather [Herbert Turner] have a tough time? Did they live in Virginia? Speaker 2: No, they lived in--came from Virginia, in South Hampton County on a farm. Speaker 1: On the farm, okay. So, they lived out there. But they didn't have any--did they experience--have any stories of turmoil or--? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). The only thing grandma ever said was, she told us a story--my grandmamma didn't, she wasn't a big talker. I came along at a time when children were seen and not heard. And when adults are talking, you're outside playing. So, I really don't know a whole lot. Because one thing, I didn't live there, I was a visitor. I told my cousins I was a city kid, okay. So, grandma told us a story about--she took my uncle. Now, grandma had, well, she had seven children. She had a set of twins, but the boy died when they were born; the girl lived. All of my--like my dad [James Turner, Sr.] looked like he was Spanish. My uncle looked like he was white. My aunt looked like she was white. She had--Aunt Esman [Esman Turner (ph.)] had very long hair that came all the way down to her waistline, and it was brown. And she used to let me brush it. So, these are things that I remember. I didn't know that we was mixed, I didn't know this. But my uncle, her last child, my Uncle Herman--Herbert [Lawrence Turner], was a brown complexion. Grandma told a story about she took him to the store one day. And the lady in the store said, "What you doing? Watching little ninnies today?" And grandma got very upset. She got angry, and her German came out. She tore up the lady's store, because that was her baby, and she nobody was going to call it names, you know. But that's how we knew grandma was mean (laughter). Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: But she didn't talk about much except for that. She said she remembered coming over on a ship when she was very little. And we didn't pay attention to the fact that she would say coming over. We didn't know what that meant, because now I know that she meant that she was riding on this ship with her family, coming over from Germany. But she would always say coming over. I'm telling you, I didn't know my grandmother was white. Speaker 1: Okay. So, do you think it was the isolation of being on a farm that kind of helped them from--to avoid conflict? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, of course. We lived on a--I mean, I didn't live on a farm. They lived on a great big farm; everything was there. I remember the little chickens being in the house. When I was young, I never knew how them little chickens got in that house. But there was little chicks, baby chicks that lived in a house. And there was a mule, and my grandpa would take me to ride the mule, and that was my Grandpa Claude. Like I said, I didn't know my grandpa. They had a mule. They had everything they needed on this farm. They had a garden, a huge garden, and an apple orchard. They had a cornfield, because I lost my sisters in the cornfield. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On purpose (laughter). Story_ID: 628088 Speaker 1: Well, at any rate, back to grade school. I just wanted to make sure I--we got that story in. But, okay, Ruffner Junior High School [William Henry Ruffner Junior High School; W.H. Ruffner Academy, Norfolk, Virginia], you're in the seventh grade. And-- Speaker 2: I had to take two buses to get there. So, I had to get up early in the morning to catch my two buses, and it was city buses. There weren't any school buses for the black children. Speaker 1: So the white children had school buses? Speaker 2: They--I didn't find that out until the next year, okay, because I didn't see them. I didn't see them, so I didn't know--I don't even think I even realized where they went to school, okay. I was very naive. In other words, this day and time, you would say I was stupid to the world. They tell me that I am clueless, 'cause that's what they use. I lived a very naive life. With mama [Marjorie Harrison Turner] not driving, she didn't let us go much, because if something happened, she couldn't get to us. So, we lived in our neighborhood, and until I was sixteen, I didn't go to movies unless dad [James Turner, Sr.] was home, and he took us, you know. So I was very sheltered. Speaker 1: Did you all have a TV and everything and--? Speaker 2: We had a TV that we used to put cellophane across to make color. Because it was a little black and white TV, and the five of us, when mom would let us watch it, would sit around on the floor in the living room and watch TV. Mama didn't let us watch much TV, but she read to us. I read to my brothers and sisters. She was very, very, strict on education; it was very important to her. So, we, we played games. We made up games. She encouraged us to be creative, and to think. So, we didn't do a lot of TV watching. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What about newspapers and stuff? Did you all get like--? Speaker 2: Mama read the paper faithfully every day. My, my--I have a girlfriend now; I still have a girlfriend from when I was a baby. She, she, still tells a story now about when she and her mom and dad--she was an only child--would come to our house. My little sisters, who were like two and three, or three and four, they would be reading the comics. So the paper would be spread out on the floor, and they would be sitting on the floor reading the comics. She said what surprised her was that they could tell you exactly what was going on in there, and they could tell you some of the words. She said, "Well, they were only three and four years old, but they could read." Before I ever went to school at five, I could read what I could read, even though I had a hard time. But my little sisters didn't, because mama read to them, I read to them. At three and four, they could read. So, it was amazing to my girlfriend that my little sisters could read. They couldn't read all the words, but they could read enough that you'd know that they were reading. Mama still reads the paper every day. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, I just wanna--wanted to--I guess figure out what you all really knew about the world before you took on this-- Speaker 2: Not too much. I was very naive (laughter.) Speaker 1: Now, you, you were in the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]. Speaker 2: I was a Brownie. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I was a Girl Scout. Mama made sure that we and my brothers were Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and everything. She wanted us to be very aware, and to know how to intermingle with other people. But we played within our yard. We stayed--some of the neighborhood kids teased us and said, "Oh, you finally got out the gate" (laughter). Speaker 1: So they kept you all pretty close then? Speaker 2: Kept us close. Mom--with daddy being gone a lot, she was very protective. Story_ID: 628089 Speaker 1: How did you--is it--I don't know if it's time to talk about this, but I guess it is. How did you first find out about the Norfolk 17 project? And how did you find out? I mean what happened? Speaker 2: Okay. Mama [Marjorie Harrison Turner], doing reading--I told you my mom read the paper every day. She knew everything that was going on. We didn't know, all right. I had to ride those two buses. Mama said that she was very worried about that, because we were stair stops, stair steps. When I was six years old, I had two brothers [James Turner, Jr. and Keith Turner], two sisters [Jacque Turner and Betty Turner Bray], and no one was a twin. So she knew that if I had to ride two buses, if something had happened to me at school, she'd take those same two buses. So, when all of this started, she knew that the school was only 1.3 miles away, the junior high school [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia]. She came in and asked me would I rather walk to school, or continue to ride those buses to continue to go to the school I was attending? And she explained to me, "If you get sick, if you walk to school, I can come and get you." Everybody else was in elementary school. She said, "It would be no problem for me to walk to the school to get you and get your sisters and brothers, plus Skip," who was James, Jr., "Skip is getting ready to go to middle--junior high with you. If the two of you are walking to school, it would be much easier." That's the way she explained it to us. She didn't explain to us about we had to take a test, and we had to this and we had to do that. She explained to us about walking to school, because my mom knew her children. She knew whatever they were offering for us to go to their school that my brother and I were going to make it; that was no problem. She knew what she had taught us, and what we had learned. So, the offer was to walk to school or to take two buses. I had already done the two bus thing; it was not good. Plus, my second brother, that boy ate everything. He--when we were playing outside and we were doing mud pies, he would test the mud pies. So, mama always had a snack for us. I mean, I was maybe twelve or thirteen before I knew bread came in a plastic wrap from the store. I thought you opened up the oven, and there was the bread, because she made all of our bread. Mom cooked everything for us. So, I was very naive to what came from the store. My dad [James Turner, Sr.] had a garden. He was a country boy. He had a garden in the backyard. So, that's how I mean I was sheltered from things. We only went to the store to get things that we needed to get from the store, because everything else was at home. So of course, I said, "I want to walk." It was much easier, and that was my answer. I wanted to walk. She didn't ask Skip. Skip knew that if I was walking, he was walking, okay. And that was how I found out about the school being closest to my home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, so mama was in, from that moment, she was in charge. And she took us down to take the test, and like I said, she wasn't worried about it. She knew we were going to pass. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she didn't know what we were going to have to go through. Story_ID: 628090 Speaker 1: Okay, so she, she really didn't--now, did the--well, nobody would have guessed fully what you would have to go through. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But, but what did the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--did they, they, they have representatives that you--were aware of them meeting with the parents? Speaker 2: Well, we went to court by the time we had passed the test and become the 17. Because later, we found out that there were people that were asked by the Norfolk 17. Since Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg], one of the other 17 and I have become very close, I found out that he had been asked by the NAACP. But my brother [James Turner, Jr.] and I were not asked, because we were [U.S.] military. So-- Speaker 1: Well, were your parents [Marjorie Harrison Turner and James Turner, Sr.] asked at all? Or were they, did they have any dialogue-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --with the NAACP before then? Speaker 2: We were military. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They didn't expect us to be there. They didn't know whether daddy would have been transferred or anything. So, we were not included in it until we made it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So your mother was approaching it from, that it was the closest school to the house? Speaker 2: Right, right, the closest school to the house, that's what. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because she couldn't drive, so that was her intent. And because my brother and I--well, mom knew that we would pass, but nobody else knew we would pass. And mom also knew that even though Daddy would go different places, that we weren't going anywhere. So, when we became two of the names--and our names were called very early on the list--that this is when the NAACP became involved with us. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, what were those meetings like? I mean, would they call everybody together? How did they do it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they--first, we went to take the test, and there were 151 applicants on the first test. Now, the children that did not go, like my friends that I even have today, they said that they were tested at the schools, at Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia]. Those kids in the high schools were tested. See, they weren't thinking about the younger kids, so we kind of trickled along. They were interested in the older children, because I think--and this is just my thought--the NAACP thought the older the child, the better equipped the child would be. So, they really didn't consider the younger, us younger ones. We just--like my brother and I came along from the--my mom wanted us to go to the closest to home. So when the younger ones passed, then they kind of had--they had to include us, because we were part of the 17 [Norfolk 17]. Of the younger ones, there was Lolita [Lolita Portis Jones] and Reginald [Reginald Young], Geraldine Talley [Geraldine Talley Hobby], my brother and I, Claudia [Claudia Wellington] and Eddie [Edward Jordan]. So there were seven younger ones of the 17. The other ten were high school students. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were--your brother Skip, he was--well, how old was he? Speaker 2: Seven--he was going to seventh grade. Speaker 1: He was going to seventh grade. Speaker 2: He was a year behind me. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were going into eighth? Speaker 2: Eighth grade. Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right. So, (unclear)--so did they--so what did they, how did they prepare you for it? Did they, did they--? Speaker 2: Once we passed the test, the three tests, the judge, Walter Hoffman [Walter E. Hoffman], said to leave these 17 alone, stop testing them. We had to be interviewed by the school board, and we went to interviews maybe three or four times. We went to court. That's how we got involved with Judge Hoffman. We went to court every day for a week, and the NAACP was our attorneys at the court cases. Story_ID: 628091 Speaker 1: The governor [J. Lindsay Almond] closed the schools. We were supposed to go in September, but the s- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wait a minute. Before we get to the governor closing the schools, now how did, did the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--did anybody--was there any group of adults that actually sat you down and tried to prepare you for this? Speaker 1: Not until we started the school. Speaker 2: Okay, not until? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Did they-- Speaker 1: That's when the preparation started, at the schools. Speaker 2: All right. Okay, so the governor closes-- Speaker 1: Right. The governor closed the school, all right. And-- Speaker 2: All the schools, right, and--or just that one? Speaker 1: Well, at first he closed them all. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so when he closed them all, I don't know what happened, but the black school was open. He opened Ruffner [William Henry Ruffner Junior High; W.H. Ruffner Academy, Norfolk, Virginia], Jacox [David Gilbert Jacox Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia], and Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia]. Booker T. was the only high school. They were open, because they weren't involved in integration. So he had no decree at all to close those, so--because they weren't involved in integration. So, they were open. And he said that we would return to our schools because they were open, and the white schools were closed. But we couldn't, because we'd been assigned to the other schools. And just as it is today, you can't just go into a school unless you've been assigned. So, the black schools opened, and the white schools remained closed. Well, some of kind of way, he opened schools across the city. But he didn't provide transportation for the white children to get to the schools. They had to get there on their own. I mean, but he funded them. The 17 [Norfolk 17] still didn't have anywhere to go, because we couldn't go to those places, because they were not where we were assigned. Mrs. Vivian Mason [Vivian Carter Mason] is the one that put up her money, and she had to find a place that would accept us, that was not afraid to accept us. Stores and stuff like that, where the white children were going, they were afraid--the black stores and stuff were afraid to accept us because of closure. So, when Mrs. Mason put up her money and found a place for us, she found First Baptist, Bute Street [First Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia]. And as I remember--now, of course, you have to remember, I was very young and very naive. So, my memory may be different than the older ones, because I'm quite sure they remember more; they were older than I was. Well, we met. We went to school in the basement of that church. And this was when I first remember meeting them, meeting them, meaning the rest of them. And our teachers came, and the teachers were volunteers that Mrs. Mason paid something to. Of my teachers, I remember Dr. Cejas [Rudolpho Cejas] had just come over from Cuba, and he volunteered to teach us Spanish. Speaker 2: How, how do you spell his last name? Speaker 1: C-E-J-A-S. And Mr. Corprew [Charles Corprew] at the time taught--from my memory, he taught me English. But now that I'm grown, I found out that he taught a beginning Spanish class also. Speaker 2: This is Mr. Corprew? Speaker 1: Cor-- C-O-R-- Speaker 2: Is there a street named for him out here? Corprew Street [sic. Corprew Avenue]? We saw a Corprew street. Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It may be. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg] is more in contact with him. He--Mr. Corprew is wonderful, he's very sweet. As I became a teacher, I even worked for him one year when he was a principal. There was a--there two Joneses [ph.]. One Jones taught music, because I remember her playing the piano. And the other Jones taught English, or she taught math. There was a math teacher, and I think her name was Jones, too. So, maybe there was three Joneses. Dr. Jones taught math, and she and I became friends. She retired from Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. Mrs.--she was our principal, and I can see her in my mind right now. I can't call her name right this moment, but she was our principal, and, of course, Mrs. Mason was superintendent of our little school. Speaker 2: She--you said she basically paid for it? Speaker 1: She funded it, uh-huh. She basically paid for everything, or we wouldn't have had anywhere to go. Speaker 2: She was a member of the NAACP, or was she not? Or just somebody (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I believe she was. Because she started the first black women's something here. I believe she was a member. Story_ID: 628092 Speaker 1: I remember Hugo Madison [J. Hugo Madison], he was an attorney. Mr. Robinson [ph.], he was the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] then. I don't remember his first name. These are people I can see in my mind. There were other lawyers, of course, but I remember him, and the reason I remember him is that he graduated from Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia] in 1939, which was my mother's [Marjorie Harrison Turner] class. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So of course I remember him. I remember them coming to the school [at First Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia] to talk to us, and to tell us--the things that I remember was, "Never sit in the back. Always hold your head up, and always walk and look straight forward. When you're in these schools, try to stay as close to the wall as you can. When--if you have to go up and down stairs, hold on to the railing and walk close to the wall." I remember those things they told us. They also told us, "If something is said, do not respond to it. When you hear different name calling, that's not your name. You don't have to respond to anything that is not your name. Hold your head up high. If anything is done to you, try to withhold it and ignore it, and keep going straight." So, those things stayed with me. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what were you thinking at age thirteen or--twelve or thirteen? Twelve, yeah. Speaker 1: I was twelve when I started. Then I turned thirteen, and I turned fourteen before school was over. Speaker 2: You never had any of those kind of instructions from school before, I'm sure? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: So what were you thinking? Speaker 1: You know, I've been asked that question before, and I've tried to look back over it and see what I was thinking. I don't think I was thinking, because I don't remember any thoughts at all. For the longest time, I was an empty slate. I believed that I was thinking what they told me to think. "Sit in the front, look forward, walk against the wall." I don't believe any other thoughts came in my mind. Now that I'm grown, I know that I was brainwashed. I didn't have thoughts; I didn't think about it. As the schools opened and we had to come back to the church for tutoring, I noticed some of the 17 [Norfolk 17] would start crying over things that had happened to them. I didn't cry. I cried to my mother, and I can remember that was way after I had started high school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]. Because I must have had the meanest teacher in the school, and he scared me. But I didn't break down. And I don't remember having thoughts. I don't remember thinking. Speaker 2: When, when you say brainwashed, do you mean by the training, or by your parents not questioning adults? Or what was it? Speaker 1: I call it brainwashing now. I didn't call it anything then. I don't remember daddy [James Turner, Sr.] being home. I think daddy was at sea when this started, but my daddy could have been home, but daddy was very quiet. Mama didn't talk about it; she let us talk. She didn't question us. She doesn't bring it up. She used to--well, things didn't change at home. We always said our grace, we always said our prayers, and we prayed before we went to bed. Nothing changed at home. When we got home in the afternoon our snack was ready and everything. And mama didn't bring it up; she waited for us to talk about it. And now I see where she did not want us to relive what had happened until we were ready to relive it. So, she waited on us. I know now that mama used to pray and walk back and forth all day and keep the TV on, and read the paper and pray all day. But she didn't let us know this. She didn't let us see this. She wanted my brother [James Turner, Jr.] and I to be--to live as normal as we were before, until we were ready to talk about it. So she just waited on us, which now, I see now was best. It was best to wait on us until we were ready. Story_ID: 628093 Speaker 1: Can you describe for us your first day at Norview [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia]? How did it go, you know from the time you left the house to--? Speaker 2: I remember that day very well. And I've said it two million times. But mama [Marjorie Harrison Turner] woke us up and told us, "Okay, now today you will be walking to school today." And she had already told us that weekend that we're, now it's time. They had already told us at First Baptist [First Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia], "It's time. You're going to be going in, okay." So, mama woke us up and told us to wash up. We took baths at night. And it was very funny, because mom was, she had five kids then. And we could take our own baths, of course. But mama always had to come in and wash you again. (Laughter) And, and I guess all of us have experienced that, you know, because you're playing in the bathtub, so you're not really washing. But we got up that morning and we had to wash up. Mom gave us breakfast, and she told me something that I didn't want to do, but I knew not to say, "No, I'm not doing it." She said, "Now, you're the oldest. You hold your brother's [James Turner, Jr.] hand and you watch out for him. And I want the two of you to go to school together, and I want you to come home together." I didn't want to hold his little stinky, fat hand, because that was the meanest boy in the world. He'd just torn up my doll baby, and it took a while for me to get that doll baby. Doll babies at that time all looked the same. They were the perfect little Barbie dolls. They were white, and they had blond hair, and I had one, and he ripped her head off. So, I didn't like that boy, and I didn't want to hold his hand. But we were obedient to our parents at that time. So, I did as she told me. But I was very smart. I knew that as long as I held that little hand, and I could see mama, and I would keep looking back waving. I'd keep looking back, and we'd wave, until I looked back and I couldn't see my mama, that meant she couldn't see me. I'd let go of that old hand (laughter). I didn't have to hold his hand. The other three that were going into seventh grade with him had met us at the corner, and we started to walk. Now, that day was very interesting, because later we found out--as I said, they were preparing the high schoolers. They didn't expect these babies to be going. So, the high schoolers had been picked up in cars. But they--I always say they forgot the babies, because we walked. Well, the five of us walked through the black section, Sewells Point Road. There was an imaginary line that started at the store. It was called Perkins' Market [Norfolk, Virginia]. It was Widgeon Road, which was the beginning of the white section, leaving the black section. The imaginary line was right in the middle of the road. Nobody saw it, but everybody knew it was there. We walked to the imaginary line; I wasn't holding his hand. Story_ID: 628094 Speaker 1: When we got there--when I was young, I used to think it was the [U.S.] Army, because the street was lined with these men with rifles on their shoulders and dressed all in black. I thought it was the Army. Later on as I got older, I found out that was the city police. Because behind the police were white parents, more white people than I'd ever seen at one place, except on the base. So, I didn't have any fear of them, because that was the only time I'd ever seen them all together was on the base. So, I just figured they was there. Well, they were there. This was when I really understood what massive resistance meant. Massive resistance meant the masses resist these seventeen children. Well, there were only five of us. We were, I had had a birthday, so I had just turned fourteen, with the mind of a twelve year old, because I was very naive. I wasn't a fourteen year old, a normal fourteen year old. My brother was only thirteen. The others, they were twelve and thirteen. And because I was born October 11 instead of October 1, they made me wait a whole year, because that was cut off time for school. So I was older, but yet, I was younger. I reached back quickly and grabbed my brother's hand, because instantly the white people started throwing things. You see, the police were there to make sure that they did not have big sticks, but they could throw all them little ones they wanted to. They could throw little rocks, but they couldn't throw stones. So, this was when I realized massive resistance meant the masses resist. They were throwing all kinds of things and saying all kinds of words. And I remember my mother [Marjorie Harrison Turner] said I was the oldest, so I was supposed to watch out for my brother. The two boys were walking behind us, and the three girls were in the front. I was the oldest, so I was in the middle. But I was holding my brother's hand, and I was squeezing his little hand so tightly. But we kept going. We had to walk past the high school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], and that's where most of the parents were and the police and walk on a side street to get to the middle school [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia]. There weren't as many on that route as it had been near the high school, because there were six black students going into the white schools, so they were there for them. But they were brought in cars, so the parents only had us to attack, because we were walking. Well, we kept going, and the police let us pass by, because we were going on to the middle school. I was okay with that, because I was holding his hand. My fear came when I got to the school. There was a sign that said the seventh graders had to go around the side. The eighth graders had to come in the front door. I don't know why I didn't think that I would not be with him all day. I knew he was in seventh grade and I was in eighth grade, but it just hadn't crossed my young mind that I would not be watching out for him all day. So, I had to think, and there was a great big tree. So I told them, I said, "Well, Skip [James Turner, Jr.], you're going to be with your friends, and the four of you are going to be together. But what I want you to do is, see this tree? When school is over, the four of you be standing right here waiting for me." It wasn't out of fear for me. I was the oldest; I was supposed to take care of them, so I had to take them back home. And I was thinking the same thing was going to happen going home that happened coming to school. So, I had to watch out for them. And you had asked me before, what I was thinking. I was thinking I was the oldest, and it was my place to watch out for them. I wasn't thinking anybody was going to hurt us, but I was thinking they were going to throw rocks and everything at us again, and I was supposed to watch out for them. So I hadn't thought about myself being alone. I don't know why, but I hadn't thought about that. Story_ID: 628095 Speaker 1: So, I went on in the school, and there was nobody around. I had to find the office, then I had to find the other students. And now that I look back over it, I can see where I mixed up the first day of middle school with the first day of high school. You see, it was the same thing, but I had to leave my brother [James Turner, Jr.] at middle school and go to the high school. And it was such a traumatic time that the two firsts get confused in my mind. And I've never been able to separate the two firsts. Now, one of these firsts, there was a lady in the office when I found the office. And now that I think about it, it must have been the high school, but it could have been the middle school. Since no one has never really talked to me about it, to tell me what happened, I don't know the difference. I know that the teacher [Hal J. Bonney, Jr.] that scared me was at the high school; he wasn't at the middle school. So, most of my traumatic occurrence happened at the high school. Speaker 2: Now, now Norview were the middle school-- Speaker 1: Norview Middle [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia] and Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 2: So, are there two separate buildings? Speaker 1: Two separate buildings. There are really three buildings. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Because there's a Norview Elementary [Norview Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia], which is beside--to this day, they're still there. They're just different buildings. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They've built a new middle school and they've built a new high school. The elementary school is still the same one, the original. But they're all right there. The middle school is over here, the elementary, and the high (demonstrates), okay. So, my middle school experience was only half a year, from February to June. I really can't tell you what happened, I don't know. I don't remember; that's a blockage. I remember going to school that first day. I remember going back to First Baptist [First Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia] for tutoring. I remember going to the Masonic Temple [Norfolk Masonic Temple, Norfolk, Virginia] for tutoring. I don't know what happened for six months. Speaker 2: Now, now, did you have the same--was it the same assembly response every day you came to school? Speaker 1: Every day. Speaker 2: Did the--were the white parents out front with the cops and all that every day (unclear)? Speaker 1: As far as I remember. Even from the time, to the time I went to the high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The numbers of the white parents got less, but they were still there. Speaker 2: Okay. Did you ever get hurt with a rock or a stick or something? Speaker 1: I remember gum being in my hair, and my mom having to cut my hair. My hair was very long, and I remember them putting, throwing gum in my hair. And Mom couldn't get it out, so they had to cut pieces out of my hair. The sticks, I remember them stinging, because there were so many, but as far being hurt, they weren't allowed that. They weren't big enough to hurt; they were small enough to sting. I remember I had a white coat that my parents [Marjorie Harrison Turner and James Turner, Sr.] had saved up to get me, because I really wanted that white coat. And I remember it being just messed up to the point that it could not be cleaned. Speaker 2: What happened to it? I mean was it messed up by-- Speaker 1: They were throwing all kinds of stuff on it, and it just got messed up. I remember just little places from the little rocks being thrown, but as far as being really hurt, that wasn't allowed. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I know that the name calling and the abuse was so bad for a young child that I did not realize the traumatic effect it was having on me when it was happening. But now that I'm grown, I know what had happened. Story_ID: 628096 Speaker 1: Did you ever ask your mother [Marjorie Harrison Turner], "Why do I have to do this?" Or why were we doing this? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You never thought--okay. Speaker 2: That was, that never crossed my mind. I didn't even know--I didn't even know I was making history, okay. Even today, I still have problems with identifying with who I am. When I hear--when people are introducing me and they're reading my resume, it's like that's somebody else, you know. It's, it's, not me. So, really I'm still that naive little girl that doesn't realize the things that I've done. No, I never asked mom, and I don't believe Skip [James Turner, Jr.] ever did either. Why did we have to do it? We were chosen by God; it was our job. We were supposed to do it. My mom gained the strength to send us out there every day. She was really going through more than we were, because she was at home waiting, not knowing what was going to happen. We were out there going through it, but we were too young to know. Speaker 1: How did the teachers treat you in class? Did they call on you? Speaker 2: Middle school [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia] was, is a blur. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: High school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] is when--that first year it was awful. You have a tendency in your life to remember traumatic experiences. I can tell you that first day when I had received my class schedule. And the name of my homeroom teacher was Hal Bonney [Hal J. Bonney, Jr.], and it was written across the top of the paper. Hal Bonney had been on the TV the night before, and even though we had black and white TV--there was no color TV--you could tell this man's face turned purple. And he said, "If you put one of them little niggers in my room, I'm going to close the door and you're never going to see it again." And when they gave me my class schedule, he was my teacher. I stepped in the room and I stepped back out, seeing him behind the desk. Something, a voice, said, "You have to go in this room. Just sit in the front." I went in the room and I sat in the front. I had him as homeroom and as history teacher. That man never called my name, not one time. He never acknowledged as if I existed. He would pass out masks to the children to put on their faces so that they didn't have to breathe the air I was breathing. He wore rubber gloves to touch any paper that I had to turn in. He had a box on the end of his desk; that was the way he and I communicated. At first my papers would all have big red E's on them. I had never made an E in my life. Speaker 1: Now what does the E stand for in Norfolk [Virginia]? Speaker 2: Failure. Speaker 1: E does? Okay. Speaker 2: Failure. And, and because I had never made one, that big red E was always shown to me. We had to take our papers back to First Baptist [First Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia] for tutoring, where our teachers would grade our papers and so forth. I know that Mrs. Mason [Vivian Carter Mason] made a call, I don't know what she said. To this day, I don't know what happened. They did not remove me from that man's class, but he never touched me, he just--I was nonexistent. Speaker 1: Did he continue to give you-- Speaker 2: He passed out his masks. He wore his rubber gloves. He, he treated me as if I was invisible for the whole year that I was in his homeroom and in his history class. He emphasized the section on slavery, and constantly let me know, or let the students know, that I would have been a house slave, that I probably would have been the bed warmer for the master to put his feet on. He taught slavery every day, whether it was part of the section or not. But I'm going to skip forward fifty years (simultaneous). Story_ID: 628097 Speaker 1: Last year The Virginian-Pilot did an article on this story. And I'm jumping forward, and I will return later to the past. The, the story is called 'When the Walls Came Tumbling Down' [sic. 'When the Wall Came Tumbling Down']. The author or the reporter [Denise Watson Batts] of that story found Hal Bonney [Hal J. Bonney, Jr.]. He later--he left teaching after he taught me [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]; he became a judge. When she found him, his section of the story says, "I took it too far." And he continued to say that the things he had done to the students that he received, he was sorry for and so forth. I have an award from the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] that was presented to me by Hal Bonney. When I went to speak to the justice department and I walked into the area--I'm a time person, so I was early, and I wanted to find my location--there was this man sitting on a stool, just feet with--inside the door. I didn't know who he was. I thought he was my greeter waiting for me. He was Hal Bonney. He walked over to me and he said, "Dr. Turner, you don't know who I am, but I know who you are." He said, "I have followed you in any way that I can, through TV, through books, through magazines, from the last day that I saw you." He said--and tears started rolling down his eyes. I still didn't know who he was. He said, "I'm sorry. No one should have been treated the way I treated you." He said, "I've carried this burden in my heart for over fifty years. There is no way I can make it up to you." He said, "Believe me, I have paid many a day. I can't tell you why I believed the way I did then." He said, "I'm sorry. I'm Hal Bonney." I inhaled, and I looked at him. There was an old man standing in front of me bent over from arthritis, partially bald, almost blind. And I just looked at him, I couldn't say anything. So he didn't say anything either. Then the other attorneys and judges and so forth came in. I went on and I did my speech. And God must have been speaking through me, because I hadn't thought about it. It was as if I was empty. I was no longer afraid of him, but I felt nothing. When these words came out of my mouth, it surprised me as much as it surprised the audience. And I said, "Many a year I thought about this person after I left his classroom. I never went back to the area that he taught me, but now that I'm grown and I have seen him again after fifty years, I can look at him now and say thank you. Everything that you did to me made me who I am today. Justice department, thank you for having me for you don't know, and only he and I know that Judge Bonney made me who I am today, Dr. Patricia Turner [HistoryMaker Patricia Turner]." And I sat down. Story_ID: 628098 Speaker 1: You asked me did I talk to my mother [Marjorie Harrison Turner]. When I came home that day after walking in his classroom [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], I became a zombie and an invisible person, and for a long time, I would go back and forth to his class. And maybe after a couple of months I came home one afternoon and I told my mom, I said, "Mama, that's the meanest man I've ever met in my life." I said, "I've never had anybody treat me that way. He hates me. Why does he hate me?" She said, "Baby, I was waiting for you to come and talk to me, but you had to come on your time." She said, "He doesn't hate you. He hates himself. And someday, he's going to tell you that. But right now, I want you to be strong. He's not going to physically hurt you." She said, "But mama loves you, daddy [James Turner, Sr.] loves you, and most of all, God loves you. You keep going back to his class every day. You make sure you do his homework first." She said, "Because every day that you appear in his room you are surprising him, because he expects you to give up. Don't you give up." And I did. I hated history, I still don't like it to this day. But I would do his homework first. I had the answer to every question he asked, even though he never asked me. I raised my hand every day, and I was ready. He ignored me for the whole year he had me, but I was ready for him. Fifty years later when I finally had the opportunity to say something to him, I couldn't say anything. But I knew that I had forgiven him. A couple of months later after I had seen him, after speaking for the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], I gave a unity program at my church. He had given me his card, which I don't know where it is now. I called him and invited him. He came; he came. We marched in together; he held my hand. You see, I feel the same way today that I did then about him; I forgave him. After years of thinking about him, by the time I got to college, I had forgot him. He never forgot me. He carried a burden for fifty years, because he mistreated me. You see, I didn't mistreat him. So God gave me the power to forgive, but he made him carry it all those years. What a burden he had to carry. Speaker 2: Is he--he's probably not alive now, right? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I saw him whenever they gave me that (points) a few years ago, and I never wanted to contact him, except when he came to church. So, I don't know. Speaker 2: Is his name spelled B-O-N-N-Y, or? Speaker 1: B-O-N-N, I think it's E-Y [Hal J. Bonney, Jr.]. Speaker 2: E-Y? Okay, okay. Story_ID: 628099 Speaker 1: Were there any--well, on the other side of it, were there any teachers that actually tried to relate to you [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there was a government teacher named, I think her name was Jones [ph.] also. Jones seems to be a name that stuck in my mind. Their names didn't have to be Jones. But she was a government teacher and she was the yearbook teacher, sponsor. She was tall and had dark brown hair. She was very nice to me. Mr. Tigmo [John Tigmo] was the Spanish teacher. He was browner than I was, but he was very nice to me. Speaker 1: Teedmo, T-I--? Speaker 2: Tigmo. I think it's T-I-G-M-O, Tigmo. Speaker 1: And he was darker than you, but-- Speaker 2: He was darker than me. He was Spanish. Speaker 1: --so, so, was he? Okay, Hispanic American origin, or from Spain? Or--? Speaker 2: I think he was from Spain, because he looked Spanish. He looked like Spanish people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was very, very, nice to me. And Miss Jones, she was nice to me. But the nicest person of all, who was very nice to me the whole four years, was the head janitor, and I know he's long gone. But the children used to write dirty stuff on my locker and everything, and I only got to see it once. Because every day when I got to school my locker was clean, and you could tell it was freshly cleaned. Speaker 1: Now, this is a black man? Speaker 2: This was a white man. Speaker 1: White man? Speaker 2: White man. Speaker 1: Okay, white janitor, that's-- Speaker 2: There was no blacks there except in the kitchen. And he used to clean my locker. And sometime I would get to school and he would be cleaning my locker, but I only saw the derogatory things they wrote on it and everything one time, because he would always make sure that he got there, that he cleaned my locker before I got there. Speaker 1: Yeah, I read in some of the literature that there would, sometimes feces would be smeared on your locker. Speaker 2: Everything, um-hm. Speaker 1: Any and everything. Speaker 2: Everything. Speaker 1: And the vile things written. But he would, he would--this white man would clean it up? Speaker 2: He would clean my locker, um-hm. Story_ID: 628100 Speaker 1: I never went to the bathroom, because they told us when we were at First Baptist [First Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia], if we did not have to, do not go in there alone. I was the only eighth grader. I was the only ninth grader. I was the only tenth grader. In the eleventh grade, two other black girls joined the school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], but I didn't really see them, because during that time we did tracking. And I was on the academic track, and one was on general, and one was on business. I knew they were in the school, but I didn't see them. They didn't live where I lived, so we didn't even go to school together. But I knew that they were in the grade to graduate the year I did, which they did. Speaker 2: Now this is something that [HistoryMaker] Andrew Heidelberg told us too, that once in the school, you hardly ever saw each other. Speaker 1: You didn't. Speaker 2: You didn't have the same lunch periods or anything. Speaker 1: Nothing, nothing. You wouldn't even have known that we were in the same school. And see, Andrew was a year ahead of me. So when I was in ninth, he was in tenth. The only time I saw Andrew was when he played football in his twelfth grade. I played field hockey in my eleventh grade, so we were both athletes. But you see, they would take Andrew on trips; they wouldn't take me. The other schools wouldn't play if I played, so they didn't take me, but because we were both athletes, I would see him. He--I went to his game. Andrew could run one end of the field to the other. And so they would also say--the crowd was, "Give the nigger the ball." Well, they would give it to him. Speaker 2: That's what they would actually say? Speaker 1: (Makes sound). Speaker 2: Like that? Speaker 1: And when they saw him run one end of the field to the other, they stopped saying it, and they'd just say, "Give it to Andy, give it to Andy," and they would cheer him by name then. He had earned the respect of everybody. And it was, like I said, those three--those two girls that joined me in eleventh grade, I never did see them, I never did. I knew they were there, but I never did see them. I've jumped years. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we were, we had you as a freshman in high school. And we were just talking about your teachers and such. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 628101 Speaker 1: Well, when you think about the fact that the cafeteria staff was all black preparing the food, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were black. See, I can jump back to the half a year at middle school [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia] and the high school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]. But as I said, I can't separate them. It seems to me that the same ladies that were working at the middle school, they were working at the high school, but that's not true, okay. But in my mind, they were. In the middle school, we, there were lines. And you would get your food one place, and you would get your milk another place, okay. When--at first mama [Marjorie Harrison Turner] gave us money to buy lunch. We would buy our lunch, sit it on the table, then go get your liquids. They would turn the table over, so the only thing I would have would be my milk. So mama started packing my brother [James Turner, Jr.] and my lunch, so that that way we took our lunch with us and we got our milk and we had lunch. But the people who were working in the back--now this must have been high school--when we would get our lunch, they would load our plates. That was the only way that they had a way of letting us know that they were with us, is that they would over feed us. (Laughter) So, they would really fill up our plates, and there was a white lady that we had to pay our money to. She knew our plates were fuller, but she didn't say anything. She charged us same as everybody else. So, they tried to take care of us the best that they could, and the only way they had was to feed us. So, they would feed us. We didn't see anybody else black. I don't know about the custodial staff except for that one man, because I don't remember ever seeing anybody else. So, to us, there was no one black in the- in there. Story_ID: 628102 Speaker 1: But let's go to the students. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. And I'm going to take you from the first day all the way up until today with the students. The first day when I went into my class--and somewhere there's a picture of my sitting in the classroom--they all moved their chairs, and I'm kind of sitting in the middle by myself. But they're in the pictures, somebody got in. The press wasn't supposed to get in, but somebody got in, as the press can do, and took this picture. But you can tell that the students are not sitting near me, but they're in the class with me. Okay, so they would move away from me. There was one girl that I never forgot. And up until this day, I think it's one of them now, but I don't know. This one particular girl would spit in my face at least once a week. Now, the way she was able to do this was because I was stupid. And the reason I say I'm stupid is because how could someone spit in your face at least once a week when you should be able to avoid this. Well, I couldn't avoid it, and I had no way of figuring it out for the longest time until I finally realized what was going on, or what was going to happen. The first few days she did it without me being really conscious of it, and what happened. But then as I began to get wise to it, it didn't happen as often, and she would get my clothes more so than anything else. They constantly called me names, constantly, up to a point where you almost believed that was your name. They had little songs that they sang about Charlie Brown. They threw pennies so much that I got wise and I would tell my mom [Marjorie Harrison Turner], "You don't have to give me lunch money today. Because they're going to throw these pennies at me, and I'm going to get enough to pay for my lunch." (Laughter) So, they stopped throwing the pennies when they realized I was paying for my lunch with the pennies. And the lady in the lunchroom, whatever pennies I would give her, no matter what it was, she would take that as the money for my lunch. And I found out later that all of us did that. If they were going to throw money, we were going to use it. So they stopped throwing money. My classmates left the middle school [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia] to go to high school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] with me, okay. There was a lot of the same children. I didn't know them; I didn't want to know them. They were so mean and nasty to me that I had no interest in getting to know them. Story_ID: 628103 Speaker 1: But in the eleventh grade [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], something happened. Number one, the 17 [Norfolk 17] had already passed two grades, including the grade they were going into, so we had to be smart. I passed the eighth grade, ninth grade, and tenth grade tests to get into the eighth grade [at Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia]. By the eleventh grade, the children began to realize this. And especially I was over exceptional in math; I was taking calculus in eleventh grade. There was a boy that--a white boy, 'cause nobody else was there. He came one day and asked me if I would help him with his algebra, because he needed algebra to graduate, whereas I was taking calculus. And I was so quiet, he just figured maybe I could help him. Well, I helped this boy. Every day, he would come to my table at lunch. A lot of them would come by the eleventh grade. But I would help him at lunch with his algebra, which was his next class. When his parents found out, they didn't move him from the school, they left the whole state. They just moved, because they found out that I was helping him. He had asked me to go to the prom. I was going to go with him to the prom; he was my friend. I had three friends when I graduated, him and two girls. When they found out I had helped him with algebra and he had asked me to the prom, that's when they moved. I never saw that boy again. I found out at our forty-fifth reunion that he had died. All right, these three gave me gifts at graduation. My class, when they called my name for graduation, my class gave me a standing ovation. These were the same people that had done unmentionable things to me for four years. But at graduation they realized, number one, I wasn't going away, and number two, I was smart as the dickens, so they accepted me. During those four years, I'd had questions asked. You see, the children were children, no matter what the color of their skin. They were only doing what they had been taught. I was against what they were learning at home. Number one, my hair was down my back. They said all black people had short hair and put all kinds of grease and stuff in it, so stay away from them, they smelled funny. I was against the rule. Number two, we were supposed to be stupid, because we had been slaves and we never did learn anything. I was smarter than most of them. So, I was against the rule. They were just as confused over me as I was confused over why were they treating me that way. I was [U.S.] military. When daddy [James Turner, Sr.] took us to the base, some of these same children were playing with me on the base [Naval Station Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia] who would call me names at school, because they were with their peers. If they had been as nice to me as they were on the base in school, they would have beat them up too. So, they were living in a confused world as much as I was. Story_ID: 628104 Speaker 1: I was not only treated bad by the whites, which was expected, the blacks in my neighborhood treated me bad, too. So, just as Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg] says, and I love his words, "White folks called me nigger all day. The blacks called me whitey all night." The Norfolk 17 became a family, because they pushed us together; we had nowhere to go. As the girls became girls and we realized that those other things over there that look different from us are boys, and you're supposed to like them, we had nobody to like except the six boys. One of them was my brother [James Turner, Jr.], so that counted me down to five. Three of them were older than I was, and wasn't even looking at me. So, it kind of cut me down to one or two, and that was all I had to like. So my crushes were within the 17. We never went to proms. We never went to dances. I mean what was I, eighteen when I kissed a boy? So I was--at eighteen, I was a sixteen year old, just discovering life. And yet, I became a split personality. Because my maturity over here, education-wise, was above my level. My sociability line was below my level, and I was stuck somewhere in the middle. So, this is why my interpretation of me is three or four different people. I'm sixty-five; certain things I'm supposed to know, but my twenty-five year old daughter tells me I'm clueless. And I am, because people still say things today and I'm standing there saying, "I don't know what they meant by that." And I'm thinking on what they meant when they've gone on to another conversation. I understand that there're things I don't know, maybe I'm not supposed to know them. Or maybe I'm supposed to be on the level that I'm on. But even at church, and it happened last Sunday, Mother's Day. Our hospitality committee was giving out roses, white if your mother is deceased, and red if she's alive. They didn't give me one. And they were giving it to the seniors. So, I went and asked the lady. I said, "I'm supposed to have a rose." She said, "Well, Pat [HistoryMaker Patricia Turner], why do you think you're supposed to have a rose?" I said, "Did you forget? I'm old as you are. That makes me a senior." They don't think of me as being as old as they are, because I really don't know what they know, and I probably never will catch up. But when you take a child and rip their teenage years from them, you can't get them back. They're lost. I'm never going to be the person, whoever I'm supposed to be. But I am what I am. For years I wouldn't even cry, because I didn't know I was supposed to. I never learned hatred, because my mother [Marjorie Harrison Turner] taught us love. My mother taught us strength in God, and I didn't even know people were hurting me. I told her I was so hurt--and so deep inside--that realizing it made it worse. Story_ID: 628105 Speaker 1: My classmates--I graduated in 1963, on time, with honors [from Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]. It took my classmates forty-five years to find me when I taught right here in Norfolk, Virginia for twenty years. My classmates had a reunion a few years ago. And they did something at the reunion that really it took me a year to understand why. You see, when I got ready to go to the prom, the school board called my mother [Marjorie Harrison Turner] and told her that it was a private affair. If I came they would have to close it. The boy that had asked me to go to the prom had disappeared; he was gone. I didn't know what happened. I thought I did something. I wasn't thinking it was because I was black, that that was why all of this was going on. I thought I had done something. So my classmates, they tell me now, they voted for me not to come to the prom. So here it is forty-five years later, and the president of the class, Jerry Collier, he owns Freemason Abbey [Freemason Abbey Restaurant, Norfolk, Virginia], which is a big to do thing here. Speaker 2: What kind of place is it? Speaker 1: It's a restaurant. Speaker 2: Called Free Mason--? Speaker 1: Abbey. Speaker 2: Abbey, okay. Speaker 1: The first thing before the reunion, they called me and asked me if I would like to work on the committee. They invited me to Nags Head in North Carolina, which is at the oceanfront. He owns two of those great big houses that they rent out to families coming to the beach. Story_ID: 628106 Speaker 1: They invited me to go. At first, I was afraid. I was, (laughter) I didn't know whether to go or not. But then I said, "Well, many years have gone by. If they're inviting me there, they must have something to say. I can go." So, I decided to go, and I contacted my BFF, as the kids say today. He and I have been--we've known each other fifty-five years. The day he was born, his mother brought him over to show him to my mom [Marjorie Harrison Turner], and we've been together ever since. I called him and I told him I was going, and he said, "Okay, I'll come with you so that you won't have to be alone." And I went, and yes, they had a lot to say. One girl cried and boohooed, and to this day I don't know if she's that Katy [ph.] that would always spit in my face. I don't know, I don't want to know. Some of them just said they were sorry. Some of them asked me for forgiveness. And to tell you the truth, I don't know what they were asking me forgiveness for. Because you have to realize, these people that I'm seeing forty-five years later, number one, they don't look the same. Number two, I forgot what they did to me. So, I don't know what they're asking me forgiveness for. It's the same thing as the teacher [Hal J. Bonney, Jr.]. I remembered him because he was an adult, and he was traumatic. I don't remember what they did. I remember the things that happened, but who did it, I couldn't tell you, but they remember what they did. I had the most wonderful time in that beach house that I have ever had. They weren't sure what to give me, so they gave me a suite. I had two beds over here, two beds over here, and my own full bathroom all to myself. They really overdid trying to make up for what they did. All right, then we had the reunion. Jerry [Jerry Collier] called me up front. I was working the desk, because I felt more comfortable being away. I didn't know what they were talking about; I didn't know what they were sharing. And they were talking about what a good time they had in high school, and what happened here, and how they did this, and how they used to walk to this--I didn't know what they were talking about; I was an outsider. So I worked the desk where you admit the people and give them tickets and so forth. So I was a part of it, but once again, I was an outsider. When I hear Jerry calling my name over the speaker, I'm saying to myself, "Why is he calling my name?" So--but I got up from the desk, and I went over. They gave me a big star that said, Norview. They made me a Norview star. And he said, "I would like to ask you not only to be our queen for the reunion, but something that I should have done forty-five years ago. As the president of the class, will you dance with me?" I cried. I cried, because they all stood up just like they did the night of graduation, and they cheered and they clapped, and I felt so overwhelmed. I never did dance with him. I ran in the bathroom and I cried like a baby. And I had to get myself together and come out. But that was their way of saying I'm sorry. Just yesterday--so I'm on the committee, the reunion committee. And we have a scholarship, because, you see, they have money; I don't. They have a scholarship that they give back to Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia]. Last year they gave twenty-five hundred dollars to a girl graduate. I didn't go to the committee this year. I went to the committee--they chose me--because they have chosen me. They treat me like their special person, something they should have done forty-five years ago, but they're making up. And it is so beautiful that it would touch anyone's heart. And I feel the love, I, I just feel it. But it's forty-five years late. Speaker 2: It's interesting that they would give you a hand, you know, at graduation. I mean, you know, they've had a long time to think about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They stood up. Speaker 2: --what they've done now. Speaker 1: What they've done now. Speaker 2: But that's not as surprising as-- Speaker 1: But see, I think-- Speaker 2: --the graduation. Speaker 1: --graduation night, which was four years, I had been with them since eighth grade [at Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia]. So I'd been with them for four and a half years. And I do believe--I can't tell you, because I was there but I wasn't there. I think that some of them started to stand up, which made all of them stand up. You see what I'm saying? I did have three real good friends, and the ones that had been in different classes with me. So, if we were--almost four hundred people were graduating. But if you got fifty standing up, it makes the crowd stand up, whether they know why they're standing or not (laughter), you know. And I believe that's what happened that night. But things have totally changed now, totally changed. I, I, can see why the reporter wrote 'When the Walls Came Tumbling Down' [sic. 'When the Wall Came Tumbling Down,' Denise Watson Batts] It's true, they have come tumbling down. Story_ID: 628107 Speaker 1: Did you--we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Andrew Heidelberg earlier this week, and he was describing his presence on the football team and emergence as a star there in that last year, as something that made a lot of the barriers fall. He felt it--he personally, you know, felt he could, he had accomplished something there after being on the team. But he felt that other people, you know, felt that maybe it helped them, too, his visibility in that position. Is that, I mean how did it affect you? Speaker 2: Since I was--I was an athlete. I played on the field hockey team, but my experience was totally different. I made the team, but other schools would send word that, "If you bring your colored player, we will not play, and you'll have to forfeit the game." So, of course, the coach was always talking to me to try to explain to me that she wanted me to go, but you know, this would happen and that would happen, and I kind of turned it around and made it appear that I chose not to go. I, I was good, but I couldn't play. They won district, all-district that year, but I never played in the game. I only played at Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], and I always felt as if I wasn't accepted, because I couldn't go and play. But they gave me a letter anyway, and I still have my school letter, but I didn't earn it. And I never felt as if I deserved it, because I wasn't allowed to play. Whereas, Andrew got the opportunity to play, but it was in his senior year. And I, I never got the opportunity to play. The friends that I earned, I earned through my ability in math, and I got accepted through my ability in math, because I could, I could work higher math than they could. So, they accepted me that way. But as a person, I, I never got accepted until forty-five years later. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 628108 Speaker 1: After high school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]--I mean when you graduated, what, what were your options? Where were you going? Did they give you honors at graduation? I mean did you, did you--? Speaker 2: Graduate as--? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I graduated with honors. Speaker 1: And what were your prospects? You know, what were you looking forward to? Had you chosen a college by--I imagine you had by time you were a senior, right? Speaker 2: I had chosen nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was so messed up by that time that I didn't know what I wanted to do. I didn't even accept the fact that I was grown. The only thing I realized was that it was time to leave home and do something, but I didn't know what I was supposed to do. I was so immature that I just knew I was supposed to get a job. And I thought about the [U.S.] military, and I tried to join the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]. But I passed the test, and I couldn't pass the physical because I have a heart problem. That left me in Richmond [Virginia], where they gave the test, and I didn't know what to do. I didn't want to come home, and I knew I had to start a life. That was that summer. I had been offered scholarships, but I was afraid to go to schools because of my experience in high school. So, I didn't know what to do. Then I thought that maybe if I became a mortician that the dead couldn't hurt me. So a couple of days I tried that, and that didn't work out. That was kind of a crazy idea. Then I, I was walking down the street one day. It happened just like this. And I saw this school, and I started--I went in and I applied. There was an admissions test. It was a business school, and I said well, I can major in accounting; that has to do with numbers. And I took the admissions test that day and I passed, and they offered me a scholarship, and I started. But I stopped because I, you see, I was still confused. I was afraid of people. I was afraid of all people. I didn't know if they were going to hit me, or if they were going to call me names, or if somebody was going to spit in my face. And even the few days in the classroom, I had a white teacher, and he reminded me of my ninth grade teacher [Hal J. Bonney, Jr.]. I was afraid of the teacher. I was just a total mess. I left school; I just walked away. I stayed in--I had a dorm room, and I stayed in the dorm room. I don't know how long I stayed in the dorm room. I couldn't go to classes; I couldn't do anything. Then it just seems like I had an awakening. I didn't even tell people that I was one of the 17. Nobody knew. I-- Speaker 1: Did the 17, the Norfolk 17 have a lot of notoriety-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --around here while this was going on? Speaker 2: Nobody knew. Speaker 1: Nobody? Okay. Speaker 2: Nobody knew about it. We were dead; we didn't exist. Speaker 1: So even--I mean, when you, when you all started to graduate, was there any publicity about-- Speaker 2: Nothing. Speaker 1: --that now they're graduating? Speaker 2: Nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing. We graduated; and we couldn't even get jobs in this area. We had been--what we call it today, we had been blackballed. No college here [Norfolk, Virginia] accepted us [sic.]. No job even wanted us. We--most of us left and returned later. Story_ID: 628109 Speaker 1: Now what did your parents [Marjorie Harrison Turner and James Turner, Sr.]--did they help you try to find a college, or prepare for the world after high school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]? Speaker 2: I don't know. I blocked that out. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean--okay. Is there--you know, I was just wondering. You go to Richmond [Virginia] and join the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]. And then you stayed there, you said? Speaker 2: I ran away. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Now that--okay. Speaker 2: I ran away from my parents, my family, and everything. I never even told anybody this. I didn't want them to know where I was, because I was a failure. I was a failure to me. You see, everything that happened to me in high school, I thought it was my fault. And I could not separate the fact that what was happening to me was not my fault. So, I built up a barrier around me. I mean, I knew I was female, but I was doing something wrong, and I didn't know what it was. I wanted to protect my brothers [James Turner, Jr. and Keith Turner] and sisters [Jacque Turner, Betty Turner Bray and Jerree Turner Eure], but I didn't know how, because I was the oldest. So if I had done something wrong, I didn't want to put this on them. Whatever it was that I had done wrong, I had to find out what that was first. I got married. It's amazing. I met--I've been married twice. I met my first husband on the bus, and some kind of way we ended up married a year later, but I wasn't ready for marriage. I felt as if I was still sixteen or seventeen in my mind, and here I was married. It didn't last but a year. Speaker 1: Is this here in Norfolk [Virginia], or, or--? Speaker 2: I got married here, and I walked away from here. He was in the [U.S.] Navy. We remained friends for many years, until he passed. He got married and he passed, but we remained friends. But I wasn't ready to be a wife. I wasn't even ready to be an adult. I became a waitress. I never talked about where I was or what I was. I became a waitress because I walked in the bar one day, and they were short of help. And I said, "I can do this." I'd never done anything like that before, but I knew I could do it, and I waitressed there for a while. Then I was very uneasy, and I wasn't ready for life again. I wasn't a good waitress, because I was still afraid of people. And these were all black people, because we weren't integrated here, but they had treated me so bad that I wasn't ready for them either. That--I just walked away from that job one day too; I just didn't go. Story_ID: 628110 Speaker 1: And I left here with a friend of mine, and I moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And it really wasn't Philadelphia. It was outside of Philadelphia, a little place called West Chester [Pennsylvania], which was like a suburb of Philadelphia, and I lived with him for a while. And I wasn't afraid of him, because he was like a friend. But then he met somebody and he was getting ready to get married, so I didn't have anywhere to live. And I was walking again, and Thomas Jefferson University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was there at the hospital, and I was walking past the hospital. And I, I just told myself I could do that too. And I went in and I applied to be what they call a ward clerk. And I got the job that day. And when I got the job I didn't have anywhere to live, because the guy that I had been living with, my friend, he was getting married. So of course he was leaving the apartment. So I talked to the landlord there, and I told her I had a job but I couldn't pay the rent right then. And she was just nice enough to let me stay there until I could. And I was working as a ward clerk. I worked as a ward clerk for about two weeks. And as a ward clerk, you deal with the patients, but you don't--they had a nursing school. And I liked nursing, because sometimes when the nurses needed help, I would go in and help them. And of course, I passed the test. See, I didn't, I didn't realize I was smart, either. I didn't realize it. I just knew that if I took a test, I was going to pass it. I passed the test and I started nursing school on a scholarship. So I became a nurse and I liked that for a while, and I worked as a nurse for about twenty years. And in Philadelphia, I was walking past a club again. Speaker 2: So what was the name of the nursing school? Speaker 1: Thomas Jefferson University. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I was walking past the club one day, and I went in. And my daddy [James Turner, Sr.] being a military man, he used to drink. But my daddy used to drink scotch, and I decided I was going to have a drink of scotch. I had a drink of scotch, and I started drinking. And I was nursing and drinking. I had two modes; home, nursing, and drinking. I still hadn't found me. I was still afraid of people. I really didn't talk to anybody. I didn't know why. So this is why I say the Norfolk 17, especially us young ones, we have never experienced any teenage life; we never had the opportunity. And the girls were different than the guys, because I didn't know girls are different than guys. But I didn't know this then. And we feel things differently. We're supposed to have emotion. I didn't have any. I met my second husband and we stayed married for four years. And he cheated on me, and I didn't understand that. (Laughter) I'm--you kind of got me spilling everything out. I came home, and I packed up everything I owned in a car. I had a Buick, a green Buick, and I packed up everything that I could get in the car, and I came home. And now I'm totally feeling--I said everything that's happening to me, it's my fault. I didn't realize that teenage girls are supposed to go through certain steps. Because I had missed those steps, these things were happening in my life. It had nothing to do with me; it was my situation. I was still smart, so this is when I split. There was the smart nurse over here, and there was this divorced, young, drunken girl over here. I didn't realize they were two different people, and yet they were still me. So, I was three people. I was the smart intelligent nurse over here who went to work on time every day. I even worked double shifts sometime. There was this divorced drunk over here, and then there was the person in the middle. I didn't know that my teenage--never having teenage years made me this person that I am. That all happened before I was thirty years old, okay. Story_ID: 628111 Speaker 1: Let me get this straight, though. This kind of troubles me that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] never recognized you all when you graduated? Or did anything, did they do anything to recognize you, and to try to help you get-- Speaker 2: I can remember as a-- Speaker 1: --started in school someplace or--? Speaker 2: As a young girl, I remember them giving us an award dinner. I never forgot that award dinner, never forgot it, because I was the speaker. But the award dinner had us sitting down here, and back here was a whole bunch of ministers. And they were really honoring them, but we were there. But as far as scholarships or anything like that? Nothing, nothing. All the education that I have, I earned it through scholarships, or paid for it myself, or got grants. I had student loans one time up the yang yang. I tell you, they have never debriefed me. I can't say what they did for the rest, I can only speak for me. I can speak for my deceased brother [James Turner, Jr.]. They never debriefed him. Speaker 1: Now, of course, you know, now--I mean we look back at it now, you know, from a perspective that's a little bit different. I mean, things are done differently now than they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Done differently now. Speaker 1: --in those days. But it is interesting that nobody thought that--you know-- Speaker 2: Nothing. Speaker 1: --in those days. And the NAACP may not be any different from a lot of organizations in those days, you know. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: The schools in those days didn't counsel students very well, either. So, just, you know, I just wanted to say that for the record. But it is, when you--I mean if we learn anything from history, it should be that you've got-- Speaker 2: You, you--once you program a person, you've got to go and un-program them. You can't un-program yourself. I tried for many years, and I know I still have issues. I still, if you walk towards me, I clinch. It don't matter the color of your skin, because I don't know what's going to happen to me, so I'm going to protect me. And I feel I'm still reaching back to protect my brother, because that's my job. That's what I was supposed to do. And he's not there now. I went through bad issues when he died, I mean bad. His death brought me together with a lot of ways within myself. But yet, the guilt of not being there when he died was very, very, strong in my mind. You see, he fell from a tree after a bunch of bee stings. I was at school, I was in my classroom. It took, oh, it took a long time for me to realize that he would have died whether I was there or not. Speaker 1: So, this is while you all were still in school? Speaker 2: No, I was teaching. Speaker 1: You were teaching? Speaker 2: My brother just died. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: In 2006. Speaker 1: He was grown when this happened to him? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He went through a lot of changes too. I mean he went through a divorce. He only had one divorce though, thank god. He has two sons. My brother has the two most wonderful sons. One's [Ellisen Turner] a lawyer on Avenue of the States [sic. Avenue of the Stars] in Los Angeles [California]. He's married now with two children. Then he has his oldest son [Derek Turner], he's a graphics designer. They became beautiful people. I have a daughter. My daughter came late in life. I have three beautiful grandchildren. I didn't know what to do with her when I got her. It was, it was such an amazing thing to have a child in my life, someone who wasn't going to mistreat me, someone who wasn't going to do anything bad to me, someone who depended on me, that I refused to share her with anyone, even her father. I said, "She's my little immaculate conception; she has no father." Because she was mine. It was the only time I really felt loved. Story_ID: 628112 Speaker 1: Now that I have all this education, all these degrees, and all these awards and everything-- Speaker 2: So, how did that happen? Now, you said at age thirty you were--well, you had a nursing--some nursing training and had a, you know, a degree from the nursing school [at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And you were, you were, you say you were drinking and you were doing the nursing. And so, what happened by age thirty that you started pursuing the educational track? Speaker 1: I didn't go--it was way after then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I, I came home after the divorce, bad divorce, and I was home for a long time. I worked for a pediatrician, Dr. Robert Johnson. I just lucked up on it. I was working at Norfolk Community Hospital [Norfolk, Virginia], and I got a telephone call. I don't know how it happened. I do not know how this happened to this day. I got a telephone call saying that the doctor was offering me a position in his office, and I took the position. It was pediatrics, and I loved pediatrics. So, I took that job and I stayed in it for, I worked for him for almost ten years. I've always loved math; I have always loved math. And I guess I had reached a point in my life where I was missing something, and I wasn't sure what it was. And I said, "You know what? I'm tired of this white." I didn't want to wear white anymore. (Laughter) And I didn't want to be a nurse anymore. That all happened, I had three babies die within the same week, and I had a separation problem. I had worked with the babies like ten hours. And when I left, one died. Then it looked like a week later I worked with that baby on double shift, and it died. And I was still going through this thing that it was my fault. So, I had to get out of nursing, because I felt like I was doing something to these babies, which I wasn't, but they were dying because of me. So, I still had those issues. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 628113 Speaker 1: Okay, we had a little segue, but let's get back to your education career. Now, how did--? Speaker 2: What happened is, like I said, I loved math. Well, I just decided I didn't want to be a nurse anymore. I can't tell you why, I don't know why. And I stopped working for him [Robert Johnson] after I had her, after she came along, and I took a year off. Because I tried for scholarships and I couldn't get them, because I made too much money as a nurse. Speaker 1: This is after you had your daughter? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: After, after she came along. And I decided-- Speaker 1: About what year is this? I'm sorry. How old are you at this point? Speaker 2: Oh, forty, forty. How old was I? Forty-one? Forty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Forty when she came along, forty-one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. So I wasn't happy, I wasn't content. And when you reach a job where you don't want to get up in the morning and go to work, it's wrong; it's time to make a change. So I started Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] in '83 [1983] for four years, but I graduated in three, because I took an overloads and I finished in three. Before I had finished Norfolk State, I had already taken the National Teacher Exam [National Teacher Examination; Praxis Series]. And as I've said in the past, I was very--I was a good student. So, I passed the National Teacher Exam. When I graduated, I already had a teaching position. So I started teaching-- Speaker 1: At this point, you have a bachelor's degree at this point? Speaker 2: At this point. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I, I started teaching, and I enjoyed teaching. I loved it. I loved going to work every day. It was just wonderful, and I decided to get more education, because I wanted to know more. And the math career, there were children who were like me in my higher grade levels, but I wanted to know more, so I could know more than they knew. So I went and got a master's [degree], and I got my master's from Old Dominion University [Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Now this is when? Speaker 2: In '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997], okay. Speaker 2: And then I taught a few more years, and in 2008, Old Dominion gave me an honorary doctorate. I was already taking some classes at William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia]. Speaker 1: You say an honorary doctorate in 2008? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, honorary doctorate. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: But wait. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was working on a doctorate at William and Mary, okay. So, I was taking classes at William and Mary already. And when the president of ODU called me and told me, "We're giving you your doctorate," I said, "Hm, how many do I need?" (Laughter) You only need one, okay, and it's hanging on the wall over there. So driving back and forth and so forth, and taking classes, I just quit. (Laughter) So, I quit the other one and I got this one. So, I'm one, okay. Speaker 1: So, okay. So your, is it Ed.D. or--? Speaker 2: What? My doctorate? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: It's humane letters. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. From? Speaker 2: Old Dominion. Speaker 1: William and Mary? Speaker 2: Old Dominion. Speaker 1: Oh, from Old Dominion. Speaker 2: No, Old Dominion is the one that I have hanging on the wall. Speaker 1: Okay, that's the one that-- Speaker 2: The one with William and Mary, I stopped. Speaker 1: Oh, you stopped. Speaker 2: And I'm not going to go back. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause you only need one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What is it going to be? Dr. Square? (Laughter) You only need one, okay. So I stopped the one from there, so I don't have to drive back and forth, and I don't have to-- I have, I wrote half a dissertation, I'm not going to finish it. Speaker 1: Okay. But, now, what did Old Dominion--did they, were they recognizing your contributions to civil rights when they gave you an honorary degree? Speaker 2: And education. Speaker 1: And education, okay. All right, okay. Speaker 2: Because I have many, many awards for education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've written pamphlets and books and everything. Story_ID: 628114 Speaker 1: Now do you have an educational philosophy you picked up in these years of studying? Speaker 2: That was mine from the beginning: education is the key to success. I learned that during my teaching career, because education opens doors. The more education you have, the more doors will open for you. I try to tell the children today when I give speeches to the school, when I speak to honor assemblies or graduations or anything, I tell them this, and it's very important, "Everyone does not have to go to college, but everyone needs an education." You can go far with a high school education and life education. You can go farther with a college education, but everyone doesn't need to go to college. You know, when you look at the hierarchy of life, it's made into a triangle when you're a math person. The bottom supports the top, but the top is only a peak. You need more people at the bottom knowing how to hold up the top. So everything that you decide to do in your life, be the best that you can be. That takes education. If you're going to be a street cleaner, it takes an educated street cleaner to do it the best that they can do it. If you're going to be a teacher, it takes an educated teacher to teach the street cleaner how to clean the streets. So, education is the key to success, but everyone doesn't need to go to college to be an educated person. Story_ID: 628115 Speaker 1: Now, do you, do you get called a lot to speak about the--your experiences (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I'm going to do one tomorrow. Speaker 1: --as part of the Norfolk 17? Speaker 2: I'm doing one more educational tomorrow. It's going to be to uplift and to lead young girls in the right direction. So, I'll be doing one tomorrow. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you do quite a few of things? Speaker 2: Quite a few. I'm not doing as many this year, because I had a stroke in September, and I refused quite a few. I even turned a couple over to Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]. Because in September, I couldn't speak. And now God has blessed me, and I'm running my big mouth (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 628116 Speaker 1: Now, we, we always ask this question, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there any thi- any major thing that you would do differently now if you could? Speaker 2: Number one, I would have started my careers earlier. I would have gotten some professional help in my early years, so that during my confusion years, maybe I would not have had to go through them. I would have let my--allowed my daughter to come into my life much earlier, so today she could have been much older. I--if I had had her enter my life earlier, my grandchildren would be older, so that I could share in a longer time with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 628117 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Number one is that they--my belief is for all people. If the United States is to be united, we need to stop labeling people. We are Americans. We need to accept the fact that we are Americans. We each have our own heritage, but it does not identify us. We never need to forget the past, no matter what it is, but we need to move forward to being unified. The African American needs to realize, some of their people were slaves, some of the slaves were kings and queens before they were slaves. Story_ID: 628118 Speaker 1: Tell me this, now: when you look back over all the things you've done to this point, again, now what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: To hold your head up high, and that the stars are attainable. For my grandchildren, who the baby is only four months old, I want her to realize that anything that she thinks about doing can be done with hard work and perseverance. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let me revisit your family again. Now, are your parents still alive? Speaker 2: My mother [Marjorie Harrison Turner] is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father [James Turner, Sr.] is deceased. Speaker 1: All right. How did they--I mean as the years have unfolded, have they--have they--I guess, how do they view, you know, your experiences as a member of the Norfolk 17, and your subsequent career? Speaker 2: That's a good question. Because my mom, she came to my master's, when I received my master's degree, but she didn't come to my doctorate because she, she couldn't. She gets around pretty good, but climbing steps wouldn't have been her--would be beyond her ability. She tells me that when she looks back over all the things I've done, she still remembers that little girl who she had to slap her hand, because she wouldn't read the passage right. (Laughter) And she could not have imagined my being Dr. Turner [HistoryMaker Patricia Turner] today, when it was kind of difficult to get me to read correctly. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 628119 Speaker 1: Now your brother passed. Was-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I don't know how--when was it? Speaker 2: He died 2006. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Skip's [James Turner, Jr.] only been gone about four years. Now, he was Dr. Turner. He--Skip graduated from Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. He got his master's [degree] from Central Michigan [Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, Michigan], and he did his doctorate work at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] where he was the affirmative action director and a history professor. Skip, when he passed, he was divorced and with two sons [Derek Turner and Ellisen Turner]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Skip went through quite a bit when--one day in high school a very good friend of [HistoryMaker] Andrew Heidelberg's, Ken Whitley, came to my classroom to get me to get help for my brother, because they had beat him and left him on the side of the fence. And it bothered Skip very much, but he never stopped. My brother and I are two members of the Norfolk 17 that continued the whole battle. I went four and a half years, and Skip had five and a half years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Brothers and sisters behind us are also Norview graduates, even the baby girl [Jerree Turner Eure], who was born eleven years after the group of five; she is a Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia] graduate. Our nieces and nephews who stayed in the area are Norview graduates. So, we're a bunch of Norview brats. Speaker 1: Okay. How did things kind of--how did your brother deal with the trauma of that integration period? Speaker 2: It was very difficult for him, but he had neighborhood good friends. The guys, guys kind of take things differently than girls. They hold them in more. He, he went through his ups and downs, and he was the reason that he ended up divorced. We both had relationship issues and being able to adjust to people. He--but we still became highly educated people, and I guess that's what he held on to, was his education. He's an Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] member, and I'm quite sure his fraternity helped him to go through a lot of his struggles. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were saying earlier that you maintain a close relationship with Andrew Heidelberg, especially-- Speaker 2: Andrew has become my brother. Since my brother passed, Andrew and I are very close. We do a lot of things together. And when I could not drive because of my stroke, Andrew was right there for me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, oh, give us a description of what your daughter is doing now, I guess. Speaker 2: Right now she's being a mother. She's raising her three children. Her children are very close. They're four, one, and four months. So, right now she's being a mother to her children, and she's starting school at TCC [Tidewater Community College, Norfolk, Virginia] in the fall. Story_ID: 628120 Speaker 1: Is there anything I should ask you before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That's a very good question. I've never thought of myself as being remembered. I'm just beginning to accept the fact that I will be remembered. I guess there's so many sides of me. I want to be remembered as a person who showed love to all people. And that has been very difficult for me during my younger years, but has increased through my older years. I never meet a stranger. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much for your story. Speaker 2: Thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Story_ID: 628121 Speaker 1: That's my father [James Turner, Sr.], my mother. That one right there is me, my brother that integrated with me who's deceased now; that's Skip [James Turner, Jr.]. That's Keith [Keith Turner]. Jacque [Jacque Turner] is hiding in the background, you can only see her head. That's my sister Betty [Betty Turner Bray], and this is my cousin Myron [ph.] who lived with us about three or four years. These were some of my father's shipmates. Well, all of these were his shipmates, submarine men. I don't know their names; I don't even remember their names. Speaker 2: And about what year, and where? Speaker 1: This was Little Creek Base [Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek; Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek-Fort Story] here in Norfolk, Virginia. I would say-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Could you move the pen, please? Speaker 1: I would say looking at me, it might have been '50 [1950], l950, 1952. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's me. I won Miss Coronado [ph.], which is a section here in Norfolk. And I remember most of these girls' names. This is Andrea [ph.]. This is Andrea, and her name was Carolyn [Carolyn Rouse Cunningham]. Carolyn is the sister to one of the Norfolk 17, Johnnie Rouse. And Ava Thomas [ph.], and I don't remember her name. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, let me get a picture with this camera, because it's somewhat higher resolution. Okay, next. Speaker 1: So, you, you were in the back? Speaker 2: Yes. And you're going to be surprised who's standing beside me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is Ruffner's [William Henry Ruffner Junior High; W.H. Ruffner Academy, Norfolk, Virginia] band. The one year I went there in seventh grade, I played first clarinet. This is me, and standing beside me being drum major is [HistoryMaker] Andrew Heidelberg (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is Judge Hal Bonney [Hal J. Bonney, Jr.], who was my ninth grade homeroom and history teacher. We're seeing each other after fifty years of being apart. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is the coordinator for the lost class of 1959. Most people think that the lost class was the Norfolk 17, but it is not. The lost class was--oh, no, no, no. I'm so sorry. This is a new judge. She had just become judge that day, and she and I had taken a picture. It's not (unclear). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on, (unclear). Speaker 2: First time I'd ever seen a judge become a judge. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, tell us about this one. Speaker 2: You want me to name all, everybody? Speaker 1: Yeah, left to right. Speaker 2: Of course, there's only seventeen. Of course, I can do it. Look, I can do it without the picture. Okay, this is Geraldine Talley [Geraldine Talley Hobby], who integrated Northside Junior High [Northside Junior High School; Northside Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia] alone. These are the four members who integrated Norview Junior High [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia] with my brother; Claudia Wellington, deceased; my brother Skip Turner, deceased; LaVera Forbes, LaVera Forbes Brown, she's not deceased; and Edward Jordan, who the four of them integrated Norview Junior High together in seventh grade. This is me, Pat Turner [HistoryMaker Patricia Turner]. I integrated Norview Junior High, eighth grade, alone. Lolita Portis [Lolita Portis Jones] and Reginald Young integrated Blair Middle School [James Blair Junior High School; James Blair Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia]. She did seventh grade, he did eighth grade. Olivia Driver [Olivia Driver Lindsay] of Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia]; Freddie Gonsouland [Alveraz Gonsouland] of Norview High School. He and Eddie are brothers. Johnnie Rouse; Delores Johnson [Delores Johnson Brown]; Pat White [Patricia Godbolt White]; Andrew Heidelberg, who integrated Norview High School; Louis Cousins, Maury High School [Matthew Fontaine Maury High School, Norfolk, Virginia] alone; and Betty Jean Reed [Betty Jean Reed Kea], Granby High School [Norfolk, Virginia] alone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Carol Wellington, I'm sorry--Carol Wellington is the sister to Claudia. I didn't say that, and I know I didn't. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my brother when they were married. Their boys were little. Speaker 1: Okay, at the top, left one? Speaker 2: Okay, that's me, and that's my brother Skip. That's Jacque, that's Betty, and that's Keith. That was before Jerree's time. That's my mother's mother [Hattie Harrison]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's my mother's mother. Speaker 2: What's her name? Speaker 1: Hattie Harrison. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Which one should we do next? Speaker 1: That's my uncle, my mother's brother. That's my mother and her father before he died. Speaker 2: Okay, we should probably get that. And name them. Speaker 1: Okay. That's my mother, Marjorie Tuner, Marjorie Harrison Turner, and her father, Henry Harrison and my great-grandmother. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you tell us her name? Speaker 1: My great-grandmother? Annie Jackson [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay, and that's your great-grandmother. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, this is my great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's her too. That's her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was ninety-two when she died. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's Andrew. Yeah, this is the lady who is the president of the lost class. They were all the seniors in the City of Norfolk [Virginia], and now they're trying to get together, because, you know, they never graduated. Speaker 2: When they closed the schools down? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh. Speaker 2: When they closed the school, the seniors were kicked out, white and black. So, they're fighting now to get their degrees from their high schools. Speaker 1: So they never got their high school diplomas? Speaker 2: Some of them were given them within the last fifty years, but they never got them. Speaker 1: Wow (unclear). Speaker 2: That's my baby sister and her girls, right here, the Hawaiian girls. She's not in that other picture, so--because, see, she wasn't born yet in that young picture. (Laughter) This is my baby sister, Jerree, and her four daughters, Kim [ph.], Charee [ph.], Lydia [ph.], and the baby girl, Lisa [ph.]. All three of them are married now, except Lydia. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Looks like I see my grandfather, I see him. Speaker 1: Is this you and your grandmother? Speaker 2: No, that's not me. That's one of my cousins, but that is my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's my great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Do we already have her? Speaker 2: Yeah, you've got her. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Let me see. That's my brother, Keith, but he's in the other picture. Then my cousins, that's my aunt, and that's my grandpa. Speaker 1: Want me to go ahead? Speaker 2: You got him with my mama. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: That's my grandfather, Henry Harrison. And that's my grandmother, Hattie Harrison. Oh, there's my grandmother with my cousins. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And I'm thinking, that's the only picture I've got of my grandmother, too. I don't have too many pictures of her. Story_ID: 628122 Speaker 1: This is my mother's [Marjorie Harrison Turner] grandfather and her great-grandfather. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's her father. Speaker 2: Let's see, well, we'll start with this one. Speaker 1: Okay, this is my grandfather-- Speaker 2: Look in the monitor. Speaker 1: --Henry Harrison. Speaker 2: Now, what is--he's in a uniform. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, see, I told you I thought he was in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 2: Where was he at? Speaker 1: I don't remember. Speaker 2: This looks like a police officer's uniform. Speaker 1: Is it? Speaker 2: Yeah, he has big badge. Speaker 1: Okay, maybe he was. I don't know, it was a long time ago. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's his father. Speaker 2: You don't know his name? But his name was Harrison? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: All right. And he's in the [U.S.] Navy apparently? Speaker 1: Uh-huh, he was in the Navy. And that's his father. Speaker 2: I don't think I've seen a picture of a black naval person-- Speaker 1: See. Speaker 2: --from that old--you know-- Speaker 1: That long ago. Speaker 2: From a family member. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: This looks like a Civil War picture. Speaker 1: That was his father. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that would be my great-grandfather. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, did we get this one, the next one? Speaker 2: That's my aunt, my mother's sister. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Would you look at the monitor and tell us about that picture. Speaker 2: That is my great-great grandfather. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, could you tell us his-- Speaker 2: He was a Harrison, I don't know his first name. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and the picture on top? Speaker 2: That's my aunt, my mother's sister, Evelyn [Evelyn Harrison], who used to go and work in the strawberry fields with her when we were little. She was a librarian in Chesapeake [Virginia] here before she died. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: Her name was Evelyn. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead and tell us about this one. Speaker 1: That's me. I've got to move it, 'cause I don't know how old I was, seven. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is myself and Delores Johnson Brown, who is one of the 17 [Norfolk 17]. We're on the cover for Old Dominion [Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia] when we received our doctorates. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's my classmate, Margaret, my classmate in the class of 1963 at Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, did you say her name? Speaker 1: Margaret Cross. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And she had come to my doctorate. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's me when I was thirteen. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 1: And we call that the mothers/daughters picture. That's Margaret again with her daughter. And I don't know her name; I think it's Ruth [ph.]. And that's myself and my child. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's my brother, Skip [James Turner, Jr.], who integrated seventh grade at Norview Junior High [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you know when that picture was taken? Was that high school yearbook? Speaker 2: No, it's not high school. I think he's in Howard University [Washington, D.C.] then. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next one. Speaker 2: My daughter's at Howard now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, (unclear). Speaker 1: That's my uncle, Lawrence [Lawrence Turner (ph.)]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and on the left? Speaker 1: My [paternal] grandmother Anzella [Anzella Claude], I'm named after her, and my father. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What's his name? Speaker 1: James-- Speaker 2: James Turner [James Turner, Sr.]? Speaker 1: Daddy. (Laughter) You know how little kids are. They think your name is daddy or mama. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's James Daddy Turner? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: You already got a picture of her, and you got a picture of my uncle. That's-- Speaker 2: Well, we have a--is this your daddy and-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and his brother. They were in Barcelona, Spain. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my uncle and my father in Barce- that's--oh, that's my daddy, you already got him. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Can you name them again for us? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, my Uncle Lawrence and my daddy. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: That's Skip. What year is that? Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957]. Speaker 2: Fifty-seven? Let's see, in '57 [1957], Skip was eleven. We're getting ready to go--we were probably testing in '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is the year--this is when my daddy died, and all of us got together. I was the only one who had changed clothes, right. I was going in the kitchen to help mom, and I changed clothes, and they decided to take the picture. You see what I look like, right? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Do you need their names? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Yeah, sure, please. Speaker 2: Okay. That's Skip. This is our half-brother James [James Wright (ph.)], also. These two are deceased. That's Keith [Keith Turner], that's Jacque [Jacque Turner], that's Betty [Betty Turner Bray], that's me, and the baby girl, Jerree [Jerree Turner Eure]. Speaker 1: Okay. A nice looking family. Speaker 2: A little monster child. We always call her the monster, because she's so spoiled it's unbelievable. But you have to realize, when she was five years old, she had brothers and sisters that already had jobs. So when she was five, she had twenty-five dollars for her birthday. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh, now you want to know who they are? Speaker 1: Can you tell us who they are? Speaker 2: I might not know them. This is Octavia [Octavia Turner (ph.)], and that's Xavion [ph.], and Kingston [ph.], and Nyla [ph.]. That boy right there, ooh, Lord, have mercy. Speaker 1: He looks like a nice little guy. He wouldn't hurt a fly (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): He looks like, "Who me?" Speaker 1: But do you see the resemblance between this one and that one in there in the bedroom on the wall? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: You got a picture of him already? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I was going to say where? He's BFF, that's all. He don't need a name. (Laughter) My lifelong friend. He was there when my father died, he was there for me. When his mother died, I was there for him. When his father died, I was there for him. When my brother died, he was there for me. So, that's my BFF...