 Story_ID: 117150 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Baratunde Rafiq Thurston. B-A-R-A-T-U-N-D-E, R-A-F-I-Q, T-H-U-R-S-T-O-N. Speaker 1: And, sir, is there story behind your name? Speaker 2: There are probably several stories behind my name. Baratunde is based on the Nigerian name Babatunde, and it means one who is chosen, or a grandfather returns. Rafiq is an Arabic name meaning friend or companion; Thurston is a slave name handed down through many generations of economic activity here in the United States, and my mother [Arnita Thurston] was going for a particular meaning with Baratunde Rafiq; she had suffered a series of miscarriages before I was born--nine--and when I finally showed up, my folks were like, "Finally, he's here;" and so the one who was chosen was representing that. She also really, really loved her grandfather, and so the idea of invoking his spirit in my life was another benefit of choosing that name. So the combo Baratunde Rafiq was meant to mean "kingly companion." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The end. Speaker 1: All right. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Place of birth Washington, D.C.; date of birth September 11, 1977. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: My occupation and title is a complex web. Let's start with Co-Founder and CEO of Cultivated Wit, which is a company that combines humor, design, and technology to tell stories, to market, to create content and to throw events--make the world a more fun place. I'm also a writer and an author. I've written a book called How To Be Black, I have a column in Fast Company Magazine, I tweet excessively and quite hard. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And you were on the staff of the Onion (unclear). Speaker 2: (Sneezing). Speaker 1: Pause? Speaker 2: No, I'm back. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: Long as you tell me I look all right, I don't need to pause. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we get into depth, there are five light-weight questions we like to ask (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, you were asking about the Onion, sir. Yeah, for five years, I worked for the Onion, a satirical news outlet known as America's Finest News Source, where I was politics editor and director of digital. Story_ID: 117151 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So before we go into depth, there are five light-weight questions we always ask of everybody, you know-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay, great. Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? I do, but it changes across time and space and depending on the seasons and the moon, so currently, my favorite food is bacon. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Orange is my favorite color right now; used to be blue, sometimes brown, but orange. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Ooh, favorite time of the year. It's not winter; I'd say after a very long winter, it's not winter. I think it is summer breakin' into fall; the leaves start to turn, the air gets crisp, it's not too sticky. Doesn't feel like a dinosaur swamp. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination (laughter) changes as I see more of the world. At this moment, I would say my favorite vacation destination is Goa, India. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter). No, I don't have any favorite phrases or sayings. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 117152 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name Arnita Lorraine Thurston, A-R-N-I-T-A L-O-double R-A-I-N-E Thurston, T-H-U-R-S-T-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 17th, 1940, Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother has passed away, right? Speaker 2: Yes, October 12th, 2005, Boston, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: All right. Now how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family, and what can you tell us about what they were doing in history? Speaker 2: Yeah, so I'll go one step at a time. The family history is a bit complicated and I've never done the whole genome and family tree thing, but her parents were Lorraine Martin, spelled like her middle name, M-A-R-T-I-N, and Homer Thurston, like Homer Simpson. They were also from Washington, D.C., at least her mother was; I'm actually not sure about her father. Lorraine Martin was a clerk at the U.S. Supreme Court Building; in fact, the first black person to work in that facility, and she had a sister, Mary, and I believe two brothers, though my sister [Belinda Thurston] could tell you much, much more about that part of the family. And then the generation shifting back beyond that, her father was Benjamin Lonesome, that's my maternal grandfather. And I can't tell you off the top of my head what his wife's name was--my grandmother's mother; I do not know. Speaker 1: Now Benjamin Lonesome was born during slavery, right? Speaker 2: He was born at the end; he was born in 1870 in Carolyn County in Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's actually after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. And so the, the, the thing about his life was, you know, we--my sister [Belinda Thurston] and I, being the only children that my mother had, we were raised with the lore that he was born a slave and taught himself to read and moved to [Washington] D.C. And technically, that shouldn't have been possible, and so we haven't done the extreme digging. In fact, just a few weeks ago, someone contacted me based on reading the book, and hearin' about me in PR, etcetera, and saying, "I've actually been lookin' into Benjamin Lonesome's family and found this birth certificate and it seems really unlikely--" actually she was more strident about it--"There's no way he was born a slave." (Laughter). And so I wasn't there, I don't know; I can imagine a period where the exact date of slavery wasn't uniform across the United States. But it seems absolutely clear he was born in the era of slavery, whether he himself was born in slavery or not seems unlikely (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, it's got a dramatic difference when it was over (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Exactly, so-- Speaker 1: Some places further west (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, so let's say he, he was born free, but still under a lot of the tone of that time, you know, not teaching, reading, no land ownership, no voting rights, etcetera, etcetera. Speaker 1: Yeah, the material conditions wouldn't have changed too much (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so-- Speaker 2: And then prior to him, it's fuzzy; I mean even--when I was writing my book, I supplemented what we had just heard from my mother, who had since passed when I started the writing process, and our grandmother, who was in dementia and in facilities and totally unable to remember things, so I went to the internet and found other references that we had never dug up before. So there's a special family history project that I'd love to do some day but haven't, haven't gotten to yet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So now the story is he taught himself to read? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And I do know from news coverage of his death that he moved to Washington, D.C. in 1896, that he worked for the Highway Surfacing Division in D.C., and that he lives to late nineties in age; not quite a hundred but, you know, upper nineties, and there's a way to verify it but I didn't quite have the time, and couldn't tell you off the top of my head right now. Speaker 1: So then he would have passed in the 1960s, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'cause there's a reference to his wife passing prior to that and that date. The, the, the newspaper clipping that we found in the Afro American is cut off in terms of the date line but, you know, if you have the right Lexus Nexus or microfiche, you could double-check that; I didn't have the resources at the time. Story_ID: 117153 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So I take it your--well your grandmother [Lorraine Martin] did--was doing fairly well then as a first black clerk of the U.S. Supreme Court; that--you know, a government job (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, no--very early government job; this is, this is in the '50s [1950s], I believe, and I don't know the paystubs and all, but it's clearly a respectable job, and it's one of these breakthrough moments in our history of one of the first (unclear) so many in various parts of the economy. Speaker 1: Now did she go to college? Speaker 2: Don't know; I don't know. My mother [Arnita Thurston] went to partial college. She went to UDC, University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], and she never got a degree. She also went to Montgomery College--Montgomery Community College in Montgomery County, Maryland, and I even attended some of those classes with her at night, after work--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what did your mother say about growing up in D.C.? Did she come from a large family? Speaker 2: No, no, she didn't; she was--was an only child, as far as she knew. Later, it would come out that Homer Thurston had another family and at least two other kids, and we found this out after somebody on his side of the family died, and I got a call (laughter) saying, "There's some property and you and your sister are the next in line and you gotta sign these things," and that was, that was quite a shock. So--but as far as her experience being raised, she was an only child; she grew up on H Street in Washington, D.C., and I know she was in a gang for a while and kinda runnin' the streets; I know she went to McKinley Technical High School and Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; I know she was good in math and did the newspaper at Banneker 'cause we found a clip of the masthead listing her as features editor, and I know there was a lot of tension between her and her mother--yeah. Speaker 1: And what was the tension about? Speaker 2: Some of it was politics, you know. There was--my mother had a very early age of reaction to missionary Christian work to white Jesus presentation in the church, and to this idea that you could impose your religious beliefs on other people who didn't share them. And even from a teenage age, she started to rebel against this idea that, that Jesus was white and that we had to even--you know, black people had to even go over to Africa and save these people from themselves. She said, "Why can't they just do what they wanna do?" So she had a partial falling out about that. There was a--my mother was dark-skinned and my grandmother wasn't always a fan of that-- Story_ID: 117154 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Used to-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--What color was your grandmother [Lorraine Martin]? Speaker 1: She was--you know it's hard to--it's hard to remember some of these. I have photo memories and the photos are of interesting quality. I think she was a little lighter than my mother [Arnita Thurston], but she was still black; like there was no--she wasn't close to passing. Her sister Mary, I think, could pass and was really, really light. Speaker 2: And was your mother's father-- Speaker 1: I don't even know; he wasn't around in any part of my life; I couldn't tell you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They don't describe what his color was? Speaker 1: No, no. They--he was out of the picture even, you know, somewhat early in my mom's life and not at all in my own life. Speaker 2: Okay. (Unclear) this is just by-the-way-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that your mother's birthday, August the 17th is the same as Marcus Garvey. Speaker 1: Yeah, and my, my birthday is the day Steven Biko died. Speaker 2: Emm. Speaker 1: Yeah, September 11th, '77 [19777]. Speaker 2: Also 1940 is the year that Garvey died. Speaker 1: Yeah. No, they're some interesting overlaps (laughter)--yeah. Speaker 2: You know, I don't know what it means, but that's--those are the dates. Story_ID: 117155 Speaker 1: But, you know, this year [2014] is the anniversary of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association], you know. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: So I was wondering, was there any history of UNIA in your family at all? Speaker 2: No, but my mother [Arnita Thurston] was a part of the pan-African Black Power groups and she was with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Toure] in [Washington,] D.C.. I have notebooks, actually, from her files of meetings. Like she was taking notes in meetings of--I couldn't tell you the organization; I could probably dig it up once I get access to my files (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Stokely (unclear)--this would be in the--this would be in the what, in the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s], yep. Speaker 1: He's in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Council] in the '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then he was a part of Black Panther Party. Speaker 2: I think this was SNCC --or it's a different group; man, it's so many (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--morphed into--he went into the--he became a (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --basically, All--African People's Revolutionary Party-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with African Liberation Day and all that in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: And I actually have a picture of my mother and her friends marching down 16th Street outside of what's now Malcolm X Park during the African Liberation Day Parade, and one of her good friends told me she thought that was '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay. I don't know when the first one was held. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's calling for a Free Eritrea and Down With Imperialism; interesting to read those signs, yeah. And I even have one of the signs from that period in--from her collection. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So she was familiar with--she actually knew Stokely Carmichael. Speaker 2: I wouldn't--I don't know if she knew--to what degree she knew him. I don't know if she was just a part of the organization like so many people, or if she was inner-circle; there's a lot more diggin' through files I'd have to do to figure that out 'cause she's not around to answer that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I'm thinking it must be the African Liberation Support Community [ph.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I do know--but she was heavily involved in protests. My older sister, who was born in '68 [1968], remembers more of the stories and more of the actual things 'cause she would be on my mom's shoulders during some of these marches and protests. And I know my mother describes one action where they sat in at a radio station and took over demanding, I'm not sure what, but it might be in some of the minutes of some of the notes she took--yeah. Story_ID: 117156 Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and we'll go back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Sure thing. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Arnold Robinson, A-R-N-O-L-D. Robinson is spelled the way it normally is--Robinson Crusoe--and a heads-up, much fuzzier details on him, though records are available; he was a veteran, and I have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Vet of-- Speaker 2: Vietnam. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I--we got social security checks after he passed that were very helpful in supporting us in my early childhood. Speaker 1: When was he born? Speaker 2: Don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you think he was about the same age as your mother? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's safe; I think that's safe. So he might even been a little younger; the odds are he was born in the '40s [1940s]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then he died around 1982, '83 [1983]. I have the death certificate but it's in a file that's a little remote right now. I've just moved, and so everything is tossed around some. Speaker 1: Okay. I know the circumstances of death, but before we get there, do you know, I mean, you know, anything about his growing up in terms of going to school and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--what religion he was, or what, you know. Speaker 2: He's a, he's a--relatively mysterious from my perspective in terms of details. There are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Did he grow up here in [Washington,] D.C.? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was from D.C. as well. Speaker 1: From the southeast side or northwest side? Speaker 2: Couldn't tell you, couldn't tell you. And there are--there are family members that are--we're connected to that--he had much larger family; I have cousins on his side, but I'm just not in touch with them. My last memory of them was when I was really, really tiny. So it's--there's discoverable information there but I don't have it. I don't know if he went to college; I do know he was a construction worker for at least part of his life 'cause I remember going to a site really early with him and he drove a pickup truck and I remember seeing the cement trucks and all. But I don't know what he did in the army, so there's a whole 'nother--you know. You guys should probably follow up with me when I've gotten some block of time to really unearth some of these things 'cause with the government records there's, there's a lot that I could probably discover. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. But you don't know where he went to high school here in D.C.? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no, no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 117157 Speaker 1: And your mother [Arnita Thurston]--did we--now she went to UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and Montgomery County Community College? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: What neighborhood did she grow up in? Speaker 2: So it was H Street, and I wanna say northeast; that's something I could ask my sister pretty quickly, I could even just text her and get back to you guys quickly, emailing as a follow-up--yeah. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Speaker 2: And then she brought us up in Columbia Heights. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my sister in the Adams Morgan area. Just off of 16th street there's an apartment complex that's still there called Envoy Towers. Speaker 1: So she was--she started off in Adams Morgan and then-- Speaker 2: Well in terms of being raised like H Street Northeast is flip-side of the city. You know, the city is shaped like this and if I do it from your perspective--northwest, northeast, so she grew up over there, but then raised my sister [Belinda Thurston] over here, you know, and part of--all of her political crew and everything, she was living over in northwest. Speaker 1: In the Adams Morgan (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah, right at the border of Adams Morgan and probably LeDroit Park like that--that borderland, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 117158 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Arnita Thurston and Arnold Robinson] met? Speaker 2: (Laughter). I'm sure there is; I do not know it. I have no idea. So here's the thing about--my family understanding is narrow; it's my mother and my sister [Belinda Thurston]. Even my grandmother who, you know, was alive during my entire childhood, I have super limited and vague memories of her. Because of the estrangement between her and my mother, I didn't have a lot of communication with her, and really didn't have a relationship, so there is a lot of mystery from my end about a lot of these questions like how your parents met and where they went to school, and all the things they did for a living. So I know my mother's direct story the most because I lived with her, because she talked, you know, about her past; but my father is somewhat of a black box. Speaker 1: You think--from anything your mother said, was your father involved in politics or social change at all? Speaker 2: I have the strong feeling she was the anchor, you know, between them around those items, and it became--for her it was such an early authority-challenging thing, starting with the white Jesus stuff. And, and just the era, you know. I know her friends circle. You know, there's two good friends of hers who are still alive in [Washington,] D.C. and I have lunch with them when I visit from time to time, and they've got all these stories about, "Arnita this and that, and these meetings, and that," so I suspect strongly she led that foray into the political, and I don't know if he was along for the ride or how down he was or if he was passively tolerant. I really couldn't tell you how active he was. Speaker 1: I don't wanna lead you but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there's almost like a script of Vietnam vets-- Speaker 2: Emm. Speaker 1: --who come back; they're super-black, they're super-political when they come back because of the experience of the Vietnam War. They come back as black soldiers who've experienced like a racist military in a country where they're shooting people they don't even know, and the come back and they're still treated-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they come back, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] is assassinated, you know, I mean it's just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: There's a whole--and then the drug, you know, and just from reading about how he died, you know, I suspect that it had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, war definitely does--can do some serious damage, and then hyper-racist environment, and everything that goes along with that--not helpful (laughter), to be kind to US history. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Vietnam (unclear) a strident critique of American (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, 'cause the, the contrast was so big between, you know, what are we fighting for? And, and that's, that's consistent throughout a lot of our wars. I mean World War I super-dramatic, World War II was special, and we're here liberating a continent, and then aren't liberated upon the return; Korea--you know there's a lot of--like American values projected overseas is one of the strongest revelations of American failure at home. Speaker 1: But I guess on their relationship, they--their relationship--do you have any fix exactly on why it broke up? Speaker 2: No, no, there was--that was a little before my conscious time, and then he was dead, so there was the obvious, you know; but I know he wasn't living with us at that time. Speaker 1: Was he around more when your sister was born? Speaker 2: I think so, yeah--yeah, he was. Speaker 1: Did she kinda know him as a person? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 117159 Speaker 1: Now when you--I always ask this question-- Speaker 2: Umm hmm. Speaker 1: --and I don't know if it's even many choices here, but when you consider your parents' personalities, your mother's and your father's--how they walk, how they talk, I mean, you know, how people say they--you know, say your father walked-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or what he--you know, what he's interested in--his talents, his opinions, your mother's opinions and ideas, their sense of humor, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I mean I didn't know my father [Arnold Robinson], and I didn't many people who did, so I couldn't tell you--I know he was tall, and I'm not that tall, so I didn't get that. He was super thin, and I'm much more muscular and, and stocky than he was so I didn't get that from him. I know I got--I mean I obviously genetically got traits from him, but I couldn't identify what they are. And my mom [Arnita Thurston] made a comment at some point when I was growin' up that there was something that reminded me of him, but he wasn't a popular topic of discussion, so everything that I know that I could trace is to my mother; or it's just me, you know. It's things that I've chosen to adopt or absorb from people around me. So yeah, from her, there is--you know, I got a little fire from her. Like my mother--there's, there's this effect in our family if you just look at my mother and my sister [Belinda Thurston] and I--the diplomacy effect; my mom didn't have a lot of it, but she was quick to flare up, she drew thick lines around loyalty. If--even as we were kids, if we messed up just as a kid will do--coming home late or not doin' our homework--nothin' dramatic, not like gettin' pregnant or knockin' over a store, she saw it as this big sign of disrespect, you know, that we were bein' disrespectful toward her, and it had a lot, obviously, to do with her upbringing in the time where she grew up. But when there would ever be some kind of conflict, you know, between her and another, she was very quick to draw this harsh line like that person is an enemy, they can't be trusted, and my sister is softer than that, you know; much more able to interact and just less quick to temper, and I'm even softer than that, you know. I'm--I got the smile, like she would send me in, like I would be a diplomat for the family. Whenever there'd be, you know, conflict with a neighbor or with any kind of authority, like I'd be the person to write the letter or to make the phone call, or to approach 'cause she knew that my disposition was just much more friendly and that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--your mother knew? Speaker 2: My mother knew this about me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I would be deployed as like the family ambassador to, to smooth over little things, little things with a neighbor that would do something to my yard, 'cause she was just ready to, ready to fight; not physically, but just ready to like-- Speaker 1: But she saw that herself, about herself, that she was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, oh yeah; no, she knew that, she knew that--yeah. Story_ID: 117160 Speaker 1: It was interesting. I was reading the book--I told you I got about three-fourths way through the book-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --and I read the tail-end of it too, but the thing that struck me about your mother [Arnita Thurston] that a lot of people from that era, which is my era-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'cause I kinda grew up on the tail-end of that-- I'm a little younger than her-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --but she really seemed to be absorbed with self-improvement-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, and in a lot of different areas that her mother, though an achiever, she wouldn't be considered an achiever in the neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --would, you know, smoke and drink and do other things that, you know, were considered--well, by a generation--there's a generation--I know your mother's generation is equal, and they were really trying to improve self, improve the community by not drinking, not smoking, not swearing, becoming political, you know--I mean I don't know. Speaker 2: Well here's the thing about my mother's self-improvement; it comes from a place of significant personal failure. In certain areas she was, as I'd mentioned, she was in gangs as a kid, and that was, that was for protection, that was for the--lookin' out for the neighborhood, you know. Gang decisions are rarely in isolation--just like, "I wanna be in a gang." And this is a different era of gangs, too; it was the sticks and bats and bricks and not firearms and high caliber weapons (laughter) and, you know, bullet-proof this and that. Speaker 1: And the drug trade wasn't involved (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, totally different; I mean this is in the '50s [1950s], you know, so a gang then is very different from the 2010s. But she also was heavily--you know she smoked; she--I can remember her rollin' her own cigarettes. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: She did weed, she partied; like she was a child of the '60s [1960s], or young adult of the '60s [1960s], really. And my sister [Belinda Thurston], you know, has a different experience with our mother than I did because my sister was born in '68 [1968]; I was born in '77 [1977], and that nine years was a vast difference from the perspective of discipline in the household. My mom definitely beat my sister, you know--spankings, switches--that was normal. With me, I can remember two times that she struck me; she regretted it both times and apologized. With my sister, the food that the family ate--more--the fried this and that; with me, it's tofu and rice cakes and grape nut cereal and skim milk and soy milk. There was a dramatic shift, and we joked that we had two mothers; I mean there's so much in common because she was clearly the same person, but she had moved along the spectrum of the new age, of the holistic, of the spiritual, of the hippy, and by the time I came along, she was well entrenched in that. And continuing, my sister got the earlier version--less refined, more raw, smokin' version, literally smoking version of my mom. So she was all those things, and with a magic of her self-improvement for me is that she didn't start, you know, so clean and pure and, you know, abstaining from this and that; she was indulging in all of that. And my sister has memories of partying with my mom--being the little girl pullin' the beads apart in these smoke-filled rooms, and people on these carpets and in the pillows and playin' jazz. My mom sang and played guitar, and she was performin' in clubs, and again a lot of that shifted later in her life, yeah. So she--I think she's this interesting bridge where she captures so much of the black experience; she lived it, she represented it from the very early shame about dark skin, and a white Jesus and the reaction to that to the full-on '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s] marching music, drugs, hip this and that, protesting to the farming, organic, yoga, tai chi, meditative in-touch-with-nature stuff--yeah. Story_ID: 117161 Speaker 1: With the self-improvement thing, my mother [Arnita Thurston] definitely had a lot of documents around that I remember. Later, it would be Deepak Chopra; earlier it was [HM] Dick Gregory, you know, in his shift; I mean he also represents the transition from urban experience to the arts and comedy to activism to health. And, and my mother, you know--I remember seeing these Dick Gregory--like how to eat healthy and how-to-be-right books in our house. So she was definitely consuming and being a part of that, that transition for us. Speaker 2: You know the Dick Gregory book, Cookin' With Mother Nature? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He had a big chef hat on. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so-- Speaker 1: But she had the, she had the Zen and The Art of Motorcycle Maintenance [Robert M. Pirsig]; like that was a book that was constant, The Celestine Prophecy [James Redfield]; I remember I read that when I was like ten or twelve, something in that range, 'cause that was what she was into. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So your mother--now she has a tremendous impact on everything you do-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, going forward. Story_ID: 117162 Speaker 1: So do you have--now your sister [Belinda Thurston]--well, tell us about your sister first, before I get into (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. Speaker 1: How much older is your sister (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--She's nine years older; she was born in 1968 in February, I was born in '77 [1977] in September. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a considerable distance. Speaker 2: Yes, that's a lifetime distance; and so what it meant for me growing up is one, she was present for my entire life and she knows things about me much better than I do because she was a witness when I was relatively unconscious; like I don't remember bein' a baby. She also has a better memory than I do for a lotta detail, and I've just--that's never been a great gift of mine, the, the dates, the times, the faces, the names across great distance like that, so she's the family record-keeper, you know, mentally speaking. So she was--we have different fathers, and her father is Filipino so we look different, and it wasn't 'til later in life--maybe high school, maybe even college, someone said to me, "Oh, so she's really your half-sister." And that was such a foreign thought to me; like, "No, Belinda's my sister." Why would I ever demote her or change the terms of that relationship? Like she's always just been my sister, and it was someone else's idea as a family that designated her half-sister 'cause we didn't share fathers. But neither of our fathers was around for most of our lives, so we had this mother. But the, the, the thing about the way we were raised during both of our lives--when we're both alive is my sister also lived with our grandmother [Lorraine Martin] for a significant chunk of time and so even when she could have have been around a lot, she wasn't always in the house; like every morning waking up with Belinda wasn't a constant thing. And by the time I was nine, she was off to college, so from--so starting at age nine, my sister was a more a remote physical presence in my life. We talked on the phone, we would write letters, and then later email and cell phones and all came along. But in the early years, she was a very good older sibling to have; she never beat me, she didn't embarrass me in front of her friends, like--I think probably 'cause the age gap was so wide that would just be child abuse, like you're basically a grown-up (laughter). And she had sort of surrogate duties in terms of being my baby-sitter and taking me places she didn't necessarily wanna take me. Yeah, so she was, she was a kind of a guardian as well as a, as a big sibling; but never the annoying kind, always the, the loving and like caring kind. Speaker 1: So did your sister get a chance to finish school and college? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so her--music was a constant thing in our family; my mother played guitar and sang, my sister, you know, would go to Duke Ellington School for the Arts, and she played oboe and--what is it? English horn. She would graduate from Benjamin Banneker, which is a magnet school--really great honors; she would be accepted to and attend Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh and do her first half of college there and then finish at the University of Pittsburgh, and she would go into journalism from there. And really had a twenty-something year career in newspapers; she worked for Gannett Newspapers, the Valley News Dispatch, the North Hills News Record, USA Today, and then switched to Dallas and went to the Dallas Morning News, which is a B-low [ph.] paper, and then went back to Gannett at the Lansing State Journal up in Lansing, Michigan, where she was at the highest levels of her journalism game--assistant managing editor. And at the time she took that job, she was one of twenty-five black assistant managing editors in the country. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a pretty successful (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, no, she was killin' it. We--so yeah, musically, that was a constant. I never went to an art school like she did, so she had a heavy dosage of that. We were both a part of the DC Youth Orchestra Program, which still exists-- Story_ID: 117163 Speaker 1: Now what did you play? Speaker 2: I played ba--actually, early on I played Suzuki violin; so my intro to music was as a really tiny person learning to read music alongside of reading letters, and just sort of getting this tuning of the ear. So I probably did that for a year or two, and then the bass would be main instrument that I played for about three years. Went on tour with the orchestra, we played the [John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.]. I got little pictures of me with my cummerbund and this instrument, which is way taller than me. You know, this is the ridiculous portrait, which--and I have some of those for y'all by the way. And, and then I did saxophone for one year at middle school, and that was the last instrument that I took on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. My sister [Belinda Thurston] persisted with it even into college to some degree, so I think she can still read; she doesn't play anymore but I think she's retained some of that. Story_ID: 117164 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest. Yeah; might be some competition for that but--well, it's three, and I might have to do a little diggin' to figure out which is the first, but one is burning my foot, so I have third degree burns on my left foot; had to get a skin graft to remove skin from my thigh and put it on my foot, and there's no surprise that that's a strong memory. My pain is often a great moment seared into your, to your cells. So we were in our house; my mother [Arnita Thurston] was on the phone and we had a hot pot on the floor--an electric hot pot boilin' water, cream colored--I could still see the floral pattern on the side of it, black cable. And she's on the telephone and I want a hug; I'm a little kid, "Mommy, mommy, hug me." And I'm like approaching her and she's like, "Not now, not now, now is not a good time." And I insist, and one of us knocks over this hot pot right onto my foot, and so I can remember seeing my foot and just seeing the skin disappear; just evaporate right before my eyes and just white flesh being exposed underneath, and then blood, and then pain. And she put me in the sink and--with ice and put my foot in the ice. I remember the ambulance coming, I remember being put on the stretcher and wheeled into the ambulance and seeing kids from the neighborhood jump up at the back of the ambulance. "It's a little boy in there, there's a little boy in there." I remember the ride to the--it was the first time ever ridin' backwards (laughter). You know, I was like looking out of a back window and the sirens reflecting off of things in the area. I remember being wheeled into the hospital, and I remember being in the, in the emergency room, and I absolutely remember posts skin-graft surgery in my--obviously I was under during that, but there is--they have a better process for it now, but they essentially, you know, raise some part of your skin and then they cut it with scissors; I'm like, 'This is technology? This is what the number one country in the world has is just scissors?' And there was a little bit of pain with every snip. And then they take that layer of skin and they place it on your foot, and so my left foot looks interesting which, again, I don't see it because it was such an early age it was just always the way my foot looked, but locker room moments in middle school, people were like, "What happened to your thigh?" I'm thinkin' somethin' happened to my thigh (laughter). And this is--"Why you bringin' up old stuff?" I'm like this is--I don't feel any pain in either place, but it's a super, super early memory. And then I have early memories of my father [Arnold Robinson]. I remember goin' to this construction site with him, being wrapped up like a burrito in a blanket; I remember tasting beer for the first time in his pickup truck as he drove and drank, which I didn't know yet was a terrible idea, but also made me not like beer for most of my life. Yeah, it's, it's probably one of those. Speaker 1: Okay. I think the photo of the big afro, skinny guy with-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --pin-striped bell bottoms on-- Speaker 2: Oh, that's not my father. Speaker 1: That's not your father? Speaker 2: That's not, that's not my father; I'm glad we clarified that. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I do have pictures of him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was then darker than the man you mentioned; that was my mother's friend, Eldorado [ph.]-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and I just use him as an indicator of the new circle she was hangin' out with after her education, and he just looks so bad-ass, you know. He's got the pants and the polyester shirt and the huge afro and the brown leather boots and he is 1970s--boom, that's it; he's like a poster child. But yeah, he's not my dad. Speaker 1: That's right (unclear). Of course you wouldn't (unclear) Speaker 2: (Laughter). Well, given some of the mystery, you never know but yeah, he was--Arnold Robinson was definitely my father, and that's definitely not him. Story_ID: 117165 Speaker 1: All right. So--now you started off in--did you start off on H Street [in Washington, D.C.]? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no, no. So the thing is I didn't even live in that apartment building; my sister [Belinda Thurston] grew up there in Envoy [ph.]; I grew up on Newton Street, Northwest, between 14th and 16th Street. Speaker 1: That's Adams Morgan? Speaker 2: That's technically Columbia Heights-- Speaker 1: Columbia Heights. Speaker 2: Adams Morgan starts a little further west. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: They're, they're adjacent neighborhoods, so it's, it's an understandable thing. Yeah, we were just east of 16th Street and across from Saint Stephens Episcopal Church; could see that right out my front window; still there, the Urban Village Housing Projects still there. Speaker 1: You had some interesting stories of growing up and how the neighborhood morphed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, no, I, I felt the change, you know. When you're young, I think partly--certain memories get locked in because they're your first ones, they determine what's normal, and then when normal changes, you remember that. And so there were some things that were normal early on--playin' outside whenever, eatin' on the stoop; and they changed, and all of a sudden there was a little more lock-down mentality--don't go here, eat inside, stay away from the window; and you just--you notice the police presence a bit more, you see your friends change, you see their activities change; the kids you played tag with are now on the corner, and they're holdin' little bags and they're taking cash and they're interactin' with people way older than them. So that sorta thing persists, you know, over a couple of decades of lost memories. Story_ID: 117166 Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--you know, you're ten, I guess, or maybe not even quite ten, when the crack epidemic hits [Washington,] D.C. Speaker 2: Yeah. I have to get you guys this article. The Washington Post did a story about mothers in D.C. raising boys who were attempting to be men during this war zone time; it was just such open season in terms of black-on-black, the police on black, like--everything was just really hectic, and we had just moved from D.C. to Takoma Park [Maryland], to a single-family home with a lawn and a driveway and a deck. You know, this is--it's like the country, basically. It's right across the D.C. border, but it felt so far away 'cause it was so quiet. And I remember the photographer come into our kitchen, which was huge, you know, relative to the kitchen we had had, and talking to my mother and, you know, she's quoted in the article something along the lines of "Arnita [Thurston] fought like a crazy woman to protect Baratunde from the mean streets of this or that," and she just put in double, triple, even quadruple time of effort to keep me occupied and, and avoid some of the, the worst versions of what that life might have had to offer. Speaker 1: How does that dynamic work now? You were--you could look across the Saint Stephens and see people selling (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, no, it's just--it was part of the scenery, I mean here's the--I think--I can't know this because I can't ask my mother these questions anymore, but I know her as well as I could have, and I carry whatever bit of her through the magic of how parenthood works, so I just--I think probably one of the things that terrified her was that being normal for me, you know, and violence being normal, people hanging on the stoop being normal, police raids being normal, and that, more than or as much as the idea that I might get hurt, or that I might end up making terrible decisions which would make my life, you know, veer into some really perverse direction, the idea that it would be normal to me, I'm sure, terrified her. And so--because I, I wasn't concerned; I remember even when we were trying to move, like why? Why do we have to move? My friends are here, you know. What's the problem? Because this was right outside the windows. The portrait that you see is the--I had posted some photos in How To Be Black 'cause she was taking photos in the neighborhood of every activity goin' down, and you couldn't, you know, put this time lapse of, you know, car rolls up, person who doesn't live in the neighborhood's reachin' out the window; there's some cash goin' out the window, there's a little bag of somethin', and that was normal. So she wanted to change that, that normal, and it was a really high priority for her to get me outta that. Story_ID: 117167 Speaker 1: So you were just starting school in '82 [1982] or so? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. I mean I was in the Head Start Program so I started a little early; it was a program attached to her [his mother, Arnita Thurston] office at Housing and Urban Development [HUD]. Started--that's not--I was a part of a daycare program at HUD but I was a part of Head Start at another facility; I couldn't tell you where it was, I was too small. But yes, started school with Head Start, and then I went to the public school up the street, Bancroft Elementary [Washington, D.C.]; still there, and I was also on Newton Street--it's a little further west, and I went there through sixth grade, and then I switched to private school-Sidwell Friends School [Washington, D.C.], seven through twelve. Story_ID: 117168 Speaker 1: Now the--yeah, this is--the crack epidemic in [Washington] D.C.-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --can't exaggerate that. I was--when I came to visit the town, I think in '88' [1988]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --[HM] Mayor [Marion] Barry was passing out guns with big ammunition clips to the police so they wouldn't be out-gunned by the drug dealers-- Speaker 2: Emm. Speaker 1: --there was talk of the National Guard-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --coming in invading and, you know, and just actually attacking gangs in the streets. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a, it's a weird thing to think about. When you mention National Guard, it reminds me of the story my mother [Arnita Thurston] told. After [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was murdered, we--there were riots in D.C. and I thought--that was even before my time, but she tells the story of seeing tanks roll down the street right outside of her apartment, and also trying to stop some of fellow black people from destroying the neighborhood, and succeeding mildly. Writ large, there is no stopping the mob and that rage and that reaction to such pain. But her bearin' witness to that always struck me. In fact, there's a film that came out about Petey Greene, this DJ outta D.C., and Don Cheadle played him; and I remember seein' that and thinkin', "My mom saw this," you know, because it's a rare film to look at D.C. from the perspective of a Washingtonian; you always see D.C. from the perspective of a March on Washington or what Johnson did, or what Kennedy did or didn't do, or the Kings and the Xs and these rallies. But that was a neighborhood, the view of D.C. during that time, and I was like, "That's what she was talkin' about"--a D.C. native experiencing a different type of occupation of their city during such a tumultuous time. Then you skip ahead to the '80s [1980s]--the late '80s [1980s] and yet another type of occupation--an occupation of this--of crack, of police, of gangs, and this talk of the National Guard coming in, under a totally different vibe, to restore order, you know, which I don't think ever really happened, but the fact that it was discussed is big enough. Speaker 1: The idea that community people would be inviting the National Guard to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: --was nothing, you wouldn't think, that would become (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no, but that's how, that's how dire the situation was. And you also--it's an extra twist to think about--you know, I, I think a lot about generations within civil rights, and the people who were on the front lines; people like Marion Barry, you know, who were--and what happened to them, you know, the people who got the power, who became the mayors, who became the city councilors and, and in very few cases, governors or senators. And what happens? You see also these same people being carted off for corruption, for all kinds of malfeasance. But for someone like Marion Barry, who was part of this community-based movement, probably opposed to National Guard presence in the city (laughter), I'm gonna assume, to be considering now in his position as mayor, inviting--like welcoming them into the city. That's insane, you know; that's a really dramatic turn of events--yeah. Speaker 1: (unclear) becomes--he, himself is arrested for crack (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, absolutely, I mean he is--there is--HBO did a good documentary--99 Lives of Marion Barry [sic, The Nine Lives of Marion Barry]--great film; really, really tells the arc of his life-- Story_ID: 117169 Speaker 1: How did you feel about him growing up? I mean [HM] Marion Barry is still a figure, and a lot of people can't figure, you know, especially if you're not from [Washington,] D.C. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's hard to figure it but we know that a lot of people in D.C. love Marion Barry. Speaker 2: Well look, people everywhere tend to love their local person, and DC is not unique; black people certainly aren't unique. Look at Bill Clinton (laughter). Look at Bill Clinton and liberal women; you know, this is a man who publicly, totally disrespected his wife, disrespected the office of president, brought dramatic shame to his family and America, and he is one of the most beloved presidents, certainly from the right--from the left, that we've ever had. He is Mr. President forever; so there's nothing unique about Marion Barry in that sense. And you look at [Albert] Buddy Cianci [Jr.], Emerald Island [ph.], you know, Kwame Kilpatrick in Detroit, look at the Newark Mayor, Sharpe James. You know, there is--or these--California--there's a bunch of California legislators right now who were indicated or convicted, and those people are, "Oh, no, no, no, he's our guy; you know, must be that thang, must be a conspiracy, C-O-N-spiracy. They set him up." So I don't actually think there's too much to read into local love for Marion Barry; I had a child's impression of him. I remember he gave garbage cans out (laughter), you know? And there was this fuzzy impression in my mind that, that he was down for the people, and certainly his background earned him a lotta credibility in that area, so when you have a federal prosecutor comin' at one of your own, regardless, all--most of the crimes or alleged crimes, there will be a significant piece of the public who wants to defend that. And there's a history of, you know, people tryin' to take our leaders and all too, that, that he certainly played up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, yeah. Story_ID: 117170 Speaker 1: But at Bancroft [Elementary] School [Washington, D.C.], now what were you interested in, and who were your favorite teachers? Speaker 2: Oh, man! Great questions. I was interested in science and math; I was a part of the Air and Space Club, actually, which is such a testament to the school. This is a public school in the '80s [1980s] that had the Air and Space Club, and my favorite teachers, Ms. Murray, who I had for fifth and sixth grade--just a wonderful woman; Miss Purnell was my first grade teacher, I had a lotta love for her; Ms. Roshay [ph.]--I think she was third and fourth grade. I had a very unique situation where two of my teachers stayed with us for an extra year; that's not normal, you usually switch every year, so I had fewer teachers than, than most in the sixth year grade school experience, but they were all--there was--I didn't have a teacher I didn't like, actually, at that school. And after school--the Air and Space Program was special 'cause we had this teacher, she wasn't a classroom teacher of mine, but she taught some of the students in the start of this organization; I can't remember her name, but she was friends with the Tuskegee Airmen, and I do remember going to a special luncheon and meeting them. And my mother was just beside herself; she's like, "You are gonna meet the Tuskegee Airmen?" (Laugher). And even I was like, "I'm gonna meet people who flew," you know, "fighter jets in the war?" Like that's, that's really cool. And we would take trips to the Air and Space Museum. I wanted to go to space camp. My friends and I--this is also maybe really important. My best friends like--we wanted to be astronauts, and pilots, and like engineers, you know. And I remember my friend Dwayne, his older brother was goin' into engineering and that wasn't abnormal, you know? We were a bunch of public school kids from the hood, and that was just fine. And I was in the gifted and talented program, so there was some extra acceleration goin' on there. I also remember one of our principals, and I recently came across a record of him; I can't remember his name, but I remember he spoke seven languages, and we had a very international school. This is heavily black but there's Vietnamese in the neighborhood, heavy Latino, Laotian; this dude spoke so many languages. Remember this was the '80s [1980s], the whole renaissance concept, you know; it's not nearly as popular as it is post-2000, it's well pre-Obama and all that kinda stuff. And it was just--it was a really great influence to have, you know, grade school principal speaks seven languages and that's not crazy. Speaker 1: Do you remember his name? Speaker 2: I, I know I can find it; I cannot remember his name right now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, that's all right. I just wanted to ask (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--There was--there were two--there was another principal; Mr. Milner was the first principal. He was older, tall, though everybody's tall when you're six and eight years old, but he seemed taller than average, and he was--he was a distinguished gentleman. I remember he had this baritone voice; but there was the guy who came after him--younger, younger cat, and just those languages and you get them--notices would go out about holiday schedules and snow days, and they'd be in Chinese and Spanish and French and English, and this guy didn't need a translator for a lot of it--it's impressive. Story_ID: 117171 Speaker 1: Okay. So did you see yourself, at that time, becoming an engineer or an astronaut? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was definitely wooed by structure and architecture and engineering and numbers; never occurred to me at that age that, that writing would be a part of it, and there was a bit of me that was into the arts--performing. I had done like talent shows, and I remember my mother [Arnita Thurston] showin' me a newspaper clipping about an audition, and saying, "You could do that," not really responding to any notion on my part that I wanted to do that. I almost thought, 'Is she pushin' me to be an actor or somethin'? Like what's goin' on with this?' And I didn't do that audition, but I do remember comin' up--and was in the youth orchestra. Now, I did love the concerts, you know--show time, and gettin' dressed up and you can imagine the thrill of being a child performing at the Kennedy Center, and just the seats and the balconies; it's so big. And then goin' on a bus tour and gettin' to Knoxville, Tennessee and performing there with other youth orchestras. That was huge; that was a big, big part of my, my childhood with the bass lessons and the Saturday--we rehearsed at Calvin Coolidge High School, so being a part of that community of musicians, that was a big, big part of my, my young years. Speaker 1: Yeah, I read that your mother had you in Taekwondo-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter); I think she was tryin' to create like a one-man nation, you know what I'm saying, a little tiny weaponized, like intellectually weaponized kid because of--there was Boy Scouts; I was really down for that in, you know, seven, eighth grade timing, and that brought about camping and starting fires and pitching tents and all the survival stuff. There was the orchestra where she's teaching another language, and socializing in a different way, and also just an appreciation for like Beethoven and Bach and Haydn [ph.]. It's not typical, and then there was more, you know; there is, there is the stuff I was doin' in school as well, and obviously academics, but she was in some ways probably obsessed with keepin' me occupied, given the neighborhood dynamics. Speaker 1: Now I was noticing--I was reading that you liked, you know, science fiction. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You read a lot of science fiction. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: You grew up during the age of--Star Wars came out in '77' [1977], the year you were born, and then all through the '80's [1980s], there were all these, you know, movies that had to do with science fiction. Speaker 2: Yeah. We watched Star Trek a lot; I mean Star Trek was a big thing in the family; so was ET, it was huge; Michael Jackson was huge, which is typical of most of America, I think; or we had some special claim to them 'cause my sister was the biggest Michael Jackson fan ever; she--at Duke Ellington, Janet showed up and attended for a brief period--like a week or a month residency thing, and went to classes and performed with the students, and then the Jacksons' mother came by, and my sister [Belinda Thurston] had a chance to meet Mrs. Jackson, and she has a chance to ask her a question or say somethin'; she says, "Mrs. Jackson, thank you so much for givin' birth to Michael." That was (unclear) on behalf of a generation (laughter), she said that. Yeah, never cable; we never had cable. I didn't get cable 'til after I graduated college--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So did your mother tend to minimize the fact that talent wasn't your thing? Speaker 2: I think it was cost, and she was supporting two kids, a mortgage, college tuition, and just the living expenses of all that. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I think she--you didn't have a video game either, did you? Speaker 2: No. You know, I--a while back, I had one of those super-early--like Pong; whenever Pong was on, I remember that, and I was like the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Atari (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, that was the last console I ever had; definitely never had the Genesis, the Nintendo--anything--yeah, no fancy stereos, no big televisions and--so it was--she also--from the time--why would you pay for television? You know. Again, this is '80s [1980s], even into the '90s [1990s], and for the rest of her life, she would not imagine that you would pay; like that's why you have an antenna. So we would just fight the antenna. And it was always, "Hold it like this, position it like that." And that was just part of TV. Speaker 1: Well you had a busy, busy childhood (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I did, I was a very occupied little person. And then I would have jobs later, too. In high school, I started working, and I, I had some really incredible jobs; some were just like landscaping and manual labor--using these growing muscles shoveling, trimming things; but then it was some pretty interesting jobs--the most interesting at the Washington Post, where I worked for several years-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --after school. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 117172 Speaker 1: Oh, we're good. I used to get my hair cut up at Shepherd Park, which is near--kinda near Walter Reed [Army Medical Center], over on Georgia Avenue [in Washington, D.C.]--Shepherd Park Barber Shop. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So you started Sid--now tell us how do you--how is that--this is--was Sidwell [Friends School, Washington, D.C.] as exclusive when you started there as it seems to be today? Speaker 1: I don't think anything in America was as exclusive in 1989 as it is in 2013--or 2014, so no, Sidwell wasn't as exclusive but it was still exclusive. I mean once a president's child goes to a school and there's secret service permanently installed there, in the age of media, no doubt it, it raises the profile. And that happened at Sidwell while I was there, when Chelsea [Clinton] enrolled, and a bunch of other cabinet folks sent their kids there. It became a--sort of an official school of the Clinton Administration with Sidwell. When I showed up, that wasn't quite the dynamic, though it was always seen as one of the fancier Quaker schools; maybe not always, but certainly in the '80s [1980s] and into the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: So this is Sidwell Friends, and where is it located? Speaker 1: It's on Wisconsin Avenue, it's in Northwest; it's just south of Tinley Town, just south of American University [Washington, D.C.], Friendship Heights. Just north of the National Cathedral--yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. And what was--now this is--your previous school was integrated, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, Bancroft [Elementary School] was a very brown school--brown and yellow; there were a few white students, but very few, but it looked like D.C., I would say, at the time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But Sidwell is mostly white, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, Sidwell was definitely predominantly white; it sort of flipped the demographics from my perspective. I wasn't ever used to being around mostly white people, I wasn't used to being around significantly wealthier people either; those two demographic changes were instantly noticeable--yeah. Story_ID: 117173 Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. How does that affect your sense of self when you're a kid, when you're around people that have much more money than you? Speaker 2: Well--so the idea of bein' around money and the effect on my sense of self--subconsciously, it might have had an effect on me not really inviting kids to, to my home; it was a real point of contention. My mother [Arnita Thurston] was always annoyed I'd invite people over, especially after we moved to Takoma Park [Maryland]--had this nice big house, this big yard; and I don't think of it as shame as what kept me from doing it, I think it was just like awkwardness. I just wasn't developed in that area enough to be like, "Yeah, everybody come over." Now, I actually love hostin' things; I throw dinner parties and events at bars, and I'm all over the globe hostin' things. But as a teenager, I was a little more shy in that regard. I'm fine being on stage, but bringin' people into my home just didn't quite cross my mind, so the early effect of goin' to a school like Sidwell, coming out of a school like Bancroft [Elementary School], was shock; there was definitely a cultural adjustment. You know, there was a bit of an Ebonics tone that I had to my style of speech, which I remember these two white kids, these twins, makin' fun of--there were these blond hair, blue eyed, thin dudes--twins--they were just so classically out of some kinda book, and their names were quite similar. It was like Ricky and Richard--somethin' like that; just one letter off kinda between them, and they were makin' fun of the way I spoke and we actually came to a little physical violence; I just went over and kicked one of 'em 'cause I was just tired of hearin' 'em talk, you know, all this nonsense. That wouldn't end up bein' my preferred method of conflict resolution over time but, you know, there was--it was, it was weird, that seventh grade year. My name was strange to people, and just seeing the houses--I remember visiting a friend who lived in Georgetown [Washington, D.C. neighborhood], and I never been to anybody's house in Georgetown, you know. Anybody's house I'd been in was in the neighborhood, or maybe a friend of my mother's, and this was a--like stupendous house; he had these speakers that were super-thin, I'm like--how do you have speakers like that? Big old TV, cable--we were watchin' like MTV or somethin'--some kinda cable or music video thing--this is early high school. But I don't think it affected me in the sense that it made me want all that, or feel bad about the stuff I had. I also got exposed--I had a preconceived notion about rich people problems, and that they didn't have 'em, and white people problems that they didn't have 'em, and I discovered by goin' to school with them and socializing and doing plays and, you know, just having human relationships--like everybody's got problems, and there's some kids who can't come outta the closet 'cause their parents would be ashamed. And there's some kids who can't make their own choices 'cause their parents have had their lives all mapped out for them. And I remember feelin' very lucky as well, being at that school, of the household that I came from, and that I was encouraged to try this and play that and go here and be that, and didn't have any career expectation that I'd have to take over the family business or live up to some name. That was a real eye-opening experience for me with that side. My previous experience is like the Jetsons, Benson (laughter), like I don't know who my references were, but they were through television mostly. Story_ID: 117174 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you had like two streams, and you discuss 'em in your book-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --'How To Be Black.' Two streams of Ankobia-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Rites of Passage project, and Sidwell Friends [School, Washington, D.C.]. So you had these two cultural paths--divergent paths-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--One person (laughter) straddling the line. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That was a part of my mother's [Arnita Thurston] genius in how she sent me Sidwell where she also enrolled me in a pan-African Rites of Passage program called Ankobia. Speaker 1: And that's spelled-- Speaker 2: A-N-K-O-B-I-A; it is born out of a pan-African group not unlike the one she was a part of in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] that stayed together, and we created an Afrocentric school called Nation House Watoto [ph.], and had extra programming to assure their youth into adulthood. Men--boys' program, girls' program, meeting every Saturday for enrichment of the mind and the body. And so we read a ton of books that were never on the Sidwell Friends reading list or the public school reading list, we learned to drum, we learned African dance, went out to the country, and we were schooled then in a different way of being and a different level of pride, so--oh, and the way we found that program was through the principal at the Sidwell Friends School, which still blows my mind. Like, there's a black dude running the Sidwell Friends Middle School at the time, who's also an elder in this pan-African program; that's in the same person. Speaker 1: Okay, what was his name? Speaker 2: Bob Williams; Robert Williams--yeah. Yeah, he was, he was known to us as Baba Jawanza [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Speaker 2: So this is, this is a brother livin' two lives too, you know, dealin' with boards of trustees and all these parents, and college, you know. Well, in middle school, you're not really dealing with college people too much, but then dealing with this program, you know, and the curriculum and what--what is it that you should have a young black mind know? And what experiences should it have to prepare us for the world? Speaker 1: Now this is an interesting idea. Well, for years, Jewish people-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --have like a Friday (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They have Hebrew School. Speaker 1: --Hebrew School-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for the children, where they learn everything it is about being Jewish-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --and the history and culture and all that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and it's not religious study (unclear), you know, under the political position (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. Speaker 1: --of Jewish people in the world of what's important, what isn't, you know, and the stories, the folklore, or all that other--you know, the dance, arts, and so this is--I don't know if the worlds are quite as different as (laughter) the ones Ankobia would have in a (unclear). Speaker 2: I think what it--you know, it was--I joke that it's the Hebrew school for blackness. I mean what it did for me in the Sidwell environment is it just gave me somethin' else; it gave me some depth, it gave me some conflict, it gave me another perspective to see the world, it gave me some weird traditions to carry. You know, there's a--sort of an initiation component to the program; we had to wear this African medallion every day, like you're not supposed to take it off--ever. And so that means I had to explain this to my classmates. "What is--why--what is this thing around your neck?" "Well, I'm a part of this program and I have to wear it." And so it forced a level of publicity around pride in self, and around your history that might have been different from what was being taught. Not that--I mean Sidwell is a very progressive school, so it's also the school where at high school I took an elective in Islam and an elective in African history, taught by a black person. That's not typical in a public school system (laughter), or of a lot of the private school systems, certainly at the time, so I feel like, you know, there's a lotta tension in goin' to a school like that, there's a lotta race issues and class issues, but I also was very fortunate that that was the version of that experience that I got because of the principal I had that led us to Ankobia, because of the nature of the Quaker traditions that were viewed in some of the processes in a place like Sidwell that might not have been in a Catholic version or in a purely money version that has no spiritual or religious grounding--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this-- Speaker 2: Those are the hippie version, you know. I mean there's, there's looser versions, you know. There's--I think Georgetown Day [School] was hippy-er [ph.] than Sidwell Friends, but Saint Albans [School], which is attached to the cathedral and the church, is much more strict and narrow, in certain ways, than a Sidwell. Story_ID: 117175 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So did your interests basically stay the same as Sidwell [Friends School]? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I evolved at Sidwell, and it's hard to know, you know, how much the school takes credit versus how much time and just hormones (laughter), and just a changing body and mind has to do with it but I, I, think the school and that environment had a--it came, it came together with the acne and the awkwardness and just the becoming of self--out of childhood and into adulthood that, that teen years can bring. So yeah, I shifted a lot, in many ways, to Sidwell. My interest in the sciences and the math, that persisted; and I always--you know, for most of my time at Sidwell, thought of myself as, 'I'm a math and science person,' and I'm trying to get into more advanced math classes, not the top level but like the next to top level, and I'm doing extra credit projects in physics classes. I'm taking summer classes in chemistry to get ahead, not to catch up; my summer school was like to leapfrog. So that, that was persistent but the development was around--my performing gene just went off the charts; my arch [ph.] gene, my writing. I filed a newspaper during high school. I was doing these annual shows, these Black History Month musical theater reviews, and that really struck a chord with me and I sorta--I got the arts--the performing arts bug and the literary arts bug when I was at Sidwell. Speaker 1: At Sidwell. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 117176 Speaker 1: I skipped over something I shouldn't have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's all right. Speaker 1: --and I'm going back to '91 [1991]. I guess you're in public school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Not in '91 [1991]; I entered Sidwell [Friends School] in '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Okay. Was this the--where were you when you wrote the paper, "The Destruction of Africans"? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Yeah--that was in the 1990-1991 school year; likely spring, so that be--make it 1991. I was in eighth grade at Sidwell Friends, and I was--and that was my first academic year living in Takoma Park [Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So tell us--describe that paper for us. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I can supply that to you. Well, actually, it's in the book so you can just take it from there. That is an audio version of me performing it, which you may wanna sample for this if, if, if, it's what you're goin' for; I can just give you the audio for that. But--so yeah, being in Ankobia at Sidwell did create some tension and, and--or it just created opportunity. And so we had an English paper, sort of open-ended, and I wrote about the U.S. propaganda machine. You know, what happens is you go in every Saturday, you're surrounded by these African elders or people dressed like African elders, you're playin' the drum, you're doin' the dance, you're doin' a thousand jumping jacks and a hundred push-ups, and you're bein' told about your ancestral greatness, you're reading Frances Cress Welsing, and you're sucking in WHUR Radio and WPFW Radio, and you're reading [Marcus] Garvey, you know, his biography, and it can't help but affect your mind. So for me, it made me angry, and I always carried a sense of justice inside of me, and I'm sure I got that as a trait from my mother. I would just be angry about homelessness as a very tiny person. Like, this isn't right. There's a empty house down the street; why can't we fix this?' Supply or demand--boom; where is the economy there? And so when you start to learn about, you know this (unclear) history of your people in this country, anger--boom, you know; the autobiography of Malcolm X, anger--it's, it's been done millions of times over by other people who read it, but it found voice for me in a paper that I wrote in my eighth grade year, inspired heavily by Marcus Garvey and a little bit by Malcolm X, about media imagery and the value of black life in this country. And I wrote this paper as if I were givin' a major speech to all of my people, as if we had such technology. And it was advising them to be aware, you know, the images of yourself that you're being fed by media interests that don't have your interest at heart. I was surprisingly articulate for an eighth grader. Even as I re-discovered and found it for the book to come out so many years later, I was like, "I'm not half bad." It's a little strident for a little kid, it's a little pedantic, you know (laughter), but I was also thirteen--yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought the same, maybe it was a little over-the-top (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. Speaker 1: --in a couple of areas, but for the most part, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The point was to be over-the-top; like it was--my people, my brothas and sistas (laughter). It was a really fun paper to write, actually, and I didn't think twice about doing it and so my teacher, who was black, he said, you know, "Would you have done this if I wasn't black?" And I said, "Oh, no." Like that was--I definitely considered that, and assumed that--"Like you're not gon' rat me out, like we're good here, because everybody else around us might not take kindly to this." I also just believed it so strongly I wasn't--there was no shame in it either; it was, it was fun, it was a fun paper to write, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 117177 Speaker 1: I know you also wrote about the (unclear) irresistible drawing in to mainstream culture on some level. If you're sitting in a classroom with all white kids, they're gonna ask you some questions, you're gonna (unclear) studying the same things, you're gonna be drawn into relationships that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, so--I mean Sidwell [Friends School] is where I learned so--racially learned a lot; I mean I, in many ways, felt besieged as one of the few black students. I mean, "Why do you guys all sit together?" Or, "Why this? Why that? Why do you have your own month?" Like--partly, you're in a teenage year of challenging everything, so that's just gonna happen 'cause teenagers are self-righteous in all directions, not just up toward authority and parents but toward each other, and we're always checking each other and being a little--oh, annoying creatures. So there was that, but then there was also privilege meeting struggle, you know, and bein' a minority in that setting and having to justify your presence and your existence to the majority. "Why do you have a black students association? We don't have a white students association." So I've had some race politics play out very early there, and persistently throughout my time would shake me a lot. And then on the flip side, I am friends with white people and rich people and Jewish people, and love them, you know, and admire them, and we're going through this shared tour of duty that is teen years together, and us versus them, and students versus teachers together. And we are flirting with each other, we're goin' to prom with each other and, in some cases, dating each other. I didn't date anybody 'cause I was just not there yet; me and girls had took some time to sort that out but it was also the first place where I found myself attracted to someone who wasn't black, which freaked me out 'cause I was like--especially with all the Ankobia, blackety-black-black, I'm black, y'all black, y'all--that was just like, 'What is going on?' You know. So Sidwell opened me just as--like I was a challenging presence there, and we both moved a little bit in a positive--you can't--I don't think you can help but be shaped by six years in an environment like that, to then check some of the input of the house or of the Ankobia-type society. So you got all these influences rattling around in a growing hormonal mind. Story_ID: 117178 Speaker 1: Now one of the questions that was asked in the book and we just--earlier today, [HM] Theodore Shaw, who was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --talked about the same question and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --actually almost had the same answer, but I'm gonna ask it of you. Why do all the black kids sit together in the cafeteria? White kids would always ask that and administrators always ask that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. Here is the answer; it's the only answer to why do all the black kids sit together in the cafeteria. The answer is a question. Why do all the white kids sit together in the cafeteria? That's it; that's it. Speaker 1: I think the other one is similar. Why do the black kids need a black organization or a black cultural center, you know. That's another question (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I mean, you know, there's obvious--like socio-political needs being met and identity and a sense of home and a safe place, and all that academic stuff. But the real question is why do you see the black people sittin' together? It's 'cause of this; it's a phenotypical thing (laughter). And, and you don't see as easily the AV kids sittin' together, or the football kids sittin' together, though you might notice their size and their attitude. But it is just a safer thing to call out, and it's--because of the history, it's a little more threatening. Because there's always still (laughter) this little subtext of, "Are they gonna revolt? Is now the time that they pick up that Denmark Vesey script and like act it out?" So--yeah, I think there is a little special notice of black kids, not just because of physically looking different, but also just because of their-and it reminds, the larger society, that there's work yet to be done. And if they're all together over there, what are we doin' wrong that they're not just evenly distributed amongst us the way we might like? 'Cause it would make us feel successful, as majority and as a mainstream, that we've done our job, that we've atoned for this past; and so black kids sittin' together is too reminiscent of slaves gathering. Subconsciously, some thirteen year-old isn't thinkin' that; I don't wanna put such complicated thoughts into the mind of a little pock-faced teenager. But, you know, no one wants to be excluded, and I think anything that visibly looks exclusionary, you know, gets called into question. Story_ID: 117179 Speaker 1: Now, among the activities at Sidwell [Friends School, Washington, D.C.], I don't know if this--did this come out of Sidwell or out of Ankobia-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --but you went to Senegal, right? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That actually came out at Sidwell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's, that's--again, I'm tellin' you man, this is a magical school (laughter) where my trip--my first visit to the continent of Africa was because of Sidwell Friends. I hadn't even put it in those words to myself, but I recently visited and I encountered the teacher--Mamadou Gueye the Senegalese French teacher at Sidwell who organized that trip. And he has a copy of my book on a shelf; he's so excited--he said, "You made me famous." 'Cause there are parents who read my book, and then they see his name and like, "You're the Mamadou from How To Be Black." And he is so excited and that--I mean that is a limited, incomplete gratitude that I could offer to him for changin' my life in one summer, you know, over the course of seven to 10 days. But yeah, Sidwell took me to Senegal--here you go. Speaker 1: Well us about the trip--What it was like, and what did you learn? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, you know, as someone who had a lot of U.S.-based African pride, it's always good to actually go, and as someone who, with an African name, who's encountered actual Africans, you know, there's some tension sometimes of the--here we go again, another African American tryin' to wear our culture as a dashiki, or as a name, and--so it's--it's just good to be there on the ground (unclear) you can be in Africa, but you can visit certain nations and get more of a feel. So the opportunity was organized by a French teacher at Sidwell who had an annual tradition of taking his French students to France, actually; and this year, for the first time, he said, "I wanna take students to Senegal." It's a little French-speaking country but--let's blacken it up a little bit. And, you know, that attracted a lotta students who were not French students but who were black students (laughter); not students of blackness, but just black students. And so--I don't know the adult conversation around all this; I'm sure there was meetings with parents and price negotiations and all kinds of things with Visas, but as a student, it was like (singing), "I'm gonna get to go to Africa." This is so exciting. And I've already been wearing the African medallion, the (unclear) bib, and I've got this Nigerian name, I'm gettin' a little closer to where that comes from, so--very exciting. And we, we flew into JFK [John F. Kennedy International Airport], and then from there, on Air Afrique to Dakar, and we were there about a week; maybe it was ten days--fifteen of us or so, a few parents and a lot of teenagers; and we got a nice diverse experience. We were in the city, and we got to see Dakar and the markets and the traffic and the smog and, and we went to the village that our teacher was from where he was chief, actually, in absentia, and we went to a resort out on the coast with, you know, naked, fat Germans running about because that's what (laughter) Europeans do when they get to Africa, I guess. And it was good; we got to eat and we got to be merry, and we got to interact with youth of our age who were in the village that our teacher was from, and it was beautiful. And we got to go, most emotionally, to Goree Island, the point of no return--that final stop for so many of us--so many of our ancestors, to get to the west. And so we walked through the cells and we held the shot put--the iron sphere that bound these chains and people to the ground, and we got to look outta that doorway of no return that people were forced to walk if they were a little too resistant to peaceably go into servitude and, you know, the room for children, a room for women; that was, you know, tears and memory and across--you know, beyond anything that's logically explained. And I also remember havin' a really beautiful memory being in the Atlantic with decent-sized waves, and floating, and looking west toward the US, and just feel like, 'I live all the way over there.' And I'm, for the first time, seeing it from all the way over here, and that was the other thing, you know; this was the home base and, and having the mildly terrifying thought to a parent who might have never heard this but like, 'I'm good now, I could die.' I wasn't seeking it, I wasn't like goin' out to commit any kinda suicidal act, but it was just a sense of satisfaction and completeness that brought a lotta things home, including me, in that moment--yeah. Story_ID: 117180 Speaker 1: That's interesting. So it says in 1995--now this also the year of the Million Man March, which was held in [Washington] D.C. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: Did you attend? Speaker 2: I did, yeah; I've got--I brought some photos for you of our crew from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that went, and bein' a guy from D.C., I helped lead us through some of those streets and was just so excited to show my friends my city and to show like I knew my way around, and--yeah, I was, I was definitely present for that. Story_ID: 117181 Speaker 1: Okay. So before we get you to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Sidwell [Friends School]--well, who were some of your mentors at Sidwell in terms of teachers? Speaker 2: So the middle school principal, Bob Williams, will always occupy a very special place. Mr. Kirby is a black teacher; he was the--my history teacher for the African History class, he was my college counselor, he was our faculty advisor for the Black Student Union so he and I spent a lotta time together across a range. Jeff Gold was a coach--still is--Coach Gold, one of these frightening black men that doesn't age, right? You're just like, "What's goin' on with you that you look the same fifteen years on?" Genes? Are your genes that good? So he was--well he, he took a lot of us under his wing 'cause as a coach, you have a different relationship with students and you're bein' physical with them and blowin' off steam in almost literal sense, sweating and, and just pushing yourself in a different way than in a classroom or in a club and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What did he coach? Speaker 2: Track; he was a track and field coach, and he was--I mean he was near going to the Olympics; he was like one spot away from going to the--I think it was the '96 [1996]--whatever Summer Olympics were around that time; I don't know if it was '96 [1996] (unclear), I get the years off for the Olympics a little bit. But yeah, he was really supportive, you could talk to him about anything, talk about girls a lot (laughter), and also just some of the BS that's goin' on there. As someone who's not a teacher, his politics are a little different; I mean he's a little more trustable with certain parts of life. Then you're on the bus, you're spending--goin' to tournaments and meets out--overnights and whatnot, so he was great. Erica Berry [ph.]; she gets a special nod because the whole reason I majored in philosophy was because she suggested I take a philosophy class when I got to Harvard, and she was an English teacher of mine. I discovered Beowulf through her, and a little more Shakespeare love through her, and I've always had a spot in my heart for Shakespeare--just great talent. But yeah, that is--me studying philosophy opened up my mind and changed my view on the world, and I actually have recently had a chance to remind her of just how important that conversation was, and I remember we were headed south on Wisconsin Avenue in her car goin' to pick up supplies, and she says, "You should take a philosophy when you get to Harvard." And I just trusted her enough to do it, and then it paid off. So there are many--and Mamadou Gueye, the French teacher who was not my French teacher 'cause I studied Spanish, but who, who brought me home in some ways, so he gets a big nod. Larry Weiss who taught environmental science class seminar; he runs the school, and I think he's head of--it's a New York City school. I can't think of it; some prestigious private school, and good for him. Story_ID: 117182 Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, and there's one more. Since we're doin'--I feel like I'm at the Oscars; I don't wanna leave anybody out. But if I left this dude out, I should get my license revoked as a human. [HM] Rickey Payton [Sr.]. Rickey Payton was the Middle School Music Director; he has a wall of photos in his room--Rickey Payton with Michael Jackson, Rickey Payton with Stevie Wonder, Rickey Payton with [HM] Dionne Warwick (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Guy plays the keyboard, heavyset brother? Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed him; we interviewed Rickey Payton. Speaker 2: Yeah. So Rickey Payton organized all those Black History Month shows for six years, and did the music for all of them, like wrote original music--every year. Worked with the professor at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], who was also a parent. Mel Cummings, Professor Retorick [ph.], and they put this script together. Rickey Payton brought me into City At Peace, which was a youth development conflict resolution theater program to build bridges. There was a Russia-US version, there was a Sidwell, Wilson High School, Public/Private School version, there was--and then the deepest version was just straight-up kids from DC that I happened to be a part of for years, that exposed me to even more pain of what teens are goin' through from incest to bein' locked in the closet to physical abuse, and bringin' all that out through theater. And that would define, for me, so much of like using arts for activism and story-telling, and progress. So Rickey Payton was my gateway to that whole world, and he wrote one of my two college recommendation letters that got me into Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Rickey Payton definitely like upgraded my life--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay...