 Story_ID: 20111 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewing today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Reginald Pole, Donna Elam and Jason Pole. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: I'm C. T. Vivian. That's C-T, V-I-V-I-A-N. Whole name is really Cordy Tindell Vivian. Speaker 1: How do you--How do you spell that? Speaker 2: C-O-R-D-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: T-I-N-D-E-L-L, V-I-V-I-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the latter is never used. However, for your kind of thing at least I should give it to you. Speaker 1: Alright. Okay. And is there a story behind Cordy Tindell or--? Speaker 2: Yes, it's my father's [Cordie Vivian] first name, it's my mother's [Elizabeth Euzetta Tindell Vivian] maiden name and it's the--his last name. In other words it's--If it wasn't for my mother's family being in there, I'd be a junior. See in other words it's--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: Cordy Vivian. Tindell is my mother's maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Speaker 2: See what I mean. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. What is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 30, 1924 in Howard County, Missouri. Speaker 1: Howard County Missouri. Can you tell us where that is? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's near Boonville, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You cross the Missouri River and you're into Howard County from Boonville. Speaker 1: Okay. Everybody knows where Boonville is. Speaker 2: Yeah. See everybody knows where Boonville is. Speaker 1: (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Don't you know where Boonville is? I mean I'm amazed. (Laughs) It's really sort of halfway between St. Louis [Missouri] and Kansas City [Missouri] on that major highways whatever the number is. Alright. And it's about oh--I don't know, ten or fifteen miles from the Ohio--from the Iowa border. Alright. Where Missouri and Iowa meet. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a minister in church (laughs). Traveling to Africa. It means five different things. But (laughs) I'm a minister--a Baptist minister. That's--. Speaker 1: And you would also be known as a civil rights--. Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Activist. Speaker 2: I was on Dr. [Martin Luther] King's executive staff. Speaker 1: You've been on the board of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] for many years now. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was. I just stopped going when we weren't doing anything. I just didn't wanna, you know. I had too much to do to start--to keep making meetings where nothing was gonna happen. So I stopped going. Speaker 1: When did you resign then? Speaker 2: Oh I don't--I don't pay any attention to that. I don't think I ever resigned. I think I just missed meetings. And then told the--The constitution put me off. You see. Speaker 1: Okay. Now sir, before we--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) They still call me back however, every time there's a problem. And Fred Shuttlesworth took over just recently. He's the first person that called and we sat down and talked program. Story_ID: 20112 Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't think I really have one. I used to have purple when I was in the first grade. I have no idea what it is now. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Not a favorite food. It's food (laughs). Largely I--largely I simply don't have what I would consider a favorite food. I just don't. Short answer. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes. Summer. All year. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well I think I would have to really answer that the Bahamas. Speaker 1: And lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really. Not that I would say is the favorite. Alright. There are--There are so many fine Biblical statements that I like. And literature was my major. And there are so many fine literary statements I like. That's it's difficult for me to start talking seriously about a favorite. There are so many, many fine lines! Speaker 1: Is there one you can give us sir. Speaker 2: Well no. The only thing that just jumped in my mind was Amos when I said Bible. Amos has a line. He says, "They don't know how to do right. They who store wealth and violence into their strongholds. They don't know how to do right." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's that--but if we were talking about concepts that's different. "Christ and culture." This conflict between Christ and culture. It's basic to how I think and what I move around about. Alright. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So there are concepts that are tremendously important to me. Alright. That's the kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the kind of thing that moves me. Story_ID: 20113 Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your mother's [Elizabeth Euzella Tindell Vivian] side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: To slavery. In fact, my family ring does that. I have a picture of my family that includes my great, great-grandfather, my great, great-grandmother on both sides of the family and coming down from there. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about how they lived in slavery that were passed down? Speaker 2: The--see my--the oldest members of the family at that point in that picture, two of them were in slavery. Then my great, great-grandfather and great, great-grandmother and my grand--my great-grandfather. My great-grandfather was born in slavery. But was only there for like four or five or six years. Alright. Uncertain, but that kind of thing. Shall we say five or six years. Whereas the others were there probably fifteen, twenty years. Right. At least fifteen years. Right. I best knew my great-grandfather, who never really talked about slavery. Excellent person, wonderful person. Just didn't talk about slavery. As the--But I didn't know those that spent real time in slavery, long enough to really know them. You see what I mean? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that, you know, so that I don't have--I'll tell you what I tried to do one time. Just because of creativity, is that I had wanted to have my grandfather--I wanted to be able to--What's the word? I wanted to be able to put him under hypnosis and have him to talk to me. Alright, about slavery. But it didn't work. I used to--And I learned how to hypnotize. But then in doing research, I found out that you could bring--take people back. Take them back, take them back. So that's what I wanted to do. Then I found out that--there is always the fear that somebody may get lodged back in the past. Now I think that is as much myth as anything. But I wasn't about to take a chance on my great-grandfather (laughs). So that stopped that. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Now these are the Tindells right? The Tindells that are in your mother's family? Or--? Speaker 2: She--Yes. That's--But great-grandfather was a Woods. Alright. So you know you're dealing with three generations. Yeah, right. Yeah right. You see what I mean. The Tindell was my mother's father. Alright. So that father was on my mother's side with her. See we're dealing with four generations right quick. Right. And a fifth generation coming down to me. So I mean you gotta--It shifts according to who married whom. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories from your father's [Cordie Vivian] side of the family from that time period? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Not so much. They didn't talk about it. Really what happened was--the one story that stands out for me is that there were these two sisters and they were big women. Alright. And they didn't allow being pushed around. And they told the people that "owned them," right, that there certain things they weren't gonna do and certain things they were gonna do. And that was that. And so we tell that story often because of that. Because of that we tell that story. Because it speaks of independence. There's another story that involves my great, great-grandmother on the other side. That she refused--Well she was sold into slavery. And she was the--she was from an Indian. She had a lot of Indian in her. Alright. So that left everybody, you know, wanting to claim. So how much Indian is really there I don't really know. It's the kinds of things. There's a lot of stories like that as people moved around. Alright. But my mother [Elizabeth Euzetta Tindell Vivian] and my grandmother is the extreme. They're too light (laughs) in the first place. Is that--and my mother had these high cheekbones which was always kind of popular folk identification of Indian. You know and so we moved on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So you get a sense of identity from that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Alright. So tell us about your mother. Can you give us her full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Yes. Her name was Euzetta, E-U-Z-E-T-T-A. Her name was Elizabeth Euzetta Vivian. Speaker 1: And what was she like? Where did she--How did she grow up and what was her personality like? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well she was a Tindell really, but I mean she became a Vivian. You'd have to say Tindell too. But they all grew up in the same place, in Howard County, Missouri. Story_ID: 20114 Speaker 1: Well I was asking you what your mother was like--. Yeah. Speaker 2: And what did she do? Speaker 1: Well I mean--See my memory is with the Depression. See we owned three farms in Missouri when 1929 hit. Alright. We lost everything. We moved into the house in town. Alright. The--And then a fellow burned it down, because my grandmother was nice to her common-law husband. Alright. And he put her out into the snow. Alright. And my grandmother would not allow it. That woman was too much of a lady and she was too good a person. See a common-law marriage was normal for everybody black, white, yellow, pink polka dot in those days. See we're talking about eighty years ago. Alright. We're talking about seventy-five to eighty years ago. So that when my grandmother took her in, it made him mad. He then put a fire to the coal and wood in our basement. Burned that house down. So now with the farms gone, and the house in town gone, right? Then what they had to do and the Depression on--What they had to do was to consider one thing. What are they going to do with me? My point being is that they didn't have any money. That meant I was going to get education. So they moved. So why stay in Missouri? Alright. So they moved to Illinois and they picked a college town. Alright, to be in. So that as I started first grade--'cause I was six years old--as I started first grade, I could go all the way through college. 'Cause nobody knew what was gonna happen. They were right. Because I was graduating from college as World War II started--from high school [Macomb Senior High School, Macomb, Illinois] as World War II started. Alright. Speaker 2: Okay. Now what town did you move to in Illinois? Speaker 1: Macomb, Illinois. Speaker 2: Macomb. Speaker 1: M-A-C-O-M-B. Speaker 2: That's Western Illinois University? Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was my school. In fact, they just named a street after me. The city and the university got together and called it Dr. C. T. Vivian Way. Speaker 2: So you grew up in Macomb. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Oh that's where I grew up. I didn't know anything about Missouri. We'd go back every now and then. We went back trying to get money. Two or three times my--but it didn't work. You see. 'Cause all the banks went broke. So if you had any money, you kept trying at least to get some money out of it. 'Cause you were broke. Alright. And so we in Illinois and like everybody else in the nation, FDR's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] program was a saving grace for all of us. So that it--But my grandmother--See divorce also comes with Depression. See what I mean. It just destroys lives. And so both my mother [Elizabeth Euzetta Tindell Vivian] and my grandmother were divorced. Right. About the same time. Alright. And so by the time we moved to Missouri, my mother had married again. But the--But the-- But my grandmother had not. Alright. And she found that person in Macomb. And this fellow--great guy. And he was well-off so to speak. So that basically was--took care of us. Speaker 2: Okay. So what did you mother do for a living? I mean she basically--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No. There wasn't anything to do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: See when you start talking about Depression, you're talking about Depression. You're talking about the lack of anything. Alright. But we hardly think in that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What was her personality like? Speaker 1: A very stoic person, my mother. A very stoic person. Very loving without showing it. Alright. I was basic to her life. But you'd never get it from her. But she would never say anything negative. For instance my mother never said anything negative about my father [Cordie Vivian]. See what I mean? And they had a real divorce. Alright. But--Never said anything negative about him. Alright. He was my father. She was not gonna say anything negative and did not. Speaker 2: Now--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And, of course, in early years I never gave it a thought. It was only later that I thought about it. Story_ID: 20115 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Cordie and Elizabeth Euzette Tindell Vivian] met that they've told you? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean that they were all farmers. They're just normal. My great, great-grandfather on my father's side was a principal of schools. Alright. Speaking of stories. He was fired from one school because he taught black kids how to do algebra. And the white school board fired him. Because they didn't know algebra. Alright. And he was taking summer courses and stuff at Lincoln [University of Missouri, Jefferson City, Missouri] and at one place or the other. And so he'd try to teach the black kids and this sort of thing. And it was at--? Speaker 1: What was his name? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: I gotta get it right for myself. It's one of those Bible names like whatever. Alright. I got it written down at home. I don't pay any attention to it. Yes it does. It just doesn't matter. Speaker 1: Was he--. Speaker 2: Now I wonder why it matters to you. But my point being is--I don't even give it a thought. Speaker 1: Well the reason why I ask is because as people go back over this when sharing maybe in the future--It may be someone linked to somebody who they're linked to. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He might have taught somebody that --. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: You know that down the line that we can make that connection. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. In fact we have pictures of classes. Not that he taught, but that my great uncle who went to Lincoln taught. My great uncle. My grand--My grandmother's brother. Alright. We've got pictures. Okay. But to me it just doesn't (laughs). It's just isn't important. We have pictures of classes. We've got pictures of classes et cetera, et cetera, you know. And it's nice. And I'm glad we got them. 'Cause very few people have pictures that go back like that. So they're very important to me in that sense. They're very important to me as part of my understanding of me. But the details are secondary--not important at all. There's just like in the family ring. Right? The matter of farms to education. That education plus imagination, alright. So the creativity becomes the most important thing as I think about it. Is that--and the cross that is central to it. Alright. Is central to our family. 'Cause that's what kept us through good times and bad. Alright. It's out of that importance. The details don't matter. But the education is. Because that was the drive of my family. See ? The religion is. That's the drive of my family. Speaker 1: Now how did your family come to develop a family ring? Now this is something that's unusual. Least of all--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I developed it. Speaker 1: You--Okay. Speaker 2: I developed it out of that history. Alright. You see what I mean? Story_ID: 20116 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your father. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah. Cordy, C-O-R-D--No. Let's deal with it. C-O-R-D-I-E is the way he spelled the name. Alright. And I spell it C-O-R-D-Y. 'Cause when I went to first grade [at Lincoln Elementary School, Macomb, Illinois], they asked what my name was. And I could read and write. So I just said, C-O-R-D-Y. 'Cause I had not seen it. 'Cause my mother [Elizabeth Euzetta Tindell Vivian] and father were separated. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. I forgot to ask you for your mother's birth date. Your mother--And your father's birth date. Speaker 2: March 23. But I don't know my father's. March 23. They were--she was 1901. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they were married in 1919. Story_ID: 20117 Speaker 1: Could you tell us something about growing up though? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh yeah. I'll be more than glad to tell you about growing up. Speaker 1: What were some of the--Now were your--you were in a household basically with your mother [Elizabeth Euzetta Tindell Vivian] and grandmother in Macomb [Illinois]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah. That's exactly right. Speaker 1: In Macomb. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights and sounds? Macomb is a small town. And it was a small town in the 1930s and '40s [1940s]. Alright. So that the sounds were the sounds of nature. The main sound other than that was the sound of the railroad. Because the trains ran through. Okay. And so you got those night sounds. Both in Missouri and in Illinois there was a train that ran--See our property in Boonville [Missouri] was on Water Street. It ran clear back to the Mississippi River. I mean you went down the hill and--It was really a lot of property. Right. But it was like a lot, but it ran--you know, it ran clear back to the Mississippi--it ran back to the railroad tracks really. Right. The railroad tracks were along the Mississippi river. So the sounds of the train at night. That 's how one of the ways that my grandmother taught me how to count. Because the light would break through as the trains passed. So I'd count boxcars as the light passed through. Alright. You know, we'd count, you know. The train may have two or three hundred cars on it. And so it was easy to count to two or three hundred (laughs). So and those kind of sounds. But when we moved to Illinois--See because part of African American life is the railroad. The other side of the track. You get my point? So we lived near the railroad tracks there. We had two houses there. One that my grandmother had and one that my mother had. And my mother's house was near the railroad tracks. Alright. And so at night when the trains passed by, you hear the sounds of locomotives and etcetera. Right. And the main sounds, of course, is the engines, you know, and the whistles. You know. So those were some of the major sounds other than nature itself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact that would be the most distinct sound I can think of. Speaker 1: Okay. Sights? What did your neighborhood look like? Speaker 2: Oh it just looked like a normal blocks of property with houses set, you know, near each other. We had--In a country town, you all have enough space between you. But it's still a town. I mean nobody is in a--is cramped in the same sense. And you couldn't be in those days. You had to have room for cisterns . And you had to have room for wells. You had to have room for hanging clothes and that sort of thing. Alright. Which is my favorite ghost story. And when I stopped believing in ghosts is that I had to (laughs). But that's not what you asked. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Tell the story. Now it's a good story? Speaker 2: Well it's a good story. Is that the--but the--Because it was a part of growing up and a part of development. The--when I'd come to that age when you come around the house, between our house and Mrs. Vans house, right? There was--Mrs. Harvey's, really, house. Is that there was a--There was darkness. 'Cause the shadow was pitched. We lived on the corner. So the light--the corner light threw the shadow this way. And her shadow normally passed this way. So it was pitch dark in there. Alright. So to speak. And so I started around the corner of the house to go down to my mother's house. Remember I told you Grandma was up here, mother right there. So to go there, and there it was! Right at the corner by the well in the grapevine was this ghost. Right. So I said, "Well here it is." You know. And I start toward it. I don't even remember moving to it. The next thing I know I'm standing in front of it. And I start to reach for it. Alright. And I said, "I hope to God it's not a ghost." And whoom! And I grab hold of sheets that had been (laughs) pushed back up against the thing. And it was--and that was it. I said, "You know, forget that stuff." So (laughs) I never had to worry about it any more. Alright. It was a very important thing. But the idea was to--and I don't even remember moving toward it. I just remember telling myself, you know, that I was going to find out. Alright. And I moved toward it. You know. I remember starting to move. I don't even remember anything until I was standing right there in front of it. It's the whole length of the house. You see what I mean. And so I had to take many steps before I (laughs) got there. But the--not a memory of it. But when I stood there in front of it and just tall white thing. Right. But you see there was this, where you hung clothes to dry. Right. From the front of the yard clear by the yard by the walnut tree. And make sure answer some of the kind of questions right--back to where the pump was. Alright. To where the--it stopped is the--and my mother dried. And she was I guess had been folding them and pushed it up there and then had to go in the house for some reason and just left them there that evening. Alright. But the main darkness was between the shadows. See how the shadows fell. Story_ID: 20118 Speaker 1: You were the only child in your household when you were growing up. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was the only child period. Speaker 1: But you had friends in the neighborhood right? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, oh yeah. And friends in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And you lived in an all-black community right? Speaker 2: Yeah. No, no, no. I lived in a--There was only 250 black people in my town [Macomb, Illinois]. It's that--'cause this morning I was telling the minister--he didn't have anything to introduce me. But--'cause I was given to him at the last moment. So--and so I was in the study talking to him. 'Cause he was asking questions. And he ends up saying that I lived in an all black town (laughs). And, you know, you're not gonna correct somebody and they're a minister saying it and they're working the pulpit. You're not gonna correct somebody (laughs). You shouldn't right. You know, you don't get up and say, "Now Reverend So-and-So (laughs) just said something that I don't exactly take offense. But I must correct." No, you don't do junk like that. So I let it go. But this (laughs) here we gotta get this right. We're dealing with a historic record (laughs). The point is no. There was only 250 black people in our town. You know how I know? I did a--I did a paper one time when I was in college [at Western Illinois University, Macomb, Illinois]. In a Soc[iology] class I guess it was in. Where that I had to quickly have a term paper. So I set up all night and did a term paper on my town. Alright. The African American people in my town. It got me an A because they're so interested in anything black, right. So (laughs) I did this thing on every black family in my town. Alright. 'Cause I knew them. I mean, you know, 250 about twenty-five, thirty families there or whatever. So it was just very easy to start at one end of the town where I lived and take it right on out. In which I did. But I just had to write term papers. I used to write term papers to stay in school. Alright. That's how I stayed in college for two years. I would tutor. Is that--I wrote them for white kids 'cause those were the only ones who had any money (laughs). Speaker 1: Now you lived on the east side of Macomb [Illinois] you said? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah. Everybody black lived on the east end of town. Alright. And later on in high school there was a--there was a song called, 'East End Blues' and we related to that (laughs). Story_ID: 20119 Speaker 1: Now tell me about the school you attended. What was it? Was it a segregated school or--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh no, no, no. See this is why my family moved to Illinois. See what I mean. It would not be segregated. And they--And it had better education than I would have gotten in Missouri. Alright. Especially when you don't have any money. Alright. Is that the--So the thing was in Macomb had an excellent school system. Because the university [Western Illinois University] was there. Right. And Dewey from Columbia [University, New York City] was the voice on education. Speaker 1: John Dewey? Speaker 2: John Dewey, yeah. The great educator was the voice on education in my community. Because of the university. See what I mean. As a result of that, from first grade on, I had nothing but good education. Alright. And loved it. 'Cause--I loved education. I loved to study. I loved to think about things. I loved to do it all. I loved everything but math. 'Cause I never saw any reason for it existing that had anything to do with my life (laughs). You see what I mean. Is that--but the--so the school system was excellent. We had a six, two, four system. Alright. You know what I mean by that? Six grades in grade school, two in junior high, four in high school. Alright, six, two, four system. And it all fit me very well. The--When I was in grade school [at Lincoln Elementary School, Macomb, Illinois], the main story from that is that I never had to study really. That was never a big time thing with me. I had a good--I had a good background when I started to school in first grade. Right. I don't remember having spent a lot of time studying. Except for special kinds of things. I remember doing a paper in the fourth grade where--That the teacher had us looking up all of these products and getting pictures out of magazines for it and the whole thing. Right. I stayed in all weekend to do that thing. We showed up, and I was he only one that had it done. And she dismissed the idea. Well maybe she meant her own assignment. Said nothing to me except--Nothing except that--You know. And I had--and I had all these pages and stuff and taking my whole weekend for. That affected me. Let's--Since we're talking about education, let's talk about two things that affected me negatively. Alright. Because that had a real effect on me. I don't remember in grade school ever studying hard. In other words, I went through the fourth, fifth and sixth without any real study. I didn't have to. Alright. And so I didn't. Where as when I started first grade, I wanted to get through grade school in four to five years. I mean in other words I wanted to skip twice if I could. There was a family, a block from my house, black--It was the Newsons, right? Eloise Newson had skipped a grade. "Well hey, if she could skip a grade, I could skip one too, right?" And so I was looking to do that. I wanna get through with all that stuff as quickly as I can. Why hang around if you didn't need to. Right? So the thing is--is the--So I start through school and I'm sitting in the front seat on the row next to the door. And Miss Ayersmith was my teacher's name. And I'm trying to think of the name of the second grade teacher. They were standing at their doors talking. And I could hear them. Right, you know, between classes. This was really before class started. And you see, I had this idea I was gonna skip half grades as many as I could. Alright. See 'cause you had a chance then to--every sixth--every half year, you could then take a test for the whole year. If you could make it, you'd go on to the next grade. That's how Eloise did it. So I was gonna do it too. Right. And so I'm working toward that goal when I hear the teachers talking. And they say, Well--how happy they were that they'd cut out the half grade move up or whatever they called it. But the--And that disappointed me tremendously. Because if I had set myself to skipping every half grade every time I could. I would've had to study. See what I mean, I would have been handling real material. I would have been in real reports. I would have really, really--I would've really done a true educational job. Alright. Well the only thing I remember not knowing in the first three grades was Latin numbers--Roman numerals. Right. That I had to study. That's the only thing I remember having to study. Is the--I mean to study. Speaker 1: Did you get--that implies that you got a lot of attention at home educationally. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. See this is--Remember my grandmother and I would sit up at night. Remember? And go through that thing. I knew my--see education was important. This is why I built it in, why I learned my multiplication tables through fifteen. All that sort of thing. You see what I mean. So I knew I gonna--I didn't have to worry. Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Oh it was Lincoln Grade School [Lincoln Elementary School, Macomb, Illinois], Edison Junior High School [sic, Edison School, Macomb, Illinois] and Macomb [Senior] High School [Macomb, Illinois]. Story_ID: 20120 Speaker 1: If we're talking school, I can give you a gang of stuff. Right (laughs). But the thing is because those are my best memories. That's the stuff I love. But what I first--the first thing that's even--when I started first grade [at Lincoln Elementary School, Macomb, Illinois], I was already half late. I started in December or January or whatever. So half the year was gone. They started in September. I started in January. So how things are structured, is that already every little group has gotten itself together. I walk in new and dressed like I'm rich. And we're in the Depression. You understand here what I'm saying? And I'm in the worst part of the city in terms of income. My mother [Elizabeth Euzetta Tindell Vivian] liked to dress me up. And I (laughs) got the picture. So here I walk in, you know, with knickers and you know, colorful socks and--I mean I'm dressy. So I didn't fit at all. See. (laughs) So I become the target of one of the little gangs. Well the little gang. And Theodore Derrick, a brother, was head of. Right. Remember it was only a very few (laughs) black kids in the school. But he was a ruffian. Right. So as a result, he had his own little gang. They were all white. 'Cause there wasn't anybody else in our class except he and I. And so I became the target. Well I used to play a game where that--on the teacher where that my name is Vivian. So I was one of the last to leave. Right. So the kids were walking out the front door. I--as we came out of the cloak room, I would turn and go out the back door. Alright. So I go through the back--We had a huge school yard. And it's a block square. Alright. But it ran back into the railroad tracks. And those railroad tracks ran straight up to my house. But so did Adams Street [Macomb, Illinois]. You got back to the back and here was the railroad and here was Adams Street. And they just ran that way right back up to--And I lived three blocks away. So I would go back there. So before they could get out the front door and get themselves together, alright, I was already home. (laughs) I was so far ahead it wasn't any sense in, you know. And that worked. So--but I had to stay after school one day for something. So I started out the back door. After I get out, they've already--everybody's been gone but me. So when I get to the back of the school yard, right there by the railroad tracks one of the lumber yards had placed where they stacked coal--sand and rocks. Which they, of course, sold and, and used for things. Right. So I get back there and I am ready to look around to make certain when they rise all up around me. So Theodore alright, he tells one of his guys, "Go and get him." Right. And I beat the kid up. So he sends another one in. I beat him up. And he starts to send in the third one and I say--and I'm figuring, "I'm not gonna be able to hold this forever." Get my point? So I tell him, "Come on. Right. Let's get it over with." Right. I didn't say let's get it over with. But that's what--that was my attitude. Right. Come on. You know, you! You know what I mean. And I called him out. Right. He didn't wanna come. 'Cause he just seen two other kids get beat up, alright? (laughs) And he was dumb anyway. He really was. I mean he was shall we say a little backward. He was slow (laughs) and that's it. As a result (laughs) he wasn't so slow that he wanted to lose out though. Right? So he called them off. And so, "You know, we'll get you some other time" type of attitude. But he wasn't saying nothing. Right. 'Cause he just got called out. He wasn't gonna say nothing. He just--(unclear) they moved off. That's fine. So I came to school the next day and I was making certain that everybody understood that (laughs). So I made certain that everybody knew that that was the end of that. And if anybody wanted--wanted to act like it was gonna continue, come on! Right. Well that ended that. Right. So I didn't have to worry about it. But it didn't make me a bully. 'Cause I never liked that kind of stuff. Didn't like it then. But Frank Thompson and I got in a fight. Frank Thompson was a big blond headed kid like our friend over here. Right. But they had a name for that when you had that kind of yellowish-brown--I mean whitish hair. You know, what I mean that kind all over your head. And a good kid. Big--biggest kid in the class. Alright. Nice, but he was a little slow too. He wasn't as slow as (unclear) but he was slow too. But he and I just about third grade or something got in a fight. And we were gonna see each other after school. 'Cause that was the thing. You saw each other after school. You saw each other and we were to meet across the street in an alley. Right. And we had a square block. So you see the alleys ran into it, but stopped. Alright. So we're gonna meet over in the alley. Right. So man we got it on. And we knocked each other down one after the other, one after the other. Right. And there was a cinder heap on that side of the alley and there was a garage on this side. Alright. And he would hit me up against the garage and I'd knock him back across this cinder heap. You know what cinders are? Alright. Okay. I just wanna make certain. (laughs) Not everybody in the world knows what cinders are. (laughs) Right? And so we got tired of hitting each other and decided we were gonna be friends. And we did. Right. And we made great friends. And so we went down the alley to the store. I'm trying to think of the fellow's name that owned it. And watch me now. And we bought a bag of Our Advertiser [brand of tobacco]. Alright. And divided it. Speaker 2: Now what is that name? Speaker 1: (laughs) Thank you (laughs). Speaker 2: (laughs). Speaker 1: I knew they--I knew you should ask. Alright. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Our Advertiser was a roll-your-own cigarette tobacco, alright? (laughs) See, see when I came to Macomb I was--in Missouri I was extremely religious. Right. I even went and laid down in the rut in the road right to--and was gonna let a car run over me. 'Cause my mother--my grandmother wouldn't take me to church one night. Alright. Right. And--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, what church did you attend? Speaker 1: [Mount Cavalry] Church of God in Christ my grandmother attended. So that's where I was from. Later I attend the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopalian] church. Right. But so my grandmother ended up being so taken by the fact that I was that committed to going, she let me go. Is that that--Isn't it strange. The more I talk about this stuff the more stuff comes back to me. But (laughs) he nodded his head yeah. (laughs) Isn't that right. But the--but the--Once I got to Macomb, I wanted to imitate all these kids. Alright. So smoking about that this was some sign that you were, you know, you were on the ball. Alright. Speaker 2: Is this in middle school or--? Speaker 1: No, Macomb. Speaker 2: No in middle school--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In first grade. First grade! (laughs). See I said watch me now (laughs). Right. First graders were smoking in Macomb. I was in the third--That's when--That's when it started. As soon as I got to school. But in the third grade we were buying and rolling our own. Alright. (laughs) So we bought this thing. And a bag of [Our] Advertiser only cost you a nickel. See. Bull Durham cost you a dime. Alright. But Bull Durham [brand of tobacco] is smaller now than Our Advertiser anyway. Right. And they both smoked. So the adults bought the--Well the poorer you were, it--if you could afford it you bought Bull Durham . Bull Durham was the other big time one. Everybody knows the name. Our Advertiser was not--wasn't well known, but it was a whole lot of it. See. But it was not as fine a tobacco. You see my point. Right. So we divided it and we were good friends from that time on. Story_ID: 20121 Speaker 1: Where I was going with the story is that we decided that nobody--I really decided and Frank went along with me, right? Frank Thompson [childhood friend]. Is that nobody was gonna pick on anybody. Alright. And that if they did they had to face us. Well we weren't gonna take on any sixth graders. Alright. But we'd take on anybody else. Alright. And could and did right (laughs). The important thing is (laughs) nobody was gonna pick on anybody. And if we or anybody smaller than me, right--A fifth grader was not gonna pick on a fourth grader. A fourth grader is not gonna pick on a third grader. And wasn't gonna pick on anybody in his class that was smaller or weaker. Just wasn't gonna happen. And if it did they had to face us. Alright. That was the beginning of my nonviolence really. You understand my point? Is that I just didn't like it. I--it was against anything that I felt as well as thought. Alright. So we had to prove it a couple of times. And after that, hey! There weren't any problems on our school ground. This Dilbert Smith, the fellow I told you we'd go up the other end of town later on and make four of us--the four together. See I went to ghetto school (laughs). What made it so was Dilbert Smith. One day I was coming around the corner of the school yard. And I saw him way down at the other end taking a swing away from a kid. A swing, you know, (laughs) not swinging at. Taking a swing away from--alright--this kid. And I hollered at him and pointed at him. Doc, it scared him so. This was recess. It scared him so (laughs) he ran home. At recess (laughs). And he never came back 'til the next morning. 'Cause he had (laughs) to ask his mom if he could come back to school. But she didn't know what had gone on. Right. And he probably lied to her about his head hurt or something. But the thing is we just didn't allow it. Right. Is that--and by the time we were in sixth grade, alright--remember we're getting ready to leave the first six years. By the time we're in sixth grade is that--and we were--spring, I call all the guys together. And we set on the fire escape. We had real fire escapes. You know. Like the old time fire escapes. You know. Set everybody down on the fire escape. And I told them. This is gonna be the end of fighting. 'Cause we fought all the time. Alright. That the way you had to deal with spies. Right? So this is the end of this. When we go to junior high school, we're not gonna fight any more. We're gonna end that. Well there was an in-between kind of thing that had happened. There was a--this is the kind of stuff you need to know so I'll tell it to you. Right. But anyway it ended that. When we went to junior high school, I haven't had a fight since. Alright. And the guys who really graduated to junior high school as far as I know none of us really had a fight unless pushed into it. Okay. We were committed to it. And we kept it. Because I just didn't want--I didn't like the bullying in the first place, didn't like the fighting in the second place. And thought it was about time that we grew up and not have that. We were going to junior high school. It was a different environment and I wanted us to live up to it. Speaker 2: Is there an origin for I guess that kind of thinking? I mean did somebody influence you along the--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah. But see--well the two things. That's why I said I got there too quickly. Alright. The--one of them was--and the most important. 'Cause I've forgotten what the smaller one is--was when I really stopped. I should have said it and just gone to it. But the major one was that was really the beginning of my nonviolence, alright, was at fourth grade a kid--I can't think of his name. But he gave me a black-faced valentine. Fourth grade. See what happened was--remember Depression. Nobody had anything. So the teacher to make certain that we understood the kind of holidays and sort of thing had us to pick a name out of a--out of a, you know, a little box. And whoever's name you picked, you bought them a valentine. A penny, penny valentine. Well you know, families understand. They could afford that. Right. In most cases. And in fact, practically all the cases. A penny. You know what I mean. So the--so he gave me this valentine. And when I got it, I turned around. He was sitting at the back, I turned around and pointed at him. Right. And let him know, I will get you after school. He didn't even quite understand what was going on. Alright. But so--but by the time I got out of school from my regular stuff. You know, I mean out of the building--I mean just with the kind of stuff--See I sort of by that time, you know, I ran things at my level. Okay. Alright. You understand the sixth grade, I wasn't gonna deal with it. Right. But everybody else I'm worried about. And so I ran across the railroad tracks and caught him on his way home. He wasn't running. Alright. Caught him on his way home. Eugene Lee was his name. And he had gotten where there was a little factory that was across the street. It was right by the railroad tracks. So they can, you know, take things off the train and so forth. It was a manufacturing--a manufacturing plant. And it--and it had a--it was a sheet metal factory. And the factory was made out of sheet metal. Alright. Understandable. I--they manufactured it. It was cheap and they used it. Right. But if you hit the side of it, it just rang. Alright. It just made noise. So I caught him over there. And I did everything I could to make him fight. And he wouldn't fight. I pushed him. I cussed him. I called him everything but the son of God and I could do it. Right. I pushed him. I just did everything I possibly could. I'd push him up against that sheet metal and it would just ring. Well all the kids were there. 'Cause they came to surround, 'cause they wanted to see the fight. Alright. And naturally right. They're kids. Right. So--but I couldn't make him fight. So I couldn't hit him. That's the thing that stood out. I couldn't hit him. Because I couldn't hit a kid who couldn't fight--who wouldn't fight. He could've. And later became a good athlete in high school. Alright. So I mean it's not that he was incapable. Right. He just wouldn't fight. And so I couldn't hit him. And I wanted to take him apart. Alright. That was an insult at a level that I had not experienced and was not gonna put up with. Alright. Is the--But I had to win the argument in the minds of all the kids. Right. But I lost that fight in my own mind. Alright. Is that--It was only years later that I came to really realize how much that affected me. Alright. What I actually learned from it bring it up out of my emotions to where I could really, really thing it through. I'd already felt it through. Alright. I couldn't do it. Now it's not that I couldn't do that. There was another kid that made a mistake like that. And no, not quite like that. He was--used some words that he should not have used. Alright. So I hunted him down, found him. Right. And I had my hands in my back pocket. He had his hands in his front pocket. Alright. And I was--egged him on and egged him on. Until he moved his hand. When he moved his hand, I hit him in the eye. And he was--the fight was all over. See my point. Is that he just--I mean he started to weeping. But he already--It was this kid that I told you about--this very poor kid in the east end of town. I mean the last house in the east end of town. And I felt badly about him anyway. Because I know he was mistreated. I saw him mistreated in the fourth grade by a teacher that I had just never did forget. Did not like at all. Is it--and--but he had called me names. But I wasn't gonna put up with--either me or somebody. Right. He used the word--the N-word. He had no business using it. Alright. So later on the--I don't even wanna tell that story. But anyway is that--So I want you to know that I could do it. But Eugene Lee I could not, Because he would not fight. And that was really the beginning of my true understanding of nonviolence. Story_ID: 20122 Speaker 1: Did you have access to black newspapers in Macomb [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No. The 'Chicago Defender' was the great one. But it--and it was in Illinois. But not really. In fact, I don't really remember of reading one until it--The first black publications I remember reading was 'Ebony' and 'Jet'. Which was many years later. Which was major--is the-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Did you have a sense though when you were coming up of the position of black people in America and in the world? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh very much. See it's basic. Alright. It's the--I was telling somebody today about the, "When did you first come to realize that blackness--," and I told him "When I was born." You know, (laughs). It's impossible not to know. Alright. Is that--but even though I was a leader, alright--For instance in my neighborhood, in the school, wherever I was. Right. It every--and as I say ninety percent of everybody was white. They weren't black. Right. Both neighborhood and--'Cause where I lived there's only about four families of black folk. And then you had to go clear up east end of town. But they were so few of us anyway. I mean you're talking 250 black folk altogether, man, woman and child. Right. You (laughs), you know, there's very few of you. Right. But when--see just like in grade school, I mean I was the leader of everybody. Right, by the time we got to sixth grade, of everybody. Alright. It's understood (unclear). In junior high school, it took me a year. Alright. So the second year I was you know, leadership citizen. But the thing about education in that first year. Well I was [McDonough] County [Illinois] Marble champion too. And so we were always playing marbles. And kids that age love marbles. Right. I was also County Ping Pong champion. Okay. And those things gave you a little edge. But by the time I was in junior high school and in junior high school is that it was a matter of education more than I remember anything else. We had a system in the eighth grade, where that--in eight and ninth grade--in junior high school--in Edison Junior High School [Edison School, Macomb, Illinois]. It was a system to where that every class was divided in three sections. Alright. Three was the upper kids, two was the medium and one was the lower. Right. They would just reverse the order so kids didn't feel like, you know, they were bad. 'Cause the kids at the top didn't care what the number was, right? (laughs) The kids at the bottom, being first made them feel good. Right. And so I was always in the top. And those were the kids I know. I ran with, so to speak. And that was also the leadership bunch. And I was one of the people from that group. We didn't have that much to lead in junior high school. We did in high school [Macomb Senior High School, Macomb, Illinois]. Alright. But knew all the kids in class. Liked them all. So I was in three. So I decided one time I was going down to two. 'Cause I had a lot of friends in two and I'd just go down for six weeks. Every six weeks there was this, you know, you could change according to grades--Or you would change (laughs) according to grades. Wasn't no could, you would. You--And so I wanted to drop down to two in order to, you know, be with the guys. I wasn't even thinking about the difference. But what happened is by trying to get to two, I dropped all the way to one. And when I dropped to one, that's when I found out the real difference between being slow and not being slow. And it bothered me. Because it was almost embarrassing for the other kids. So I wouldn't say much. The teacher understood because of the papers and all the rest of it. Right. Is that I'd gone too far down. I knew all the kids. But that's the first time I realized the real difference between kids that are really ill-prepared and slower, etc., and kids who were the other way around. So we don't have to go into a lot of detail. Right. Is the--so I went immediately back up to three and stayed there. I didn't wanna experiment like that any more. Right. Because I just felt lost down in that first rung. Speaker 1: Now what was this--When you got to high school, did the social dynamics become more stark? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. Yeah. In fact by the time I left high school, I was president of the fourteen of the sixteen clubs that I'd been in. Right. By the time I left high school, I was president of everything or anything that was important. And I was calling everything. Except you've got to see how the racism got in the way all the time. You see. Is that it you really see it in high school because although at one time I got twenty-five votes--I got all but twenty-five votes in the school--Alright. I still was never invited to a party. It--The--I remember Van--Something. I can't think of her last name now. Anyway she--I tried out for the school play, right, and I did Langston Hughes's, 'I've Seen Rivers'. And they loved it, right? And so--oh she was so--she was gonna invite me to dinner. Alright. Well it didn't happen. So about three weeks later she was--It was obvious she was trying to avoid me. Well in a small high school like ours, that's not the easiest thing to do. And we're all busy anyway. We're all interrelated in the same general classes. But I was gonna ask her. And she finally stopped and just told me. Say, "I really wanted you to be at my house. And I really want you to come over too. But my parents wouldn't let it happen." Alright. And on that party thing, I didn't know that they were having them until a fellow named Don Cargill. Don Cargill said--we were sitting on the bleachers one day in the gym. And he said, "Vivian--" Or words to the same affect. You know. "You know, C. T.," is what he really said. Is that, "I wish that I could invite you to a party." He says, "But it's my parents." Says, "All these kids wish they could, but it's their parents." Alright. Well it was interesting to me. 'Cause I hadn't really thought about it. Okay. But it was--left me outside in one way. Very much inside in another. Alright. So that when we ask about suffering from the racism personally not nearly as much. I just knew the condition, the situation alright. Is that the cut-off was social. See you are not going to be part of the social life outside of the school. Whereas you could be dominate social life inside the school. Alright. As--but not outside. Speaker 1: Now did you graduate with honors or anything? Speaker 2: Not really. I was a B to B+ student then. Is that--But B. I was never really an A student per se. Alright. I never worked that hard. You see this is what I was telling you about. Those--Those early things affected me tremendously. Because I knew, number one, I really didn't have to study to get what I wanted. Right. And--But the other thing is I don't know. It sort of gave me the feeling is, that you just ride with it. Because you never know what's coming. So you just ride with it. You know. Alright. See I did all that work and it was thrown out as unimportant. But I would--So and that stayed with me. Right. Later on in college I'll show you how it affected me. What I could do there, that I didn't do in high school. Story_ID: 20123 Speaker 1: What were your prospects? What did you think that you would do? Would you--Did you know that you were going to college? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh right. Here's that--Is that I knew number one--you see, you've gotta see when I was--before I moved to Illinois, we had a doctor who--I had a goiter. And this doctor told me not to eat meat. He was a German doctor that was held in high esteem in the first place. Right. And he can--he could talk English too. He talked English quite well. He just had the accent. And he told my grandmother, you know, not to allow me to eat meat. Well my grandmother was cooking in the kitchen. And I came in and hid under the--under the table. So when she turned her feet, I could draw back. Alright. When she turned toward the stove, I'd see her feet move. And I could reach up over the edge and get bacon off of the plate that she was--she was cooking bacon and putting it on a plate. I reached up and got a piece of bacon. And I ate it. And when she was turned toward the stove, I went back and got in bed. See what I mean. I crawled away and got back in bed. So what happened was it put me into a fit. Right. And I was--And I was really into a fit. And it was pain and whatever. I don't remember the pain. I just know that I was really upset. I was having real problems. And she called the doctor. In those days, the doctor visited the house. You see it was way back when the earth's crust was cooling. (laughs) And as a result of it, right--the doctor came. And no sooner he looked at me. He said, "He eat meat. He eat meat." And my grandmother said, "Well I haven't given him any meat." And I knew I'd eaten meat. You see what I mean. And--but what got me was this guy could look at me and tell me, "Ha!" Shakespeare, I learned, had a line for it--"If you could look into the seeds of time and tell me which will grow and which will not, speak then to me." Right. Well he spoke to me. Right? (laughs) He could--and from that moment I wanted to be a doctor. Right. That got me all the way--half way through high school [Macomb Senior High School, Macomb, Illinois]. And I wanna use that "got me". I wanted to be half way through high school. But "got me" is another important part of it. Because as long as you know what you were gonna be, and that has social worth. It gives you a sense of social worth. You see what I mean. So going to be a doctor, right, was something that was always with me. So it gave me a sense of self-assurance in itself. See. So it got me half way through it. But I got there and realized, I didn't wanna be just dealing with folk. You know they get cut up, shot up and bring them back to you to fix them up and then they go back out. But what it said to me that I want to be involved in something that stops all that. Story_ID: 20124 Speaker 1: Where did you go to college then? Speaker 2: Oh Western Illinois University [Macomb, Illinois]. See that's what--. Speaker 1: Right there in town. Speaker 2: Yeah. See. Because that's all we had money for. Get my point? Is the--now here's that other thing. Had I not been--I believe with all my heart, alright. That had I not been cut off from that first grade thing [at Lincoln Elementary School, Macomb, Illinois], I was telling you about, alright--And had I--and that other fourth grade thing, I think I would have studied much harder looking toward college. I took college for granted. I took it--my--I knew I was going. Right. I knew I was going to college. I just knew I was going. I mean it was understood in our household. Alright. But what was not understood by me was that it was gonna be more difficult to get in than I thought, to where I would like to have gone. I wanted to go to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. I didn't have the money for it anyway. Right. Later I learned I probably wouldn't've gotten in anyway either. 'Cause I just hadn't studied hard enough. But in college, I--but--I liked to prove things by going out of the box. So I had to prove--I would write term papers. I had to prove that racism was holding my grades down. Right. I don't believe it in high school [at Macombe Senior High School, Macomb, Illinois]. But I know it in college. Right. So what I did was to do term papers for white kids which I got paid for. Which helped me pay my tuition. Right. But I would do a--I promised them an A or a B. Alright. If they didn't get an A or a B they didn't have to pay me. I only didn't get paid once. Kid got a B-, and said he wasn't gonna pay me. I said, "That's right. He was supposed to get a B." His dad--But I still see him walking away. The kid didn't really have the stuff on the ball. Right. But his dad owned a Studebaker [automobile] company in town. And when I say Studebaker, you can understand how far back we're talking. Right. Is that (laughs). Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It was one of the major motor vehicles--. Speaker 2: At one time in the history of America. Right (laughs). And so the point being is that I see him walking away now. Right. And I was thinking about how much money he had. How much money he was coming into. How things were structured for him and set up for him already. Right. And he owed me about, you know, I don't know, five dollars, six dollars, seven dollars. Whatever. Right. And so I don't know what he owed me come to think about it. I forget what I charged him. Right. But it had to be more than five dollars when I think about it. Right. It was probably ten dollars or something. Right. 'Cause we're talking about just as the war breaks. And see we're still talking a lot of money. '42 [1942], '43 [1943]. Alright. And so I started producing these term papers. But for me it was proof to me that I could knock out a term paper anytime I wanted to. I--In fact, I never spent a lot of time writing those term papers. Right. In fact I've written twenty-page term papers basically overnight. Alright. And any white kid got an A or B. I did it, I got C's, alright. So what I would do was to produce an A paper. Alright and I'd get a B. But I give it to a white kid, right and just, you know, change it according to the class and he'd get an A. So one time I gave a piece I did for to--the same piece to one English teacher that I gave to a white kid to give to one English teacher, I gave to another English teacher. Alright. I got a C, he got an A. My wife [Octavia Vivian] had the same problem. She used to talk about that black kids at the--her college talked about the same thing. Story_ID: 20125 Speaker 1: Now were you aware of what was going on in civil rights in those days? Were you--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, there wasn't anything going on. Is that--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was there. But there was nothing they were really doing. I mean you got--really got to--I'm trying to say is that there wasn't enough to fire the national imagination. Speaker 1: So 1942 and '43 [1943]? Speaker 2: Yeah. See this is just beginning. And at college [at Western Illinois University, Macomb, Illinois] I was. By the time of college I was. Right. Because what? You had the FEPC [Fair Employment Practice Commission] bill. See. You had that change from--I was quite aware of the differences between how the public programs of the time CC--the CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps] program and all those programs. The WPA [Works Progress Administration] and the PWA [Public Works Association]. I was conscious of it. I was told about it from the standpoint of who would actually get a chance to be the foreman. I was conscious of it from the standpoint that whites were always the foreman and you worked for them. Alright. And he may not even know the job and you may have. But he was gonna be the boss. Right. So I understood that. Get my point? But I only understood it. I didn't feel it. Understand what I mean? Because my own condition was very good. But I saw--and this is where I ended before. I saw other people suffering far more than I was. Alright. Let me tell you. When I was in high school [at Macomb Senior High School, Macomb, Illinois], I had three jobs. Okay. I found out later I was making about what the average family in America was making. Alright. I didn't know it. Stupidly didn't know it. Alright. Never thought about money. That's better than most everybody. Because I got to use my money. Right. Where I should have been giving every dime of it to my parents, alright, and letting them deal. Right. I didn't. I was stupid. I--is that--Because they--as I said, my mother [Elizabeth Euzetta Tindell Vivian] was very stoic. She never asked anything. Alright. And that was that. The--That having three jobs by the time I got out of high school is also a part of this work ethic. Is that I've always on time, always worked. I like to work. I liked to be able to know I had my own money. Right. But it was more not the money. It was just my independence. I knew that I could do and see and--what I wanted to do. Right. The--the--see and so I didn't use it well. Alright. Now I could have--I could have paid for any college in the country. Alright. If I had really saved my money. That was not something I felt I needed to do. Story_ID: 20126 Speaker 1: You were a literature major in college [at Western Illinois University, Macomb, Illinois] right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well--I started out in social science. I started out as a lit major and became a social science major. Alright. So I ended as a social science major. Speaker 1: Okay. And did--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I ended as a English major. Ended as a English major and a journalism minor and a social science minor. But I went back and forth. Let me give you again--here's where racism comes in. The head of the English Department alright, wouldn't let me join the English club 'cause I was black. And then the--when ten of the kids were English majors rebelled, he called them in one at a time and told them, "If you give me any trouble, you won't teach in this state." Well their parents had gone through a lot of problems to get them there one thing or the other. But they'd stop me and tell me. "You know I'd like to, but you know, I can't do it." That's how I knew, you know, they were more worried about their parents than anything else. Is that--So I changed from there to social science. But social science was what I was about--mainly interested--I think when I first went to college I was a social science major. Then went to an English major and then--and then went to social science and then went back to English. Because of the journalism. Alright. Because journalism's my minor. But I had a social science minor anyway. 'Cause by the time you're changing back and forth, you're taking courses. Right. Is that--I think that's the way it really ended. Story_ID: 20127 Speaker 1: What were the events that led up to you getting involved in the ministry and then the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Well I'm gonna sketch it for you real fast. Alright. In the first place as I told you, I was very religious in the beginning. Except that you don't see that later on. Right. But about high school [at Macomb Senior High School, Macomb, Illinois] in the middle of high school, around sophomore or something, its starts coming back. And because there was a fellow--I thought his name was gonna come back to me. But he started a Bible club at school. He was a very popular guy. And he started this--fine basketball player, took us to the state championship. Alright. John (pause). It doesn't come to me. Right. Too goes to the state championship. He started a Bible club in high school And a fellow named John Reitzel (ph.) and I had been studying Bible in junior high school and so John Reitzel opened my mind to a whole lot of stuff about scriptures I never knew or thought about before. Right. Ways of seeing the study of. Okay. The--So I was coming back to--I was really reconverted in the middle of high school Okay. I went to college [at Western Illinois University, Macomb, Illinois], I was a part of an organization that I now do training. I do their--I do some training of them at the national level. It was Intervarsity Christian Fellowship. Alright. See I dropped out of college and came back. And I got involved in Inter Varsity Christian Fellowship. Right. Of the--then--so I always took Scriptures seriously. Is that--I was--I had been a Sunday school teacher when I was in high school. Remember I told you I was doing alright making money. So I would pay kids to learn whole chapters like the Sermon on the Mountain, or whatever member. When I went back when a street was named after me, this year--a couple of months ago--four or five months ago--No the end of last year [2003] I guess. But one of the kids who was in one of my Sunday school classes now is one of the policemen in Macomb [Illinois]. Witnessing to the fact that it--my Sunday school class is what gave him an interest in religion that's still with him. Alright. But what he was remembering was that I paid the kids to learn scripture. Alright. The--so I always had that sense of that. Then as I said, I got reconverted in the middle of--in the middle of college. The--by the time I was coming out of college, I was one of the hot 100 asked to come to Colgate Rochester [Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York] to see whether I would be--want to be a student and whether they'd want me as a student and that sort of thing. And-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Top 100 (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes. That's what they called it. They chose 100 kids from all the colleges in the country. Alright. To bring in to see if from them they could not get their class for the coming year. Alright. So it was a term. You know, a slang term "hot 100," you know. And so I went in for that. But by that time I was--I was really not that concerned. But it was my chaplain who really set that up. I didn't set it up. He did. He just told me Rochester was his school. He knew about it and he sent my stuff in. And you know, I got chosen. But the--But the thing is I was on my way to doing other things. And so I got out of school and I got married in between. And, you know, and stuff like that. I mean another marriage beside my--right. I had a daughter who is my oldest daughter. Right. By my first wife. And then later comes the one [Octavia Vivian] I've been with for fifty-one years. Or she's been with me for fifty-one years (laughs). Is that--The--so that when we see this tendency I got--I was working at--oh I removed it. Didn't I? Off my notes I mean. But the--I was working for Helen Gallagher Foster. I'd come back to Peoria [Illinois] and I started a newspaper. And it wasn't successful. And I was working at this mail order house, Helen Gallagher Foster [Foster & Gallagher, Inc]. She died and left me a note this year. She left me a note and thought she knew she was gonna have a heart attack. She knew she was gonna die. And I hadn't even talked to her, called her. She had called. We hadn't talked for all these years. Alright. And this woman sent it to me. 'Cause she found it on her--the found it in the kitchen table. The counter really. And she'd written this note to me. As though she knew she was gonna die and she wanted to send me a note. Right. And she did. Helen Gallagher Foster was a big time--It was the seventh rate--ninth I guess it was--largest mail order in the country. Alright. Gift mail order in the country. Alright. I gotta break it down. Sears and Roebuck sold more in a week than we sold in year. You understand my point. Alright. To give you some idea. But Sears and Roebuck is the biggest thing in the field. See. We were eighth in gift mail ordering. Alright. It was quite different. Is that I was putting together a package that she should create an African American--well at that time a Negro theme. Alright. And then I got the call to the ministry. Now I see where we are. But I got the call to the ministry. The call to the ministry was very dramatic. Extremely dramatic. Alright. And shortly after that all life changed. Story_ID: 20128 Speaker 1: So the call to the ministry came. It was quite dramatic. It was--it seemed like the whole building opened up. I was going across the floor, going toward the office. A big warehouse kind of thing. See. Mail order stuff in the warehouse. And they wrapped stuff. Right. Breaking all up cases and thousands of things to a case or hundreds of things to a case according to what the item. And you wrapped them. And then they're shelved. So that as fast as the order comes, you can get them out. So I was going across the warehouse, going toward the front office. 'Cause I was trying to put together this program. Alright, for an African American--or at that time we'd've said Negro mail order company. It would've all happened out of there. See they owned about four companies, by different names. Right. Helen Gallagher Foster [Foster and Gallagher Mail Order House] was the top name. 'Cause that's who she was and she owned it all. It was all under her leadership--Under her ownership. Right. The--so until she--the last year or so there was a fellow from--that went to the University of Arizona [Tuscon, Arizona], that his father owned a drug store--that they--Is that--Okay. I'm with you. Is that--So I get this call to ministry. And so I have no other choice to go. Unknown to me, shortly afterwards my minister was collecting money for me to go to seminary. I did not know that. Is that--by the call. And my wife [Octavia Vivian] at the same night that I was to tell her that I was going to seminary, she had something to tell me. Alright. So what she had to tell me--and we were lying there in the darkness and we were just happy. There was this good feeling. And she said, "We're gonna have a baby." She said, "Let me tell you first. My good news. We're gonna have a baby." And I lie there silent. Right. 'Cause I'm thinking, "What! I am not about to leave my wife going to have a baby. She's, you know. And if I go to seminary I don't have a job. She'd have the only job." Right. And I'm not gonna do that. And so after she tells me, then she says, "Now what are you gonna tell me?" and I said, "Nothing." (laughs) And I wasn't gonna get by with that. So I had to the--She knew I had the call to go to ministry. But that I was gonna go to seminary. But now I was not going. We lay there silent. And she said, "Whose faith is in question now?" Right. And I had no other alternative. 'Cause I'm the faith guy. And so we prepare. I go to seminary [American Baptist Theological Seminary, now American Baptist College, Nashville, Tennessee] in December. Right. Like first grade, I end up in second semester. Right. In college though, I started in the summer--two weeks after college--after high school. You have to graduate. But I liked going to school in the summertime anyway. But I always thought it was kind of funny. I entered first grade. And then I enter seminary the same way. So I go to seminary. And it's perfect for me. The call was reestablished for me in the fact that everything--soon after that I realize that everything that I had ever done in my life I was called to do in seminary. But the first thing that happened was I was just going through the regular studies and routines and guides when my wife called and said, "Well I'm coming down." And I said, "Fine." And I'm standing in the hallway 'cause that's the only phones in the hallway. And I'm standing in the hallway saying, "Fine. When you coming?" and she said, "Oh I'll be here in about three weeks or whatever.' And so I said, "How long are you gonna stay?" She said, "Oh I'm coming to stay." And I stood there. I remember I said, "You know--What?" I said, "You know, if you leave your job we don't even have--we don't have any money. I don't have a job. I'm living in a dormitory. We don't have an apartment. Nothing. You know, This--how are we gonna make this work?" She said, "Well we'll find out. I'm coming." She's the one that had great faith. Right (laughs). And by the time I get there, one of the married student dorms opens. I get it. A job at the publishing house opens. And I knew people at the publishing house. And my whole background fit it. Right. I'd been in journalism. I had--so there I was. And I had taught and I was a teacher. And I had to write my curriculum materials for a boys' work program. And I had been in boys' work both in Peoria [Illinois] and in Chicago [Illinois]. Right. Is that--So it was perfect for me. Alright. So by the time the wife gets there, we got all this going. Not long after that, is that I--and not long after that we do--well a couple of years after that actually. We do a twenty-four page piece on [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.]. And I say we do it, because I started it, thinking the publishing house was gonna publish it and they wouldn't. Because they were afraid. They were afraid to publish something on Martin King. It might mean that the publishing house might get bombed. Speaker 2: Now this is in 1950? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh it must have been '50 [1950]--when I first got there, it must have been '52 [1952], '53 [1953]. That's why I say a couple of years later you have--you have Montgomery [Alabama bus boycotts]. Alright. And that lasts eleven months really. Before they win it. Right. Is that--that's when we were working on the piece. When Martin comes to pick up honorary doctorate from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. And I interview him. And my interview is a part of that piece I did--that twenty-four page piece I did. And had about sixteen, eighteen different pictures in it. Alright. That had come out of Montgomery [Alabama]. Alright. Speaker 2: This was about 1956? Speaker 1: Fifty--he won in '56 [1956]. I think it started in '55 [1955]. He won in '56 [1956]. Right. Shortly after that things began to happened at terrific speed. So that [James M.] Jim Lawson had come to Atlanta--Southern--what was the name of the organization now? Speaker 2: Southern Christian Leadership [Conference]? Speaker 1: No, uh-uh. It was just being formed. And a group of us, Kelly Murray Smith, pastor of First Baptist [Church, Nashville, Tennessee] was our leader. He asked me to join the group [Nashville Christian Leadership Council]. There was about six ministers. And who--That's about all you could get. It--not because of their faith. They did not understand nonviolence. They didn't understand the need for another organization. They figured "What was the difference between NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?" No sooner we'd begun to act, they knew it. Right. And they said it. And apologized in not coming sooner. Right. To our side. But the thing is--so we had started. Jim Lawson comes in town. Really sent there by Reconciliation--Fellowship of Reconciliation. Alright. That's who sent him there. But he wanted to finish up his seminary work and still work for the organization, of which he was doing. Of which he was doing. Story_ID: 20129 Speaker 1: Now what was the Fellowship of Reconciliation? Speaker 2: Fellowship Reconciliation is--I always like to think of it as the keeper of nonviolence. When nothing was happening in nonviolence, the Reconcil--the Fellowship of Reconciliation was keeping all kinds of little incidents and stuff on nonviolence. Teaching and producing materials on it. All kinds of stuff. Alright. Is the--Ed--I was trying to think of, [Glen E.] Smiley was the executive director. A fellow named Smiley was the Executive Director. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is this a black organization? Speaker 2: No, no. In fact, it's really an outgrowth of Quakers. Speaker 1: With Quakers--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (unclear). A brother and then--yeah. That's it. All that group. Right. See, of the peace churches. Alright. That's what it's an outgrowth of. Peace churches. And so we were--We joined in. 'Cause Jim [James M. Lawson] came. And Jim was there to teach students. Remember the other--the Montgomery [Alabama] things was going on then over--and then we understood the power of it. And there were a great number of people that wanted to--And Fellowship was passing it on. So he started classes teaching students. We had the ministers. We all got together, created the national movement. Alright. So it became as the Nashville Christian Leadership Conference. See. But that's what it was called first. Not--not--each town named the organization after it. Like St. Louis Christian Leadership Conference. See. New Orleans Christian Leadership Conference. See what I mean? And you taught how to do it and had mass meetings and all that sort of things. So people could learn and be committed. At first it was just teaching, teaching, teaching. Alright. Is that--We did it through all kinds of methods. Workshops for knowledge, for real practice in mock trials, mock lunch counter sit-ins, the whole thing. And from that we were well on our way. So what we did was to start the movement nationally. But we didn't start the--really, really start the movement nationally until the one broke out in [Greensboro] North Carolina. Alright . Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In 1960. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we were ahead of the game. Actually I think it was '59 [1959]. Alright. But we were ahead of the game. We'd already trained our people, no one had. They didn't either. They just ran in there, you know, creating what they saw. Which was alright. 'Cause they did a nice job on it. They were clean shaven, et cetera, et cetera So--and we joined them. And that's how we won our first victory. In the (unclear) time. The--but we were learning what it was all about. When--so we learned when. Martin [Luther King Jr.] calls me from that to--well I go from there to Chattanooga, Tennessee and start a movement in Chattanooga. Right. A big time thing, you know, sort of for Chattanooga But they shook up everything. And we won it. Then-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You were able to desegregate a-- ( Speaker 2: Simultaneously) Yeah. Public facility in Chattanooga. (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Before Nashville [Tennessee]. Story_ID: 20130 Speaker 1: Integrate public accommodations--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: In Chattanooga [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We--yeah. All of them. Right. In Chattanooga. Speaker 1: Before Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Yeah. But organized ministers--no not before. It was after Nashville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Alright. See I left Nashville going to Chattanooga. 'Cause we had a newspaper again in--we had a free newspaper. But we didn't have enough money to keep it going. And I--and the publishing house was afraid to let me stay. Because they're afraid the church was going to be bombed because I was too act--the publishing house was gonna be bombed 'cause I was too action--active in the Movement. Alright. And so that cut off that income. Alright. And then when the newspaper didn't go, that cut off that income. And the church I was pastoring and built there. Right, was too small. I mean I was just doing that sort of with my left hand. Right. Because I was left it because I filled in for a friend of mine's seminary. And he ended up coming back saying that he was going back home after he had done a thing in the islands. And so I was left with the church. So I just kept it going with my left hand and built the church. Right. Speaker 1: Let's do this. Maybe we should--Because of the time factor--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: We have, and focus (unclear) --. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now we've established that you're involved in the Civil Rights Movement as a activist. (Simultaneously) yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: How did you--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And I can--? Speaker 2: How did you-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah. You've gotta (unclear). Speaker 2: --first come to Selma [Alabama]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. See let me--Let me get you there right quick. Is the--I can get you there in four paragraphs really. Alright. I just don't know how much you want. And that's why I'm pausing right. So I go to Chattanooga. I start a movement there. We open the whole industrial complex there. Right. Just like we had done in Nashville. We opened everything in Nashville. All the counters and so forth. In Chattanooga we opened a whole industrial complex. Right. Commercial industrial complex. Right. All the factories, everything. Right. We opened them all. Right. So--And but I'm in Chattanooga then. [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.] hears about me 'cause I have done a series of things. First he knows about Nashville. Alright. Secondly I gave some speeches for the--for the--I did a speech. I took Adam Clayton Powell's place on a national program of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. Alright. And [Ralph] Abernathy said, "I pass a motion that we thank Mr. Powell for not coming." (laughs). So I know that I'm in with the top. I mean they liked the speech and they want more of it. 'Cause nonviolence had great meaning for me. As I said I had my first nonviolent direct action campaign nine years before Montgomery [Alabama] in Peoria [Illinois]. Alright. We won there. We opened all the restaurants and lunch counters. Right. That's before I came to Nash--came south to Nashville. Alright. Is the--So that I already had the experience. Alright. The--And so then after--I'm in Chattanooga have--actually have won thus my third campaign. I've won nine years before Montgomery, one in Nashville, another in Chattanooga. Martin calls me then to staff. But part-time. Calls me to staff. And when we first went into Birmingham [Alabama], I become an assistant to Wyatt T. Walker. Alright. But I'm National Director of Affiliates was my title. Okay. Is that--remember we stop in the middle of Birmingham to go to the March on Washington [1963]. To create it, develop it, make it happen, to do it. Right. Is that--So I organize the state of Tennessee for it. Alright. And then right after that--Immediately after the March on Washington, Martin calls me to staff full-time. I give up the church in Chattanooga. I come in to be full-time on staff. First movement was Birmingham. We were successful. Now the--but Martin had already had me to be--this is--see getting out of line. But Martin had already had me to be a consultant to him when he left Montgomery going into--a little town in Georgia. We went back and established a bank there. I mean a group in Atlanta [Georgia]. We established a bank there three years ago. Albany, Georgia. They call it "Albinney". Alright. They call it "Albany" in New York. Right. Is that--So we went in there. Martin had me come in as consultant. Right. I and another fellow. So the--We're knowing each other. See. So by the time I have these other successful actions, he calls me to staff full-time. Right. So I come in as National Director for Affiliates. Alright. Full-time. And then--and then we have--here we go. The next thing we know after a couple of other kinds of engagements like Danville, Virginia, we come into--I think it was Danville. We come on into Selma [Alabama]. Story_ID: 20131 Speaker 1: Now what is the situation in Selma [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Selma. The situation in Selma was this. Is that SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] had come in, alright, to set up action here. But SNCC could not cut it on what they expected in this community. This community has some background. Mrs. [Amelia] Boynton [Robinson] was sort of the natural leader here, in terms of any action. The Boynton family you might say in one sense. Her son had been a lawyer in Chattanooga [Tennessee]. A person of outstanding status in Chattanooga. But he's a lawyer in Chattanooga. The--but she was quite a person and still is really. As much as she can do. And she, you know, quite old really. Alright. Is the--but Mrs. Boynton was the natural leader here with Reverend Reese. Frederick Douglas Reese. Yeah, Frederick Douglas Reese. Reese was head of the teachers here. That's where his power really lay. Right. Boynton's lay broad in the community. The--they wanted the right to vote. We wanted to deal with a city that wanted a right to vote. So that when I came men--this was the circumstance I really found. SNCC was here trying to organize people. But it wasn't working. Alright. and it wasn't wor--shall we say--I don't wanna put anybody down. It wasn't working in relationship to what the community wanted. They wanted Martin [Luther King Jr.]. I went in to see whether Martin wanted them. You understand my point. We had a two-way street. Who would wanna to come to Selma, Alabama to do a national campaign. Right. If you're gonna do it, let's do it in the city of some size. Some where that you, you know, it's on the main line. That somebody's heard about. Alright. Is that--but I come in. Find out that the people really do wanna move. Martin--and the planning goes on then. And we plan Selma for Emancipation Proclamation day. Okay. And that's when we--when one day later we open things. He couldn't come that day--sorry. He was scheduled to speak somewhere. But we do. We do open the campaign that week. Speaker 1: So now Emancipation Proclamation Day is a celebration day? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) January 1. January 1. Yeah. See that's a very important day. See. Alright. And the thing is so--there's generally in most places in the South there is at least one church that has a big observance and everybody goes there. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) At this point, now this is 1965--4? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess. See is that--I get dates all mixed up. See you had Birmingham first. It's--Now remember it's six--Martin was killed in '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) '68 [1968]. This is about '65 [1965]. That's what I was starting to say. Alright. See check it down. I don't get--my wife [Octavia Vivian] gets dates right. I don't get dates right. John Lewis is the only fellow I know that knows the dates by month, day and everything. Year. Right. He gives them all. He really knows them. He really--he just, "I think that was--" And he comes out with these dates. And he's right. (laughs) You can figure ninety-nine times out of 100 John's right. He gets dates right. I just don't. But me--the--so we come in to do the full job. Alright. And that means setting up the whole thing. And Martin is the person that has to come in to make that thing real. See we haven't talked about Birmingham [Alabama] at all. But the point is there's so much to talk about really. Is that--that we just can't get it all done. Speaker 1: Let's just focus on Selma right now I guess. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, that's what I'm trying to do. Is that--So that we are--See I don't remember all the details. But the things that stand out for me more than anything else is, of course, the things I was most involved in. Right. But the--what we really had to do was to make this city understand that we can bring a whole nation to bear here. Speaker 1: Now--. Speaker 2: And we had to prove to ourselves that we could make it happen. Speaker 1: You had us right at the big meeting for Emancipation Day. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How did (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Now when we opened. Right. That's right. And when it opened and the place was crowded and its filled and et cetera, et cetera, and the people met Martin with open arms. They wanted him and that's it. Both leadership and the folk. Alright. And the common folk. So that Martin immediately made a hit with all the folk. Which he did where he spoke. Alright. Speaker 1: Where was that again? Speaker 2: Here in Selma. Speaker 1: Okay. Was it at the church? Speaker 2: The Brown Chapel [AME Church], yeah. Is the--the next thing however, you got to do is make certain that everybody is geared for action. Nashville is the only place that really did a full job of training. Everybody else it wasn't much training involved as much as learning what to expect. Learning the ideas behind nonviolence. Learning to keep your hands to yourself and feet on the ground. You see what I mean? Is that--but as we came in to Selma we knew what the conflict was and what conflict we needed. We needed a conflict that would deal realistically with the fact that they were destroying us educationally, destroying us socially. And we wrote that up. And such I don't remember where the material is. But the thing is those were the things that we had to contend with. Do we really wanna come into a place like this? A little town. Not much reserve or anything. Meaning that if you don't have much physically reserve, personally. Alright. You're not likely to even wanna get involved with people who don't have any. You see what I mean? And all of these things mitigate against a movement. Alright. Because people have to feel their continuity. They have to feel their closeness. They have to feel that the struggle will work. Alright. I mean you're talking nonviolence. Most people don't. Story_ID: 20132 Speaker 1: So what role did you play in the march? Speaker 2: The famous march across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama]? Oh hardly any. I went across--you heard them today. You would've thought that I was right up front when they got knocked down. I wasn't at all. I was home (laughs). The--All of us--I think maybe Andy [Andrew Young] might have been around. But I don't think so. Hosea [Williams] sort of planned the march himself. He wanted to do a march. Speaker 1: Hosea Williams? Speaker 2: Yeah, Hosea. And he wanted to do a march. But we were away. We were at home resting for the weekend. Anytime you thought you had a full weekend is that we left one staff member here in town. Not over two. Alright. And off we go. And hit the deck, hit the bed and sleep a while. And be with your kids and your wife and sleep a little more. And then you were ready to get up and go back. In other words it was like a good two day thing. Right. And you'd shoot out. But we used to use Saturday and Sunday. And we'd be back by Monday morning ready to do battle. Alright. Well the--Hosea didn't want it to happen. He wanted to march. And he wanted it in spite of himself. And the only way to make certain he'd get it is to go do it while we were not there. If it won, fine. If it didn't, he could be--you know, he'd be complained all over. But that was it. So--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So Hosea Williams really--it was basically his idea to lead this march? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. To make the march that was Bloody Sunday [March 7, 1965]. But it was something that none of us wanted to do. I mean there had to be another way of doing it. And we did not want to break attorney [sic, Judge Frank] Johnson's rule. Alright. [Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.]--see Martin--there was three marches. There was one where we were beaten. The next march was where we turned around and came back. Alright. The third march is when we march on across (unclear). Alright. See what I mean? The point being is we were able to win it. We were able to win it. Because we had the people. We had a certain set of circumstances. We had Sheriff [Jim] Clark that thought he was gonna beat people down. And as said in the movement everything that happens to destroys us only develops us. Alright. And so he was involved in that for some time. Story_ID: 20133 Speaker 1: Sir, how did you find out about the--? Speaker 2: I--the march--Bloody Sunday [March 7, 1965], I found it out on the TV set. I was home. Most of us were home. In fact, all of us were home for the weekend. And when we had a chance to make such a break, we left one staff member in town. That staff member was not supposed to leave. Alright. And--I'll tell you about later. I got caught in one of those things. But Hosea [Williams] had been wanting to march ever since the Jimmy Lee Jackson situation. Alright. Just a few days in between all of this. And--. (Simultaneously) Okay. And Jimmy Lee Jackson was killed by--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah. That's right. Speaker 2: Police officers in Marion [Alabama]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In Marion, See that's where I was. I had been in Hosea's place the week or two before. The week before, I guess really. I never connect these things too well. But that's the week before. And I had left to go to Marion to give a speech. That's--behind that speech is when they walked out and the state police was waiting for them and beat them. And then went looking all over town supposedly for me. Ones--it's according to who's talking. Right. But they went all over town going in one place or the other. And Jimmy Lee Jackson tried to defend his mother from remarks and stuff. And they just shot him. Right. Is that--so the next week or so--we gotta get it right? 'Cause I'm not clear. But it was all in a short length of time. Is that when Hosea's in town. Alright. And Hosea decides he's gonna have the march. And he's gonna have it. He felt like he'd been wanting one. Alright. And so--but he wasn't really supposed to do that kind of action when we were away. We should all be doing that together. But John Lewis comes in town and begins to give him his excuse. And he--and so--'cause John Lewis was willing to do it. Mrs. [Amelia] Boynton [Robinson] was willing to do it (laughs). And so he talks about it was the people's will. And they asked the people and people said--Well I think all that needs some real sharp examination. Alright. So Bloody Sunday comes as a result. Now the reason the second march Martin [Luther King Jr.] turns the troops around and we come back. Speaker 2: But let me backtrack just a minute. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now how did you--How'd you feel about that? After it's--I mean you--When you--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well I mean I'd been in the [Civil Rights] Movement a long time doctor. Stuff happens. Alright. You never know what's gonna happen. Alright. But what Reverend learned--what I learned is everything done to destroy us only becomes a means of developing us. Alright. If you live through it, you'll be able to see it. If you didn't, why you won't see it, but others will (laughs). Alright. But everything used to destroy us becomes a means of developing us. It's a basic lesson for me. I mean that's my line. But the point is I find it true. Alright. Is the--so as far as feelings is concerned, my feeling was it's done. So let's keep moving. Got to. Story_ID: 20134 Speaker 1: Now the second march [March 9, 1965]. You were telling us about the second march. What happened? (Simultaneously) Alright. The second march, is everybody turned around and came back. 'Cause Martin [Luther King Jr.] told them to. Speaker 2: Start over. 'Cause your voice-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes, yes, that's right. That's exactly right. Okay. You're right. So the second march, we start to march. And what happens is we come to meet the troops. And we meet the troops. Martin allows the group to turn around. We make some prayers. The group turns around and come back. But a lot of people are mad, both white and black, both North and South. Alright. And they're upset. But you see what Martin was about was [Frank] Johnson, the attorney, who was a judge alright, a federal judge here is decided--hadn't made a decision yet. That assured Martin that there would be real protection. And he wasn't gonna take those folk out or something like that. Alright. So the second we turned around and came back you had to understand that Martin did not want to break a federal law. Right. When he knew that Johnson was working on the answer and the response, and not only that, it would probably be in our favor. Alright. So you don't wanna cross lines like that and get jailed for no reason. Alright. Especially at the federal level. So we turned around and came back. Then in-between that and the third march, Johnson the attorney, not the president, Johnson the attorney had made his appeal--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The judge at that point. Speaker 1: The judge. The judge I mean. Yeah. The judge had made his appeal and won the case. Alright. But we couldn't help but think we'd've had people still around had it not been for our own attitudes and so forth. You know. But had we been able to fight alone. Speaker 2: Okay. Which is a different matter. So the third march you were actually protected by--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Sure. Speaker 2: Federal-- Speaker 1: That's right. Because you see Johnson had made his thing. Had made his ruling. Alright. It was in our favor. So we could continue to move. Speaker 2: Okay. What was it like when you arrived in Montgomery [Alabama]? Now you marched all the way from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery. Right? And it took three or four days? Speaker 1: Yeah, from Selma to Montgomery it took four days I think. It's only fifty miles. But you see we purposely didn't wanna make it in two days. Yeah. The idea is that what we were looking for was attention to the whole problem. You've got to make--you've got to make people think about a problem. You've got to help them make up their--to decide whether this is a cause for whatever you do or not a cause for. Alright. See? That's how--that's how you did it. So Martin was, of course, the number one thing on this. Martin was inside. And--but that's the way it really unfolds. Speaker 2: Now along the way for those four days, how did marchers eat and sleep and--? Speaker 1: Okay it's that they just slept wherever there was a place to lie down. They put stuff over them that would help them stay in good weather. Alright. We had women that just--had just as difficult a time as men. Alright. And stayed with it. Stuck it out. Speaker 2: Now I've read somewhere that there were some farmers that allowed you all to camp out along certain lands of there's. Is this true? Speaker 1: I don't know. You got me. Oh farmers did. But, in fact people--old people are so nice. I mean people pulled you in from everywhere. Alright. You'd be surprised. A few months afterwards--I wouldn't say how many and all that. I'm telling you hearsay now. There were, there were any number of people that brought their children in and--to play chess with them. So that we could see what they can do. Story_ID: 20135 Speaker 1: But I mean how did you really decide that this was (unclear)? Speaker 2: As I jokingly told a guy, "From birth." But I also knew that--remember I told you when I gave up medicine--the idea of medicine really--when I gave up the idea of medicine, it was because I wanted to change to do something that would stop people from getting beat up and people from having to live that kind of life. Well--so--and so I knew that racism was basic to three-fourths of it. Where I was concerned. So the idea was how do we help kill the goose in this case, racism? You see what I mean? How--what can we do to stop this from happening to people? To put them in that position? But what we needed was a method. And when [Dr.] Martin [Luther King Jr.] came along, he had the means, a method, a message and he was the man. And I know I've mentioned a lot of stuff. 'Cause I really like it for children's books. All those, you know (unclear). And also--and the second question was I mean we know what Martin's dream was. Speaker 1: So what was your personal dream for America? How did you see this ending up? What was--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Same. See the way I see ending up is that we must convert America. We must save America's very soul. That's where Martin was. See--in fact Martin put it so well. "To redeem the very soul of America. To redeem the soul of America." That's the ultimate peace. Who is going to save this nation from itself? Alright. See this is the real problem. Who's gonna make it face the fact that it is nothing it says it is? Alright. When a person walks around thinking they're something they're not, they're insane. You know, what are they gonna do next? How insane do they have to get before there will even be a change in their mind? That's basic. Story_ID: 20136 Speaker 1: Now I just wanted to ask you one last question I mean sort of about your--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, I hear you. Speaker 1: About your own--I would be remiss if I didn't ask this and having you here. But tell us about that day [February 15, 1965] when you were actually attacked on the steps of the courthouse here in Selma [Alabama] by [Sheriff] Jim Clark. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Well the first thing what you see on the film is about ten minutes. The whole thing happened thirty to forty-five minutes. Alright. We--I was leading a group of people down to the courthouse to vote. Alright. We knew we would probably be stopped. But the thing is we didn't know for certain, and we had to try. We go down there and Sheriff Clark's men are waiting for us. Alright. 'Cause they figured there's gonna be something going on anyway. So they came out of the courthouse and down those little steps and et cetera. I passed it today, they look so small. But at that moment they looked so big. Right? And the--So when we get there, they come out of the courthouse, down the steps and meet us there. Alright. And tell us that we have no right to be in their--things of that sort. Right. So their head seemed to have been a practice of every time that was done by somebody, they would say, "Well that's it." You know, and just basically they'd go at that. Alright. Or maybe ask a question or do something. But not much. Well I didn't bring all these people down there to have them hear, "No." And we just walk away. I brought them down there that we're gonna deal with nonviolent direct action pressures. Alright. And because they knew how. We really didn't. In fact, I wanted to take within me--with me as I went there a stronger sense of urgency and need. And I did. And I raised questions to him. And he could not answer. And I kept raising questions. No matter what he tried to do. Alright. I was right there with him. He went inside. Although it's all over. I had my troops to come right up the steps behind him. Right. So we're right up the steps behind him. And he realized it didn't work. And I guess he couldn't stand to see us standing out there. So he comes out again. Right. And takes (unclear). This happens about--and pushes us down the steps. Alright. And we, of course, are easily pushed down the steps 'cause we're not violent. Alright. So we gave way in front of him. Alright. But when he went back in, we came back up the steps. Right. It probably happened five or six times. But the last time we come down and we're pushed all the way to the street. And so I'm talking to him, talking to him, talking to him. He has no answers. He doesn't know what to do. Right. And so he decides to turn his back on me. And he turned his back on me as though with arrogance and pride. And he stood there, you know, with squared shoulders and one thing or the other. And I said, "You can turn your back on me, Sheriff Clark, but you can't turn your back on justice." Boy! His shoulders slumped and he looked back over his shoulder as if to say, "What do we do to a guy like you?" You know? And I was right on talking. Alright. Right on talking. And laying it out for him, and laying it out for his men. Alright. It was because I wanted them to understand the gravity of the situation. The world understood what was happening here. Right. And you can't just cook this stuff. You can't make macaroni and cheese forever. You're gonna have to face the fact that you are the evilest guy in American society. And see--there I went again. Alright. Speaker 1: But at that point I think he--is when he strikes you. Right? Speaker 2: Yeah, soon after that. Alright. Is that--I'm right up on him and he says something about these people. And he tries to answer me. So he starts talking about, "Well, you know, it's all these people with--broken the law here." And I said, "Yes. If some of them are here, you can find out when they registered to vote." In other words, you can't just determine that until you know. "I see people here with felonies." And I said, "Yes. And you'll know which ones did and which ones weren't." And then I told him and that--"and whether they are up for felonies not or were, it depends upon a good deal about how you, Sheriff Clark, in this court treats them. Right? And how the society treats them." Words to the same effect. And that's when he can't take it any longer. He just turns and lets me have it. Now the critical piece there that you have to understand is whether he hit me with his fist, whether he hit me with his club or whether both. I saw the club coming. I can see that club coming. I'd been told by a policeman out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that had driven through Mississippi with us that one of the ministerial tricks--that one of the police tricks is to hit you with their club. They're holding the ends of it and hit you right across here. And what that does is to drive that bone right back up in your brain and kills you. Alright. And I saw that thing coming straight at me. I went up on my toes. Alright. I used to be a ping-pong up later. You do all this kind of stuff. Just automatically in ping-pong. I went up on my toes and that club hit me here instead of here. You see what I mean. And just tore loose all inside of here. But I also in the film I see him swing. Right. Alright. So I'm mixed up at that point, very truthfully. Alright. But I know what I thought was happening was happening. 'Cause when I went up on my toes he hit me here instead of here. You understand what I'm saying? Is the--and it just tore a loose everything underneath there. Just tore it loose. They had to take me and just stitch me and stitch me and stitch me all underneath there. Right. Is the--then they put me on the elevator and the guy beats me on the elevator. But he only gets one good blow. But he is the biggest guy you want to see. Alright. And there was another guy on the elevator that is the warden of the prison, if that's what you want to call him, to a jail--Whatever it is for a jail. And he is taking the elevator up. Remember in those days elevators worked by hand. And this great big guy that they deputized alright. He said, "Just let me hit him once. Just let me hit him once." He saw that the guy didn't really wanna beat me. And he knew he wasn't gonna be able to stop the elevator in the middle of the floor. See that's what they'd often do. Stop the elevator in the middle of the floor. Alright and then just beat you. Alright. And so he realizing that he wasn't gonna be able to do his regular stuff asked him for just one good blow. As soon as the warden type turned his back, and looked out through the bars, I knew that this guy was gonna hit me. It wasn't, "Yes," that the warden gave him. But it wasn't, "No," in strictly Southern terms. Alright. So I put my hand up trying to make certain that I--that I'd have my fingers like this. Alright. When the blow would be landed on the back of my head. Because I didn't wanna get really hurt. I'm not talking about pain. I mean I'm talking about really something that would mess up your head inside. So I threw my arms back to get like this. And I just got like this when the blow hit. Story_ID: 20137 Speaker 1: Now think how good that is. What would have happened if he hit me like this? It would have really (unclear). That's it. It would have broken all my fingers. It would have broken all my fingers. It's the--but just as I got there, is when the blow hit. It was just perfect. Alright. The timing was just perfect. Is there whoof! Alright. Not to be there oof. Here, that's good as I could get. But I couldn't feel the ends of some of those fingers for three days. Alright. The--but I was still trying to find my wife [Olivia Vivian]. Alright. And finally I did. And she's coming out of the whole thing. That's one of those things that's wrong. The sickness and disease and stuff that comes from, you know, that kind of situation. But that's the short form of what happened that day. There's only one other thing that's really important. Is that in between these two scenes I've mentioned to you, is that we're at the top of the stairs. I'd gone back up. And Sheriff [Jim] Clark, but I had run ahead of the group. So I was standing up there by myself. He comes out and he looks like he wants to talk about it. And he's sort of with his head down. And he's got his club in his hand but not in the regular manner. He's got it held like this. Just beside him. And all of a sudden! Man he (makes noise) and jabbed me straight in the solar plexus. Right. Knocks me down the steps except that I would always ran backwards when I was a kid. It was a lot of fun. I ran backwards on every one of those steps. Running up and down the steps was always a pleasure of mine. I ran right down those steps and was one my feet when I hit the sidewalk. But I had that club in my hand. See. Because he let go of the club. Once he hit me, he let go of the club. And this policeman--the same policeman that told me about the other, had told me that what happens is that they hit you in the solar plexus when you grab. 'Cause everybody grabs. You're hit in the solar plexus, you grab. Alright. And they let loose. So you've got a club in your hand. And they've got a right to shoot you. Alright. But the interesting thing for you and for--is this. Right before I start up the steps with his club in my hand, it seems like the sky opens and voom! Just shot into my head this message from this fellow in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Alright. That they will shoot you. The whole thing just (making noise) alright. And so I had my first foot on the step getting ready to go up when whoom! I turned back around and I lay it in the gutter. I said, "This is where these kinds of weapons belong. In the gutter." Weapons or whatever word I used. But the idea these kinds of weapons of violence. Right. Belong in the gutter. And we're representing nonviolence. So it was just perfect. That's the idea. Up the steps I go. Down the steps he comes. His people start pouring out of the building. Right. To back him. And my people start coming up the steps with me. Right. But we know what's gonna happen. 'Cause we're not gonna have a non-, we're not gonna have a violent encounter, because we won't, we won't allow ourselves to have it. They can beat us but we will not beat back. So we knew that we would slowly take steps backward, take steps backward, 'til we're back on the sidewalk. And it was on the sidewalk that we go back and forth and I tell him about you can turn your back on me and you can't turn your back on justice. And--when right after that he hits me. Alright. And knocks me down. When he knocks me down, I can feel the people following me (gasp) then disburse. I can just feel it. I can hear it even. Alright. And that's what it sounded like (gasp). You know. And I know they're gone. And I know they're just--They're just upset. They don't know what to do. So I don't lay there. I jumped right back up. And I really wasn't clear on what to say. But I remember a speech from when we joined World War II. We were seniors in high school. I was a senior in high school [at Macomb Senior High School, Macomb, Illinois]. And Winston Churchill said, "What kind of people do they think we are? Do they think we will be destroyed by their iron? By their whatever?" Alright. So I come back up and I say this. "What kind of people are you? What do you tell your children when you go home in--at night? What do you tell your wife when you go to bed at night? What kind of people are you?" Boy! He couldn't take that. And he says, "Arrest that man! Arrest that man." Well I didn't mind being arrested. Because here is the point. We'd have to go to court. Alright. Remember when he knocked me down I said, "You don't have to beat us. Arrest us." I knew he didn't want to do that. Alright. I wanted him to. Alright. If he'd arrested us, then we've gotta go to court. He could not have that happen really. 'Cause he was likely to lose it. Alright. Why take a chance when you can beat people so that they won't--you can say, "Why nobody said that anything was wrong." You see what I mean? "Why they never--" So--but he arrested me. That's when I got beat on the elevator. But two days later I was in court. Now here's the end that's so beautiful in that court thing. I go to court. I know I'm gonna lose it, of course. Right? It's a local judge. The whole thing is set up. But they carry it on for a while as though this is something real. So I'm sitting there. And suddenly the doors open beside where the judge has this thing with the fence around it. Right. And in comes this fellow. And he's got something in his hands. But he stands right there at the swinging kind of door that goes into where the judge actually is sitting on this high thing. Only in Alabama and Mississippi they have them set high. You see. That's the idea that's, "You will obey us." You see. "We will intimidate you into--" And that's what it says. You know. You talk down to people from those things. And just as he was getting ready to put me away, those doors open. In comes a fellow. He stands there. The judge understands he's a lawyer. He's got a writ in his hand. Right. He doesn't wave it or anything. He just holds it. And he knows it's a writ. So he tells him to come on up. He comes up, lays the stuff up on him. And the judge when he sees it he pushes his chair back in disgust. Is that the lawyer--an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyer--I can't think of his name. He's been teaching in a--at a Catholic law school in Chicago [Illinois] for the last--many years now. He just died a year or so ago. Alright. I can't think of his name. But he presented this thing. He had been in New Orleans [Louisiana] and got a three judge panel to issue an edict right. Saying the judge was wrong. The judge was disgusted. He did not know what to do. But he couldn't go against a three-judge pannel. Alright (laughs) over his district. So he pushes away. And he says, "This case is over boom!" hits his wand, alright. And he is upset. And he just sits there. And we are happy and we go out. That's the way it ended. But that was a most important ending. [Andrew] Andy Young said that if I had lost in my non-violence then we may not have had the Voting Rights Bill. See because they were trying to make somebody fight back. If you'd fought back they'd say, "You can't trust these people. You can't tell what these people are gonna do. They may start a riot. Any kind of being." You see what I mean? And we would have lost a very important one that need not be lost. Speaker 2: That makes it I guess doubly important to people-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It makes it worth it. Speaker 2: Use it. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That's exactly right. That they use it. And doubly important for us to have it. And that for us to rather get beat than to fight back. As [Dr.] Martin [Luther King] says, he said, "Violence creates more, violence creates more problems than it solves." You see what I mean? If we had acted violently, we would have created more problems--than we were there to solve. Alright. Is the--Because that's what they wanted to do. They would have destroyed us, kept us out of things and all kinds of things. On the basis of, "These people are not to be trusted. Their riotous, they're this, they're the other." So that's the--That's the--that's the story in short form. Story_ID: 672354 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our illustrious videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing are Kiara Ortiz and Kemtria Ponder. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: My full name is Cordy Tindell Vivian, but nobody calls me by that. It's C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian] is, is what I'm called by. But the rest of it puts in the family. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 30th, 1924. Speaker 1: In? Speaker 2: In, in Missouri, in, in Howard County, Missouri, really. It's--some of the things say Howard as though it was a town. But when I was born there, it was--the Howard was the name of the county, all right. And we were farmers there. That's what, why we were in Howard County, Missouri. The, but the whole family were Missourians coming right out of the Civil War. Story_ID: 672355 Speaker 1: Now, I, I got the first part of your family history back in 2005, I think it was, when we we- we sat down at the anniversary of the march [Selma to Montgomery March] across the Edmund Pettus Bridge--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Pettus Bridge, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, in Selma [Alabama]. And so we're finishing up the interview that we started there, and the hotel there--I can't think of that, name of that hotel, but. Speaker 2: Yeah, me neither, it's been some time, and it's-- Speaker 1: Yes, it's down the street from what used to be Major Grumbles [Selma, Alabama] and all that other stuff-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --in Selma (laughter) the Edgar Cayce-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: --site of the photography studio and all that sort of thing, we started way back then. And then we--at that time, we got you to the--we discussed the confrontation on the steps of the Dallas County Courthouse [Selma, Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --with Sheriff Jim Clark-- Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: --of Selma; and we talked about all the, some of the nuances of that, and, and if you wanna add anymore to that-- Speaker 2: Nah. Speaker 1: --that's, that's fine, but-- Speaker 2: 'Cause you have the film so you've-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you've seen everything that's there to be seen. Speaker 1: So, sir, could you talk about what happened? Now, we left you in that scenario being beaten on the elevator as you're going up the stairs to the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: --Dallas County [Alabama] jail. Speaker 2: And what you don't see is that we had gone up and down those steps about three times. And, and, in fact, we had started in the morning and met with a group in the park some distance away. And I--but not too far, and, and so that's where I met the group I was to take to the courthouse. And we were going to the courthouse, asking for the right to, to vote which was what was important to the whole thing, right. And so we met there and, and moved over and kept walking until we had got to the courthouse. When we got to the courthouse, we started up the steps, and as we started up the steps, we found out that the doors were locked. Had we known, we would have gone in the side door. It was the one that was open for the white customers (laughter) but, but we, we went to the door. They, they didn't let us in, but Sheriff Clark wanted to be certain that, that there was no need for us to come back, right. And so, he let four or five of his guys out, and, and they forced me down the steps. Of course, I'm nonviolent so I couldn't, couldn't you know interfere with them physically. And so I just kept backing up, backing up, backing up with all my guys and women, and backed up until we were down at the bottom of the stairs, right. And then he would run back up the stairs and go in and lock the door. Story_ID: 672356 Speaker 1: And so we did that, I think three times, and so on the next time he [Jim Clark] came out and he, he s- he, he stood there for a moment with his head down and had his billy club in his hand, and, and he asked me what I wanted. And I said, you know, "The right to vote." And he said, "Well, it's not open today." And, and then he just dropped his head and wow, stuck me in the solar plexus with the end of his billy club, with the--I don't think you have this, do you? Or do you? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did. Go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, and, and when it happened, that was to knock me down the stairs, and I was supposed to be tumbling down the stairs. But I used to run backwards as a kid, and, and that's precisely what happened. I started running backwards down the steps. And, and, but when someone hits you in the solar plexus, you automatically grab. So I had his club in my hand, and when I got to the bottom, I started back up, (gesture) and something came to me that, that I was supposed to--that I should not go up the steps with the club in my hand, right. And so I mentioned to, to him--I'm talking to him, but everybody's listening, of course, but is that, that, so, so I tell him that we're going to put this back where it belongs and, and that, that was in the gutter, right, 'cause that's, I was, I'd backed and backed up all the way down to the sidewalk. And so, and then I started up the steps again, right. And-- Speaker 2: Because if you would've started up the stairs with the club, that was an excuse for them to-- Speaker 1: To shoot you. In fact, I, I understood it because that's the way the Chicago [Illinois] police used to do. They would say to the young guys, you know, says, "Tell you what you do," says, "I don't feel like taking you back down to the office, so tell you what you do is," said, "when we get to this alley, just start running down the alley," right. And, and then when the guy would do it, they would shoot him down the alley, right, and would just--it was, it was one of those things that they, they were in the habit of doing, and so that they would kill you or at least cripple you, but mainly kill you. And their .38s [.38 caliber gun], it--and you didn't have a chance because here you were--here these young guys were running down the, this alley and there was--you were in, in the sights of the gun very easily. Story_ID: 672357 Speaker 1: And, and you would--kill you so--and that all came to me when I (gesture) (makes sounds), right. And, and, and I, so I said, "Let's put this where it belongs. It belongs in the gutter." And I went over and put it, and put it in the gutter and then started back up the, up the stairs [of the Dallas County Courthouse, Selma, Alabama]. He started down the stairs, right. And we met about a fourth of the way up because he was, he had, he'd caught me off guard. And the--then as a result of that, the, we--I was losing place. But I just keep walking backwards, walking backwards and looking him in the face, looking him in the face, right. And, and, and so finally, he stopped, so I stopped. And we began to talk to each other, but not, not, not silently and certainly not with any sense of, of, of coming together; and, so, but I, I start to talking to him about what he was doing and why he was doing it, and what he should not be doing, right. And, and he decided to listen to me, right. But then he, he started to walk away. I remember his shoulders. He, he straightened his shoulders and walked away at the, at the steps, not down, but across, right. And so, and, and I said--that's when I said, "You can, you can turn your back on me, Sheriff Clark [Jim Clark], but you can't turn your back on justice." And I saw his shoulders just sag, you know, his shoulders just went down, right. He was trying to be, with his shoulders up and his head forward, as though, forget you. And, and when I said--but when I talked to him at that moment, his shoulders sagged, and, and he turned back around, right. And, and then he started asking that the lights be turned out, the camera lights. And, and they were really bright in, in my face, so I know it was, but, but that wasn't what he was concerned about (laughter). He, he, he wanted the lights out so that he could really hit me, right. And, and so he did, and he didn't want any cameras taking it. And woom, boy, he really did, he really did hit me hard, right. Story_ID: 672358 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think I asked you befo- before--we talked about this, and I asked you like, did you know that he [Jim Clark] was gonna hit you? Speaker 2: Well, no, not really. You see, you never know until they swing, right, but when they start to swing, you know. And (laughter), 'cause you're, you're expecting it, you're waiting on it, but you're not standing still. You are, in fact, talking to him or you are moving up on him, or if he's moving away, you move right behind him, right. But you know that he can turn at any time and hit you. And, but you're ready not--but you're not gonna hide your head and all of that, right. So he, when he did hit me, he knocked me down the steps [of the Dallas County Courthouse, Selma, Alabama], right. And, and that's when I said something--I forget what the words are now. But, and, and I said, "You can turn your back on me--," no, that was, I don't know. But in that, in that--and you'll read other stuff. It's been so long, even I'm forgetting it (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well you told me that you remembered to get up on your toes so you weren't hit in the, in the--in this, between your eyes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's right, in, right here (gesture). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's exactly right, and it did too. I went up on my toes so that he couldn't hit me across there 'cause that's, that's a death blow. And, and really, he hit me right, right in here (gesture) right. And, and the blood flowed, et cetera, et cetera. And then when I kept talking back to him, and walked toward him, he said, "Arrest that man, arrest that man!" And so they did. Story_ID: 672359 Speaker 1: And then we went down to the jailhouse [Dallas County, Alabama], right. Well, the jailer was not so happy about, about the whole thing, but it wasn't me he seemed to be unhappy with. It was the policeman; and so the policeman came, went into the, to the elevator. It was a crude elevator 'cause it was a long time ago, right. And-- Speaker 2: It's a hand, hand operated elevator--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a hand operation, right. And so he got in the car and, and I was with him. The guy had looked like he could play, play fullback, fullback--remember when there was a fullback (laughter), a guy who could play fullback with the Bears [Chicago Bears], right. And so, and I was standing there, and then when the, when the jailer got on in order to operate the, the elevator, it was crowded in there. And he was asking--he said to the jailer, "Let me hit him, let me hit him, let me hit him, just, just once, let me hit him." Well, the, the jailer looked at him with disdain really, and, but, but I knew one white man wasn't going to tell the other one off, right. I knew he wasn't gonna tell him off. So I knew if I was gonna get hit. So, but he didn't have much swing room in there because we were so crowded. But I put my hand behind my head and, and I was trying to do this (gesture), and, but as I got my hands here is when he, his club hit me. And I didn't feel these center fingers for about three days (laughter), is that I couldn't, you couldn't, you know, you couldn't feel 'em, right. And so I, I ended up--he, he--the elevator, second floor, and the, the jailer stopped the elevator and put us off, right. But, but he waited for the, for the policeman, and the policeman just sort of tossed me into the, into the jail cell. And, and I was very thankful to the Lord. I mean I'm, I--as soon as he left, I started praying. I got on my knees praying if--now, think about this. If I had really got my hands there, it would have really broken all my fingers. I only got my hands here, right, and, and it was a good thing I did, right. And it's that I didn't, I didn't--no bones were broken, and I have no problems now or ever did as a result of, of the beating. Speaker 2: So it just kind of mashed your fingertips, I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, see. It, it's got--instead of, instead of getting a--it wasn't the tips. It was the center fingers, see what I mean. It's, that's, that's where they got it, got those center fingers. And I couldn't feel 'em. I could feel the end fingers, but I couldn't feel, feel these, right. Had I got my hands all the way then--if I had gotten my fingers all the way in there, right, as I was, started to do, and wanted to do, is that it could have broken all my fingers. And they could have hurt from, from that time on because all these, I mean these kind of points in your fingers don't heal very well. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now, I think you said that they arrested you, and there were some other people that are arrested too, right? And was that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, arrested. I thought you said, (unclear) arrested--oh arrested? Speaker 2: Yeah, arrested (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there, there was, but that was the only one that they called--he, he--to be arrested. He says-- Speaker 2: It was just you? Just--okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, "Arrest that man, arrest that man." And down I went. And I don't remember any others being arrested. Speaker 2: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think they were all sent home. Story_ID: 672360 Speaker 1: I have a question. I didn't ask this last time-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I think, but when SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] planned an action, how was it decided--I mean you seem to be the point person in this action-- Speaker 2: In this action--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --in terms of--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But not in every action. Speaker 1: No. I mean how did they--'cause they, they could have had Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] try this-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or, or James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], or. Speaker 2: Yeah, or whoever happened to be there. Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but was it that random or was it, was it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was just basically that random, but you didn't expect Andy to do it, you know, every time. Andy had the clout 'cause he was be- he was right beside Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. But Martin wanted him there to, to go forward with other things, went with police chiefs and the power and all that kind of stuff. See what I mean? For instance, you've never seen me with anyone there that--any white person that has any power, and, and, and forward thinking except the sheriff. Speaker 1: Okay. So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You see everything above the sheriff, basically, Andy dealt with. Andy could have dealt with it, but Bevel just, I guess, happened not to be there. Bevel is one of those people that can do any and everything, right, or was that kind of person, right--could do any and everything, right. Bevel was quite a, quite a, quite a real, real person, and, and the nonviolence is real to him as it was to me. In fact, I had been doing nonviolence about ten years before the--but I wasn't--b- I had done nonviolence in Peoria, Illinois about ten years before we were there on those steps [of the Dallas County Courthouse, Selma, Alabama], right. And, and, see, the, the--there were spots here and there where people were doing nonviolence. And, but none of us moved outside of where we were, like in, in my case, it was Peoria. My wife [Octavia Vivian] had done nonviolence--not much, but had done nonviolence in Pontiac, Michigan because of a doctor there that backed this group of about ten, ten young people. And, and they, they did what they could, but largely, they turned out a little newspaper [Pontiac Challenger]. They did all that kind of stuff. They made certain that everybody knew the time to, to register to vote. They, they did all of those kinds of things. But any time, but there was never any violence or even being in anybody's face, right. But in various places, like in another Illinois situation, at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], there was a group of young men who fought to get their hair cut--I shouldn't use the word fought, but they demanded that they could be able to get their hair cut, right. Speaker 1: Okay, it's a white barbershop that wouldn't cut black people's hair. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. And they, they, they used nonviolence to do it, right. So, but the little spots, but people knew very little about nonviolence really. But they were going to be as nonviolent as they could, but make certain that they, they, they challenged the power. Story_ID: 672361 Speaker 1: What was the situation in Peoria [Illinois] where, where you were involved in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Peoria--is Caterpillar Tractor [Caterpillar Tractor Company; Caterpillar Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was vice president of, of the NAACP [Peoria NAACCP, Peoria, Illinois] at the time. But the fellow who really did it was not me. (Laughter) It was, was the fellow who became president [Harry Sephus], and I can't think of his name. His name just never comes to me, but he was a, he was a small guy. He was skinny. He was small. Everything about him was small, but he was willing to, to do any--whatever was necessary, right. And, and he was the one that really did the upfront--he, he worked at one of the department stores. There were two department stores across the street from each other, right. And at noon hour, he put away all his brooms and so forth and went out--and he had to do it at noon--and he'd set up a meeting at noon with the president of Caterpillar. That's the most powerful man in the whole end of the state. There was nothing more powerful than Caterpillar, all the way you could--until you were in the next state. And, and he challenged him, and had the meeting--they had the meeting. And he challenged him. See, the, the guy thought that he was going to--the president of, of Caterpillar thought he was gonna simply bring him in, tell him no, get him out, right. It didn't work that way. And I wish I could think of this fella's name 'cause he deserves--I was surprised. I was in Peoria not too long ago to give a speech, and found out that the lawyers there and et cetera, did not know that had even happened, right. And here was where they all got jobs. How it worked was the--he said, the guy told him, says, "Six, six--you can have six guys to try out." And he said, "I'll pick 'em." So he wasn't gonna argue with the president of Caterpillar, right. It was just been an excuse for him to turn him down. So he said fine. And so we made certain that the six fellas he picked, we made certain that they were ready at--they were up and ready to go to work, right (laughter) because everybody's job was gonna depend on it, right. And, and it, and as a result of it, these guys really understood, began to understand how important they were 'cause we would talk to 'em in the evening. And, and they got the idea. And from that time on, nobody missed in the morning. They were ready. Well, that upset the president of Caterpillar. And he had to fire--I mean hire. By the way, there was a law passed at that time--and I don't know what it is, but with the lawyers here you need to know that we depend upon lawyers to (laughter), to be able to tell us what's the newest thing, right. But we knew what it was 'cause that you always know, know what law has been passed, what law has been changed, but you don't know it in detail. You depend upon the lawyers to do it, right. I say that because I, I think it's important for any young lawyer to know how dependent upon them we really are. And the, and when we won, he began to understand that he was missing good work, a good work force. And so, he--and they have, they had, and I don't know what they do now, but they had different Caterpillar Tractor Company places all the way up and down the state, all right. And, and he began to open them up, open 'em up, open 'em up, and because he realized--and remember, this was at war time [World War II, WWII], all right. Speaker 1: Okay so this is back in the, in the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So you had been at this a long time before you got to-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --twenty years before you got to Selma [Alabama]. Speaker 2: That, that--there we go. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: We're gonna pause here a second--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, at least twenty years. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 672362 Speaker 1: All right, so I just wanted to make the point that you were experienced-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in that kind of confrontation--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I know you said that Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel] was good at it, and-- Speaker 2: Well, Bevel became good at it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Bevel wasn't at that time. He, he had come out of, out of Michigan, and he, but they weren't using nonviolence there, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he had come out of Mississippi. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: In fact, when Bevel and I first met, we were, we were at the seminary [American Baptist Theological Seminary; American Baptist College, Nashville, Tennessee], and we were washing clothes and stuff, right. And, and so I said, "Where are you from?" And he says, he says--what's the name of the town? Speaker 1: Itta Bena [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Itta Bena. No, he didn't say Itta Bena. Speaker 1: Oh, he didn't, okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: See he said--at first--later, he did, right. He said, he'd, see, he had just come from visiting his brother in Detroit [Michigan]. So he said--whatever he said was around Michigan, right. Speaker 1: Flint [Michigan] or some place, or? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was, it was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --'cause he was right in, in Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that's not what he said. He said something else. And I thought--and he gave a Mississippi name, right. And I was wondering where that was. But, and, but he was laughing because he knew I didn't know, right, and (laughter), but we, we got over--that's just part of the fun of knowing each other, right. And then he told me about Itta Bena. And, but, but that's the--that was at the seminary. See, see, the, the seminary made the difference. My, my minister--I, I had my calling to the ministry and the--and as a result of that, I had gone to, to my, my--I should tell you the whole story, but it's not necessary (laughter), it's that--but my wife [Octavia Vivian]--I, we, I came home one night from working--forget this because we'll catch up with this, right because I want you to know how I got to, to this story of Itta Bena, right because (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh (unclear) but that's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: I think you probably told that story before, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's probably in the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Probably in the other one, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --yeah, that's good 'cause it's-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --it's one of my main ones. Story_ID: 672363 Speaker 1: Well, let- well let's go forward from Selma [Alabama] here. So you're in jail. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what's the outcome? I know you told us this, but I want you to tell it again--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then we'll go forward. Speaker 2: So one day or two days or later, they, they took me out and took me to the courtroom--well, in the, this, I was--the courtroom, and they eventually call me forward. And when they called me forward, what--it was an unusual thing is that the, a brother [Fred Gray] had walked into the, the, into the, into courtroom and had gone over right straight to the bar. And, and he was standing there waiting to be called on. At the same time, his secretary came out and asked to be seen before he started talking to us, right. And so--and while she was talking to him, right, we were both getting ready for, for whatever was going to happen. Well, this, this fella happened to be a lawyer, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyer, right. And, and he handed his stuff up as soon as he finished talking to his secretary, right. And in Mississippi, you know, you got these high, high places the judges stand by. Oh, yeah. See, that's to scare you. Don't let that worry you (laughter). And, and so as a result of it, he turned, and he, he turned to see which one. Well, he decided to go with this new guy that had just come in the door, right. And, and he, so he took the papers from the guy that was--and he, and he looked at him, and he looked down at the papers and he looked at him, and looked down at the papers. And he said, "Case dismissed!" And with a bitterness, man. What had happened, this NAACP lawyer had, had driven all night to get to Selma, and, and because he'd had a three judge panel already acting on the case. And, and the--and this local judge realized or this--that he didn't have the power to overthrow this guy, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so a decision already had been rendered on a higher court? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and he'd got that the day before. We knew nothing about it, and he drove all night to get here--to get to, to, to Selma. Story_ID: 672364 Speaker 1: Was it a court order to let you register to vote, or what? Speaker 2: Yeah, to--that, to let me go because, because I shouldn't have been arrested. You see what I mean, is what, what it was all about. Speaker 1: So the arrest-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was it the arrest that gave them a legal reason to act, or what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See what I mean? It's that--and he had gone to fight that--he'd, as an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyer, he [Fred Gray] had the state--remember there was only two black lawyers in Mississippi, all right. Now, and but he really covered Illinois. But I mean, pardon me--he really covered s- Alabama. Speaker 1: Alabama, okay. Speaker 2: Al- but he had, he had done--and I don't know the exact legal stuff. That's why you need to study (laughter), but, and, but as a result of that--now, here's what I think happened, is that we had just heard--I mean our group that was there in Selma [Alabama]--we had just heard that they were going to not arrest you, but put you in an insane asylum, the idea that you were crazy. Speaker 1: To try to register to vote--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, that crazy Negro thing, right. And, and so, and I think they were ready to do that, right. See, because then they could control you. They didn't have to let you go. You couldn't come back in their face. You couldn't carry out anything, see, because--and, but he had to let, he had to--I mean he was upset. And I think that's why he spent so much time with these other two people, right, is because he realized that, that something was going on. But they had planned what they were going to do. And, and then, boom, he finds that he's, he's, he's been short changed, and he has to let me go. Boy, he was upset. In fact, my definition of upset is looking at him (laughter). He was upset, but there was nothing he could do, right. And he shoved his chair back and he said, "Case dismissed!" (Laughter) And so we left. And that was, that was the end of that case, right. But--and it was, but it was, meant that the whole, our whole movement could con- in Selma, could continue to, to move forward. Speaker 1: Now, this is--your case was--that was, was that before the march [Selma to Montgomery March] across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: In fact, some time before. Well, actually--well, it's only days, but I mean in terms of the time, you know, is we figured that--'cause you could--it wasn't gonna be forever. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but it was, it was beforehand, right--(simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 672365 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, tell us about the march [Selma to Montgomery March] across the bridge [Edmund Pettus Bridge, Selma, Alabama]. Now, how did--how was that--I know originally, I think Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was supposed to lead a march across the bridge? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But then he took another assignment or he did something else. Speaker 2: (Shakes head) N- unh-uh. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: See, the real thing was, is that Martin never crossed a judge, big time judge. What kind of judge you call 'em? He's over--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: A federal judge, or? Speaker 2: Yeah, federal judge, and he never, he never crossed a federal judge. So he was waiting for this federal judge, and I think his name was Johnson [Frank Minis Johnson, Jr.], but I'm not certain. I think he had the same name as the president [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], right. B- I think, but check that. And, and so he--when I was let go, that I could do anything I really wanted to do, right, and that--or that we wanted to do. Well, we had decided that we were going to have this march, right, but that we couldn't have it until Johnson was ready for it, right. And so we marched up to a certain point and then we broke ranks, turned around and walked back. And that's what confused everybody 'cause a lot of people had come--ministers largely--black and white, had come--and largely white though, had come to, to, to Selma [Alabama], ready to meet the policemen, right. But it's not what Martin wanted because of what Martin did. So that was the--we turned around and went back. Well, we--the next day we moved forward, and, but we stopped when they said stop. And we went on back, hoping about the police thing, right. Well, the third time is when we, when we walked forward and kept moving. And that's because they, they--we didn't have time to turn around. We didn't have time to do anything else really, is that the policemen started beating us. If you notice the films, they, they, they--when we got there, they moved forward. It wasn't--they said, "Halt," but they weren't halting. Speaker 1: Yeah, they--well, let me go back a little bit. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And from what I understand--now, correct me if I'm wrong-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that Dr. King did not want a march on that particular day. Speaker 2: Well, he didn't wanna march on that particular day because Johnson--he didn't wanna cross Johnson-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --see. You see what I mean? And, but-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --but by the time this third day is when (makes sound), he didn't want to because Johnson hadn't, hadn't come through yet, right. Speaker 1: But it was, I think it was Hosea Williams who-- Speaker 2: Well Hosea wanted to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: His idea--wanted to do it--he wanted to do it? Speaker 2: Yeah, but he wanted to do it in the beginning, but he wasn't able to because Martin didn't want it to happen yet, right. And so it wasn't Martin's--it wasn't--it was Martin's call, not his. You see what I mean? But he had really wanted to. Story_ID: 672366 Speaker 1: Now, what you have to also realize is that it was following--what's the young man's name that the police shot? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I know, I know who you're talking about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, which is twenty miles outside of Selma [Alabama]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Johnny [sic. Jimmie Lee Jackson] some-? Speaker 1: Yeah, I can't think of the name of it. But the--but you'll know it, you'll have it, you know, just write it in-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --is that--and that--oh, what was his name? But anyway, it's not coming. And he was shot in the stomach. He--the policeman [James Bonard Fowler] had come--well, let me tell you where I fit into it, right, (laughter) is that I was, I was in--what's name of that little town [Marion, Alabama]? It's twenty miles out, and you make a tur- from Selma, you make a turn, and you go up a hill, and there's the little town. And mainly, the church [Zion United Methodist Church, Marion, Alabama] stands out. Well, what we really did is that Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had, had said, "If anything happens, call me." And so one of us had to stay there for the weekend, stay and it was, it was my turn. And then it was what's his name's turn. But it was my turn. He said for me to stay there, right. Well, they called from that little town, right, twenty miles out of Selma be- and asked me to come over and, and start the parade there, give a speech to get 'em out the door, right. So, so I did, and, but I sh- I wasn't supposed to. So I told them, I said, "Look, I'll--I have to come over and do the speech immediately and come right back out," right, so that they're--and come back to Selma, right. So I drove over and, and as I was--and gave the speech. The people started out the door, but I'd already left. But what would happen is that police cars were coming around the corner. See, we--was you come out of whatever that little town is, when you come out of it, you go down the hill, and, and you make a turn to, to Selma. And when you make that turn to Selma--twenty miles later, you're--from--twenty miles after you--from that little town was Selma, see. So you'd come out of it, and that's where we would be, our headquarters. So I'd come out of there, gone up the hill and given this speech at the little church up there, right. And it's strange that--boy, I remember when I went in, oh, the place was crowded and people were all over place, and the upstairs area and everything, right. And, and, and the wife [Octavia Vivian] and I went back a few years later, and we were surprised how small the church was (laughter). It seemed like it was a large church then, you know, or a medium size at least, right. Well, this was a little church. And, and, but to me it was, it was a size--. Well, anyway, I start down the, down the hill to make the turn, and there was a policeman there with a flashlight (gesture). And he was telling police cars, state police cars, where to turn, right. And so that's what he was doing on the corner. It was a little store there, and he was on the porch, a little store, right. And I said, "What is going on?" So I slowed down, and pulled over to the side to see what was up, right. Well, then when he finished, he turned his light off, and he followed them up. So I thought I'd better do that too, find out what is going on. Story_ID: 672367 Speaker 1: So I went up the hill. And behind it--it was dark by that time. And the, and so I wanted to know what had happened 'cause the--everything was dark, the church [Zion United Methodist Church, Marion, Alabama] was dark, everything was dark, right. So, and there was a funeral home behind the church, and a little store. And the--so as a result of that, I went to the funeral home and asked the guy, and I said, "Look, what happened?" He says, "The policemen just beat people all over the--," all, that were coming out of the church, said it was just bloody. And people were beat. But by the time I got there, had finished, and you could see stuff, it had been washed away, right, the blood part, right. But the, but the other people told me that they, they entered in, in a restaurant [Mack's Cafe, Marion, Alabama] and beat up people and killed, whatever his name is. Speaker 2: I think his name was Jackson. Wasn't it Jimmie Lee Jackson, or? Speaker 1: Jimmie, Jimmie Lee Jackson. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. And he had--they, that they had killed Jimmie Lee Jackson because he, because they started to hit his mother [Viola Jackson], and he, and he told 'em, "Unh-uh," you know, and, sh- they hit him and just, just--I mean, you know, it's one of those things. They just shot him. It's almost like it was now (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right--things haven't changed that much. Speaker 1: You know, it's no, no thought of the life, you know. And so then that was Jimmie Lee Jackson, right. And so I went back to, to Selma [Alabama] to the office, and got--no, I started to go back. Then I went up, back up the hill 'cause I wanted to see what happened. It's--I know Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would want to know, but that wasn't Martin. I mean we all needed to know where we fit in this and what to do, and how we're gonna handle it, right. And the, but the police ended up leaving. They came back down that hill and around the corner, right. But, so--and I wasn't for certain where they went. So I thought I'd better stay in Selma, in, in that little town that's next door to it, right. I'd better--and I knew the guy who was head of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] there. And, but it's not coming to me. The, and as a result of that, we said--the people there said, "Let's, let's take the body and put it on the governor's [George Wallace] and--take it to Montgomery [Alabama], and put it on the governor's o- doorway," right. At the--and so, they, they, they decided to do it, but by the time it ended, they decided to--we decided to have a long march, but stop each night at some--one of those little towns, right, until we got to, got to the place, and so we could have a mass meeting every night. And the crowd would get bigger and bigger going on into Montgomery. That's--and so we did, but that, that's a next action afterwards, right, and one needs to know that but--because it's the Jimmie Lee Jackson story. And, and a few days later, Martin came to preach the funeral, and I remember talking to his father 'cause it was--they lived right across from the cemetery, but not exactly the spot that, that Jimmie Lee was buried in, right, but on that side of the funeral--of the cemetery. And, but he was, took several days for him to die, and Martin came and, man, the people turned out from every little place around there, all right. And everybody was there. I mean, when I say everybody, I mean everybody in that, in that whole area was there that was black. And Jimmie Lee had been killed, and his mother had, was the reason--everybody's got a mother, and, you know, we all--but, but that's the end of those two scenes, right. Story_ID: 672368 Speaker 1: Well, I didn't ask you this, that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when you were arrested-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I know you had like a lot of damage to your mouth where they hit you. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: You didn't? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: When they hit you in the mouth? Speaker 2: No, not, not--there wasn't a lot of damage. Speaker 1: So you didn't have to be hospitalized or anything? Speaker 2: No, oh, no, (laughter) no. I wasn't hospitalized I know. But I don't remember, what I don't remember is any kind of major difficulty and we're back before the, before Jimmie Lee Jackson deal, right. You're thinking about before the Jimmie Lee Jackson deal. Speaker 1: Not bef- well, I'm thinking about what happened after that confrontation on the Dallas County Courthouse [Selma, Alabama] steps, and the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and then the court action--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, yeah, that's, that's what I mean. Speaker 1: And then after the court--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: See, because Jimmie Lee Jackson was after that. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, okay. All right. Speaker 2: You see what I mean? Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And I just wanna make certain that we're, you know-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so we're going chronologically forward. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: All right. So, so, all right, so the march across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama], that happens--when does it? Speaker 2: See, right after because we, we have the funeral after that, that the group decides to, to move forward and, and did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm pretty certain because I know right after the, the beating up, is that I went back with the undertaker from, whatever that little town is [Marion, Alabama]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --and when he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So you weren't in Selma [Alabama] when they marched across the bridge 'cause you were in the other town, right, is what you're saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no. Unh-uh, I was there, but, but my assignments, when we left for the long march [Selma to Montgomery March] going into, to Montgomery [Alabama], you mean? Yeah, but I, I wasn't part of that because Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] wanted me to go bring people to the, the march because we decided the march would be--was not just going all the way at once. We would-- Speaker 1: Okay, you're going to stop and have meetings--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --stop at all these places, right, and pick up people, right and, and give everybody a time to rest 'cause they would sleep with people at night, right, and then after the mass meeting. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: See, what I mean. And people would get up in the morning, and everybody moved forward. Story_ID: 672369 Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, think it through, doc, 'cause I-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --I'm trying to think through what happened next-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --after Billy--after Jimmie Lee Jackson and before the next thing of size, you know, that's worth the talking about, you know. Speaker 1: Right, right. At the-- Speaker 2: Well, you see, we go, we go up to the state house [Alabama State House, Montgomery, Alabama]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Well talk about that and--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and, in fact, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came back to preach there. But, but the governor [George Wallace] closed the place. Speaker 1: Oh, the state house? Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, so that they're--and I think, I think actually it was a s- by the time we got there, I think it was a Saturday or a Sunday, and that was an excuse for them to close it up, right. But check that, right. But I, I remember, I know where I was sitting (laughter) when Martin was making the speech [How Long, Not Long]. I can see all that, and I remember we left right after Martin, Martin finished, right. Speaker 1: Now, when you go to Montgomery [Alabama] to, you know--when I saw it for the first time, it was when we interviewed you. That's the first time I'd been in Montgomery-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in my whole life. Speaker 2: Oh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And I was just struck by the landscape 'cause you've got--you can look down the street and you see the state house. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's exactly right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And you look right down that street and see Martin's church. Speaker 1: Yeah. There's Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and across the street from that is the Department of Justice [Alabama State Department of Justice]-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --for the State of Alabama. Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: It doesn't--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: In fact, all the state buildings are there right around the (gesture), right around--see, so, now you'll know which building to go to (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, you can--it looked like if you had a crane, you could lift the whole thing up and put it on a stage. Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and you could play all the parts (unclear)-- Speaker 2: In fact--that's very true. The--'cause everything goes around the state house there. In fact, even as you're coming into town, what you're thinking, you keep seeing that signs that say, state capitol [Alabama State Capitol, Montgomery, Alabama] ahead, right. And, and you're, you--each time you go you want to go there really, you just want to-- Speaker 1: See it. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, that's right. Yeah, I remember--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The- well I also learned that Montgomery was the first capital of the Confederate States of America, right? Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Jefferson Davis' first home was there, and then he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --then he, they moved it to Richmond [Virginia] later. Speaker 2: That's what I thought-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Richmond is what I thought. Speaker 1: Yeah, Richmond became the capital, but the first capital was Montgomery. When they, when they first--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Yeah it's very strange. Speaker 2: Strange--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Any rate, it's like a little play, look like--you could look down the street--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear) yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --there's the capital and there's Ebenezer and there's--I mean Dexter Avenue--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Dexter. Speaker 1: --and the justice department (laughter) across the street from Dexter--(simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: It's, it's all very interesting. Story_ID: 672370 Speaker 1: I tell you what is a, is an interesting thing. When you go back there now, and you go to the library, all right, is that two nuns kept track of everything that was happening in that town [Selma, Alabama] for the next twenty years after, after we were there, right. And just to, just to get that understanding from them and the idea that they gave me that was so important to me, said, it was between twenty and twenty-five years 'cause they would go back, go back every year, right. And, and they had--and that library was a new library, and that was, oh it was nicely done. They would stay at that library as, and they, they--what they said was that it took twenty-five--twenty or twenty-five years, either one of the two, they said, for that town to admit what it had done and, and what it was really like. And, and what Sheriff Clark [Jim Clark] was really like. Now, you know the story of Sheriff Clark following the-- Speaker 2: No, what happened to Sheriff Clark? Speaker 1: Okay, Sheriff, Sheriff Clark went to jail (laughter). Now, they didn't put him in jail (laughter). What happened is--and I like to think of it as--I feel sorry for Clark, really. See, Clark did everything they wanted to do, and--him to do. He was the perfect example. It's like the guy we got running for president now, you know, he said--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, he's doing everything, everything that his basic following wants, you know, wants him to do, right. And it's that--and, but he was no longer loved because once you lose your sense of, of big time, right, the next thing you wanna do is to have money, right, because if you got money, then you don't feel like you're a loser. That's the way I think of things, right. And, and as a result, I think of Sheriff Clark as the guy who had lost everything 'cause nobody really liked him anymore, right. And, and the next thing he was, he was taking, taking bribes from people, going from the, from the--down in the next, right near the--well, it's not river, but the body of water that you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Alabama River, the? Speaker 1: No, you go straight on through though to the, to the, to the ocean [Atlantic Ocean]. Speaker 2: Oh, to the--Mobile [Alabama], or the gulf [Gulf of Mexico]? The gulf--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you see what I mean, is--and you, and the guys are bringing dope and everything up that route, right. The--and as a result of it, they would pay off the policemen along that line, right. Well, he got caught, Clark got caught; and as a result, he ended up in jail. Speaker 2: I did not know it. I didn't know what happened-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, sometimes you don't know what happens to these figures in--but that's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yeah, we never do. (Unclear) In fact, if I wasn't there, I wouldn't either. In fact, it was a long time before I knew that happened, right (laughter). I didn't know it immediately, right-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --'cause we were, we were in another place, you know. Story_ID: 672371 Speaker 1: Now, you started something called Vision, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And this was to put some 702 Alabama students in college with scholarships. Speaker 2: Precisely right, and that became Upward Bound. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See what I mean. Speaker 1: So you are--now, let me just say this so everybody that's watching this, knows this. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You are responsible for Upward Bound-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You've all heard of Upward Bound? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] C.T. Vivian's responsible for it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And we have Upward Bound in Ohio. We had it in Illinois-- Speaker 2: That's right. It's everywhere-- Speaker 1: Had a big program at Roosevelt University in Chicago [Illinois], and-- Speaker 2: And you know what? I have least awards. If you were--if we were at the house now, I got the lowest number of awards coming as, as founding Upward Bound. And it was the biggest thing I did, right (laughter). But, but all these other things were, were the things that excited people, right. And, but the Upward Bound didn't excite 'em, right. But I had gone to--and I tell you when it all got really underway. I can tell you that beca- in a way that you will know it. I'm trying to think of--I'll tell you what. Not--let me tell you this story then tell you the, the other kind of story that goes with it, right, is that I was in Birmingham [Alabama], and, and I heard that, that--and I heard it from guys who had radio stations or radio--if they didn't have the station, they had the, you know, they worked for radio stations. And they were talking about that, when the law was changed on the schools, what the school, the Alabama school system did was begin firing and demoting all the black, black formers, seminar- Speaker 1: School teachers. Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: School teachers, right, and, and those who were over them, right, and--that were black, right, there. And so as a result of that, the young guys there--'cause those were their heroes. You know, you didn't have many heroes for black, for black guys, right. And, but they, but they--the principals and so forth were. And as a result, these guys would just leave school. They just--'cause here, here, here, their, their heroes were being put down. And they decided to just leave school, so many of them. And, and as a result of this, these guys on the radio was telling me about it, right. So I thought, hm, this is, this is something we should be dealing with. So I, I started what I called--you got it there? Speaker 1: Vision. Yeah. Speaker 2: Vision. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, and in the movement, the guys called it Vivian's Vision, right. And, but the, the idea was, was to make all of these guys able to pass high school exams so they could go to college, right, and, and raise whatever money, or whatever to deal with to help them go to college, right. So, so I did, so I had these guys come in and to--and we had the meetings in churches, right. And, and I got the students from the East Coast, and that's what I wanted: young, talented people. And when they, the whole East Coast, when you start dealing with that, you're dealing with the, some of the brightest, out of the major colleges. On the East Coast, you're dealing with some of the brightest people in the country, right. And so I--and they wanted to come because it was the movement. See what I mean. All right, and so (laughter), so I did, and in fact, remember the Iowa test [Iowa Test of Basic Skills; Iowa Assessments], test? Well, I asked them for a test. Man, they just gave me a, they gave (laughter) gave me all I needed and told me if I needed some more, come back. I remember the plane lighting in, at the state capitol there, right. Story_ID: 672372 Speaker 1: But see, now, I'd gone to the--it was when Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was doing his, what did he call it? Speaker 2: The Great Society. Speaker 1: The Great Society, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. War on Poverty. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--remember. And so, so, and Johnson had, had young people, in particular, all over. There wasn't hardly a space in Illinois--I mean in, in Washington, D.C. that Johnson didn't have some sort of office in, right. Well, I found out that there was an attic that had been remade that, that those guys had all the power to, to shift, had power to shift the schools and, and that people could go to, see, any--anyway they wanted to. Now, the individual ones weren't able to, but these guys were, right, because they had this little--it was two guys, had this little office in the attic. And, and, but they were in charge of every, every school that, that was a part of the, the Great Society. And as, and as a result of that, I was able to get them to send people to every one of the cities and places that we had, that we had our students going, right. And, and, now, you see that was very important because what happened is that, the black students were never able to be the teachers because they had to work all, all summer long, all right, in order to get back in school, right. And I, and I wasn't--I didn't have any control over any money, all right. But Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had, had given me the go ahead to do anything I wanted to do with the program [Vision; Upward Bound]. And he didn't even know what had happened in--totally until he had to make a report at the end of the year (laughter). And, and he found out that, man, this thing was going on. And he was very happy 'cause, you know, he was, he was--he was brilliant himself, right, and, and was breaking--all his life, I mean, he was graduating from grade school [David T. Howard School, Atlanta, Georgia], graduating from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], graduating from college, even Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] ahead of time, right. And, and then went to seminary ahead of time. I went--I passed through that town--I forget what the name of the town was, one time, just to see that, that school that Martin wa- Martin was on, on the coast, right. It's a seminary. And, yeah, that first one, right. Speaker 2: Was that Crozer [Crozer Theological Seminary, Upland, Pennsylvania] (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Crozer. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, and then, and then he went on to the big ones, right. Do you know why the, the professors in seminary used to come during the, during the summertime, and there were, practically, almost any time that we had a movement going on, is that they would come to talk to Martin. They wanted him to be a professor at their school. And even before he did the movement, right, and the, and they'd come, and they would sit there and be with him for two or three days at a time (laughter). Is that--and these are, these, these are the guys who wrote the text on--and they were brilliant guys, but they understood that what Martin was doing was, was so basic to, to, to the Christian church, right. Story_ID: 672373 Speaker 1: Give me your assessment of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, he's, he's a iconic figure now, and people--he's, he's characterized as a dreamer by some, and all kinds of ways now since he's gone--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but that is--but, see-- Speaker 1: But how-- Speaker 2: See, what--to really understand Martin in the movement, what you have to understand is nonviolence. See what I mean? When he discovered nonviolence, right, and he--because he was hearing the story by college presidents and so forth coming--remember, his father [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] was a minister and, and one of the two big churches in Atlanta [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], which was a university town, right. And, and when I say university, I mean Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Selma [sic.]--and what's, what's the woman's name? Speaker 1: Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Spelman, 'cause she said Spelman. I was, I remember being introduced, right, and said, and as a result of that, right, then they, they wanted to, to make things better on that whole line, right, so, so that you had, had a real, real thing going on that, that--and Martin, Martin was a part of it. Remember, Martin started not to join the ministry, but he talked with--who's the great teacher at Morehouse? Speaker 1: Oh, Benjamin Mays. Speaker 2: Benjamin Mays-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --when he went there. Benjamin Mays talked him into it. But those guys used to--in the summer, they would--they were, they were in cotton f- not cotton fields, tobacco fields in bordering states, trying to get the money to go back to school, right. They had made Martin their, their, their, their minister for, for the summer, right. And as a result of that, Martin came back deciding he was going into the ministry. And he was ready to go to seminary, right. You know, it's just one of those things that most people don't think much of or don't know about. Story_ID: 672374 Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about the direct action today and, you know, in-- Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --in regards to Black Lives Matter and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Is that, in the first place, they should let them know what they, what they mean by Black Lives Matter, right, is because--Lives Matter--is because the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] is now saying, they're hate groups, that--right. Nonsense. But the point is, we're--they're not saying that--what we're talking about is, we're not treated equally. In fact, we take that for granted, right, but, but I find out that young guys don't even know it. And, now that's number one. Number two is, they don't have real leadership, right, is that they don't have guys that really know what, what's really going on. They--when they have meetings--I've, I went, I've been to a couple, right. And, and everybody just sits in chairs and, or takes over whenever they want to, and they talk and so forth. Now, that's the group I had seen there. Now, let's look at another one, however, is that, is at the other--that I was in somewhere in Florida doing something, giving a speech or something. And, and the--who, who is the guy in Washington, D.C. that has the best radio program? Speaker 1: Oh, you're talking about--it could be several different--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but there's this one guy that everybody-- Speaker 1: It could be--are you talking about The Black Eagle, Joe Madison or are you talking about the guy at WAMU [WAMU Radio, Washington, D.C.]--what's his--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I'm not talking about WAMU. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think I'm talking about-- Speaker 1: The Black Eagle? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Who has the talk show--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Joe Madison? Speaker 2: Yeah, Joe Madison. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And, and I was going through somewhere in, in Florida, and what was it? The--it was, you know, right on the ocean, kind of thing, you know. And, and this group was having a meeting of, of bringing together labor guys of yesterday, right, and, and of the new movement that was theirs, right. And, and, well, I just happened to be there. And they said, "Join us," you know, and I, so I did. You know, what would you say if--you know, what did, would SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] say (unclear)? They said, they said, "What did Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] say?" I said, "You mean what did SCLC say," (laughter) because I'm not about to try to read Martin's mind for you (laughter) that as the--and so that night we were there. And, and one of the things that was wrong is, that hadn't been really dealt with was real leadership. And you really got to see that because they, they want to believe that all of 'em together can be the leader, right. And that they don't have to pick a leader, right. They can just all talk together. I've been through that kind of thing too, right, but in the end, leadership wins out. Story_ID: 672375 Speaker 1: See, is that Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Martin was the great leader. For instance, let me give it to you. My wife [Octavia Vivian] and I both were, were doing nonviolence, but I was doing it in Peoria [Illinois], and she was doing it in Pontiac, Michigan, right? Now, the thing is, is that, that we were doing nonviolence. But we never did anything big time, right, because we didn't have a big time leader. You understand my point? There wasn't a person that was taking us to the next step and, and moving us forward and, and had the, had the dreamer attitude that makes people go all the way. The--and they never talk about the suffering quotient. It's very important. See, if you're going to be nonviolent, you really have to say, you know, whatever happens, happens, right. But, but I'm not gonna let it stop me. Well, they don't quite say that, right, and, but I tell you a good example of it was the, was at the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri]. What won the University of Missouri was the president's--president [sic.] of the group [Concerned Student 1950], the student group--desire to, to say that he [Jonathan Butler] was gonna fast. Well, he was willing to suffer. When they all began to see somebody that was willing to suffer, they began to take sides, right. But it didn't matter because they weren't gonna do what he did, but what he did caused the president [Tim Wolfe] of, of the University of Missouri to, to decide, okay, I'm, I'm licked. That wasn't what he started to do, but when, when the young man proved that he was willing to die for it, he knew that he was, he would, he would be stuck with being the murderer, right; and he didn't, and, and so he decided to give it up, no, the, the president. Speaker 2: Right, right, that's a couple years ago in Missouri where they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, remember? Speaker 2: The president of the university resigned, yeah. Speaker 1: That's exactly right. Speaker 2: Under pressure. Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that pressure didn't really come on enough to make him resign until the president of the, of the youth group was willing to, to really, be willing to die for it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You see what I mean. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that's, that's the method. That's the most important thing. We took it for granted in the movement, that if you had to go, you had to go. And you weren't gonna back up or back off of it. And if you had to go to jail for ten years, you had to go for ten years, right. And when that's known, everything else happened. I remember [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond. Julian Bond and I--Julian wanted me to run for, for--this was very early (laughter), wanted me to run for [U.S.] Congress, right. And, and, but I had three other things I wanted to do (laughter). So I didn't wanna run for it. But he wanted to lay down in front of a, front of a truck. I did too. But the guy wouldn't, wouldn't run over us. Speaker 2: That's a good thing. Well that's-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --when you look back on it, a very good--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, you see, you see, how all of it is good if you carry it through, see. But when you are hesitating along the way and playing with it, then, ha, ha, ha, and you can be scared away--they'll scare you away. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But when they find out they're not gonna scare you away, that's when they have to take you seriously. Story_ID: 672376 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the Black Lives Matter movement and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --some of the--now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And its relationship to other movements. Speaker 1: Yeah, the, the old movement, and--I mean the old Civil Rights Movement-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and, I think one thing I noticed is that when there're demonstrations now, that there are some people that seem to be committed to nonviolence. They lay down in front of cars and on lawns and things, and then there're other people are actually tearing things up-- Speaker 2: Yeah--it's--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --in the background. You know, so is that what you mean by the lack of leadership in terms of being able to coordinate--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the lack of--actually, have some rules and regulations because if somebody messes up, then your leadership doesn't mean anything. If there's guys knocking out windows and so forth. Story_ID: 672377 Speaker 1: Now, were you with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in Memphis [Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, I was there that night to help pick out the casket. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, I was no longer with Martin at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had-- Speaker 1: But you, you remember the march [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike] where the people blamed the Invaders--this group called the Invaders of disrupting--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah. In fact, in fact, the building right next to where you left back--it was--saw that part of it with Coretta [Coretta Scott King], I was in the same car with Coretta. In fact, that, the morning or two before--see, I was there that night, and then, and so the next, next two days, I was also there, right. And Coretta, she'd come back. I was there when, when Coretta took the, took the casket back-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, and the next morning, I went over and looked out the window that what-you-call was supposed to have shot Martin out of. Speaker 1: Yeah, James Earl Ray. Speaker 2: Yeah, James Earl Ray was supposed to have shot at, to have shot Martin from that window. Story_ID: 672378 Speaker 1: Well I probably should back track to 1966 in Chicago [Illinois]. Now, you--had you moved back to Chicago by that time? Speaker 2: I don't remember the--I never remember dates. Speaker 1: Well, '66 [1966] is when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Chicago, when--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no. Well, see, yes and no--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He lived in Chicago on the West Side for a while--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Yes and no, see. I was at the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission], all right, at the--which, and I had, I was sort of a partial with Martin, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So you were in Chicago, but you weren't necessary with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --activities. Speaker 2: That's right. See, I was with the Urban Training Center. Now, the Urban Training Center is something that people never talk about because they don't know about it. The--we remade the Christian church. See, we had to. The point is, I mean we had a hundred, a little over a hundred board members because they represented the various denominations. See what I mean? As that--because they had come to the point that they--I mean the, the National Council of Churches, right, had come to the point when they realized that, that they had to reform an urban--a moral--pardon me, a country, an agrarian church, see, and because the, the new world was, was--and now cities-- Speaker 1: Yeah, urban world. Speaker 2: Yeah, urban world, and as a result of that, the--the churches were not ready. Now, everybody but black churches. Why? Because all the black churches felt that--not because they felt backwards. They felt like they were ahead of it because they were largely coming out of the South, right, and, and they--so they were in the cities 'cause there was no place for them in the country. See what I mean? So, so, so we were what we considered the first urban churches, right. So nobody, so the bishops and so forth didn't want to become a part of that. Well, they were not with the National Council in real, fully, full spirit anyway. Now, they would deny that, but that's it. Story_ID: 672379 Speaker 1: But, so I would, I had the money from Ford Foundation [New York, New York] for all the black guys coming, right. And, and so I would go, go try to get them, right, because I had the money for them, right. In fact, at one point the, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church that's headquartered--what's that town in Ohio? Speaker 2: Wilberforce [Ohio]? Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --no, yeah, yeah, Wilberforce, Wilberforce, right. Well, they have a seminary there, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Payne-- Speaker 1: Payne, right. Speaker 2: --Payne Theological Seminary [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. I, I brought all of the members of it to one of our sessions, not for a day or two, but I mean for, for a month to, to Chicago [Illinois] to get trained. And the guy who was head of it, the--a doctor of--somebody, right, who, who was-- Speaker 2: I know who it is and I can't think of it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --who was head of it at that time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --right now--Stokes, was it Stokes? Was it Rembert Stokes [sic. Charles Spivey, Jr.], or? Speaker 1: Yeah, I should remember, but I'm not certain 'cause I'm, I'm--really, because I'm not certain, I'm not saying yes or no. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Go--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You see what I mean. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, go ahead. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So you brought 'em to Chicago and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and brought the whole school to Chicago for one of these long sessions that we had over, over a month or so period, so they could understand what was happening to the urban, urban world. Now, what happened, as a re- I almost forgot this, but, but as--the guys decided that they wanted a person that represented the new urban church, and--for their denomination. And so--and the guys that had gone to the Urban, Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission], then made it possible for them to go. They, they created an urban church office and it was one of the former bishops that they chose. I think it was a former bishop that they chose. In fact, the office for it was across the street--I can see the building, I can see the building. I can see the whole corner (laughter), but-- Speaker 2: Is this in Chicago? Speaker 1: No, this, this is in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Atlanta, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh, that they, they were A.M.E.s and they knew what, you know, what they were gonna do. The real work was done in Chicago, but they wanted a urban church office-- Speaker 2: Here. Speaker 1: --and there's this building that was catercornered across the street in Atlanta, right, that they made for him. And, and he would, came into the Urban Training Center and studied, studied like mad. He became a part of the program, and then studied there like mad. And so they ended up having it. Story_ID: 672380 Speaker 1: Well[MO1], I was with the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission] in Chicago [Illinois]. The first one was the Urban Training Center in New York [New York]. The second one was the Urban Training Center in Chicago, right. Before it ended, there were twenty centers, right, twenty-two, right. And it's, it's, it's well for you to know about this because you know clergy. And, and--there was something else I'm gonna add to that, right, that, but, but that was how we came into the, the urban world. We came into it innocent of any real, great changes, right, because we, we had--our larger churches was in those large cities, right. And whereas in all the cities, the, the--and the main denominations' churches were, were in town, right, or close to downtown, right. Why, is because that's the way they had done it to be able to prove that they were the, the biggest and best churches, right, of their denominations. And (laughter), and, but, you know, it's just a part of that thing that people do. But by the time we ended, we had twenty-two churches--twenty-two centers that ran clear across the nation. And that's, that's--and, but, but that great board--see, see, the story has not been told, right. But it was a tremendous and important thing, right. Speaker 2: Well what are some of the--well, what churches were the most active and the most successful? Speaker 1: The Episcopal church was head of it. And Jim Morton [James Morton] was in--came out of New York to Chicago, all right to--and his bishop was the man who had the vision to see it and back it. And then others followed him. Speaker 2: So the Episcopal churches in Chicago, like--no--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, no, the Episcopal church in New York-- Speaker 2: In New York. Speaker 1: The bishop was in New York. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But Jim Morton who, who is now in--who went to--what's the largest Episcopal church in New York? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. Speaker 1: We all know it 'cause it's right over there with-- Speaker 2: Is it--it's not Saint John the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, yeah--Saint--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Is it Saint John the Divine [Cathedral of Saint John the Divine, New York, New York]? Is that the one? Speaker 1: No, unh-uh, it's not Saint John-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --'cause if you said it, it should immediately come to me, but that sounds right. Yeah, Divine. Speaker 2: Yeah, Saint John the Divine. Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So it was Saint John, Saint John the Divine--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --that's a huge church, right? It's a great big--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's exactly right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Huge is right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I mean, it was the large--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's the biggest I think church facility in the United States. Speaker 1: In fact, they say it's bigger than, than--the church itself is bigger than, than St. Peters [St. Peter's Basilica, Vatican City]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Right. Speaker 1: --in, in Italy, right. The, well, the bishop over it, right, was the guy that was making it, really backing it and making it really happen for, for the whole country. And then, and then the churches would join clear across the country. Speaker 2: Well, what kind of things were the churches doing as a result of training through UTC? Speaker 1: Well, see, there was, there was, there was a kind--there was--there 'cause everything in it was really new. For instance, we had a guy that started--a black guy in Raleigh, North Carolina, right, that started, started two housing projects. You see what I mean? It was--they were doing things for people on a scale that we had not done them before. You see what I mean? And, and, but they, they taught people how to do it, and we--in fact, in that case, which is the (unclear) one for me too, right, but it was a government program that, that they, they worked off of, right, and not, not necessarily was their program. But it was like their program, and, and, and, because people from the various denominations that, coming into the Urban Training Center, learned from this, from, from these government guys that was coming in, right. And, and, but all--everybody on our, our basic staff, all right, had written books on the new urban world, right. Story_ID: 672381 Speaker 1: And, and as a result of that, we had--in fact, one of the--the neatest thing we're, we're known for is that--and wherever we were in the country, the first thing that happened is they put you in Skid Row in Chicago [Illinois]. But, and Skid Row is something you might not know, but Skid Row was, you know, it's just the worst possible slum that white people had in, in the major cities. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's gone now, but it's-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it was depicted in the movie 'Blues Brothers' ['The Blues Brothers']. The Blues Brothers were actually staying on Skid Row-- Speaker 1: Oh, is that right? Speaker 2: --with the train coming by on Wabash [Avenue] and everything by the window and all that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, there we go--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I mean, The HistoryMakers si- our headquarters, is in what used to be Skid Row. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause Chicago changed so, man. I mean it's that--in fact, now, over where, where the Jewish section was, that, that sold secondhand goods and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 2: Yeah, what they used to call, well, Maxwell Street area--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's it. See, and that's gone too--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And the vernacular was called Jew Town, but it was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. But it's Maxwell Street area by the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Maxwell Street. And, when I first came back to Chicago and saw all those changes--see, I used to be a--YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. I was--way back in the '40s [1940s]--see, I graduated from high school [Macomb Senior High School, Macomb, Illinois] in, in the '40s [1940s], right. In fact, and I tried to go to the [U.S.] Army and couldn't. So I went to--because I had a hernia, right. And, and everybody in town knew me anyway, so they didn't wanna send me (laughter) (unclear) true--I mean but that's true. You know, you just had to, you had to say--they really didn't want me to get killed. In fact, they've named a street after me, one of the largest streets in Macomb, Illinois, no, Western Illinois University [Macomb, Illinois] is the school, right. And, and, but, but anyway, is that, so I left and went to--I, I left Western--I, I'm going back and forth a couple of times, right. And I went to Peoria [Illinois], and I was working in Peoria at the urban training center in Peoria at--pardon me, at a type of urban training center in Chicago. But it was the community center. It was the largest community center between Chicago and St. Louis [Missouri], right. And so, what happened, I was, I was in the one in Peoria, right, which was the largest between those two, when a woman came in from New York [New York] and wanted to, for me to go to Chicago 'cause Chicago needed a new guy. And, well, they needed--they were building a new, new Y. And they, and they needed the guy who was, had been at the, the old Y [Wabash Avenue YMCA, Chicago, Illinois] at thirty--35, 36, [sic. 38th Street] something like that, thirty--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Wabash. Speaker 1: Yeah, Wabash Avenue, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where they founded Negro History Week and the Association of the Study of African American Life and History [sic. Association for the Study of African American Life and History], Woodson [Carter G. Woodson] and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Precisely, right. And so much happened right there, right in that circle of--I was thinking of the main restaurant over there by--(laughter) I can't think, can't think of the name of it. But, but-- Speaker 2: Thinking about Gladys' [Gladys' Luncheonette, Chicago, Illinois], is that it? Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, well yeah, that was way out. You know what happened, but, but, you know what happened? After Gladys [Gladys Holcomb] moved back in town and cleaned up and didn't have as much stuff on the floor and the peanuts and all that, is that (laughter), she didn't make as much money (laughter) and that, because everybody wanted all that crackling underneath their feet there. Everybody wanted that (laughter), that, that feeling of the, of the old one, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, the famous soul food restaurant, Gladys'--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's right, (laughter) it's good to talk to you 'cause, you know, you very seldom get to be talking to people with all of this, and they're with the same background and coming out of the same basic experiences. Story_ID: 672382 Speaker 1: About--about what year was it that you went, went to Chicago [Illinois] to establish this urban--I mean the, help establish the new Y. Speaker 2: Oh, the new Y? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was--the war [World War II; WWII] hadn't stopped. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So this is back in the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, see, see, I, I went to college [Western Illinois University, Macomb, Illinois] for two years and decided--because I thought they were gonna send me, finally send me to the [U.S.] Army. I, I left 'cause I wanted to go across the country, and ended up--because I wanted to see America before, before the--by the way, Walt Whitman was my favorite poet then, and, and Walt Whitman, the new, the volume came out, 150th anniversary (laughter), this, this year. And a woman [Susan Williams Smith] that's doing my biography, she sent me one (laughter), and she (unclear)--she, she, knowing that I liked it, you know. So, but, but I, I can--I'm getting off of the subject. Speaker 1: Yeah but I--we probably talked about this before, but didn't you get some of your grounding in Chicago when you? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah, oh, yeah, in fact, actually, that's how I got to, to New York [New York], right. If it hadn't been for, for the, the--I would have been working out of Chicago, you see what I mean? And, but then I left, I left Chica- my wife [Octavia Vivian] didn't like Chicago because nobody spoke to you (laughter). Speaker 1: That's interesting 'cause when I moved there, I found it just to be the different--I mean just the opposite where people did speak. Speaker 2: Me too. I didn't want nobody to know who I was. I was just happy to live in a town where nobody knew me, right, and, and was big enough for you to have, have something like the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] on your side I mean is a part of the whole, whole deal, right. And, and yet not, not be known in the city (laughter) 'cause in every other town I'd been in, I, I, I knew everybody, everybody knew me, right (laughter). It's, it's--the urban world was coming in and later I was really dealing with the urban world, right. But, see, there was--because I left college, right, to do all of this kind of stuff, right, and I was waiting for the war to be over so I could go back, right. But I could do everything I wanted to do. I, I did a lot of things I wouldn't have been able to do. I, I remember when they called 55th in Chicago. That's how far we had extended. I was (unclear) (laughter), and the next one was sixty-something, right. Speaker 1: Yeah now you're referring to the range of the black population in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: There was a southern terminus of 55th Street at one time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --then it was 63rd [Street]-- Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: And then it was 75th [Street]--you know and it keep--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That, that's right, yeah, that's right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --kept moving south. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, is that, and see, and I'm glad you know because very few people even know that could have happened, much less did (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. It's that, that kind of restriction on black expansion that was, that made 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] make sense. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They couldn't get out of the Black Belt. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: They was stuck no matter how many black folks poured into Chicago--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: They was bursting at the seams 'cause they couldn't move out. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And so you lived--I mean there were ramshackle places with outhouses and stuff, side-by-side with people having--they had mansions and (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I can see both the film and the play, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, because you begin to--those were awakeners for so many of us right, you know what I mean? And, and when we, 'caused us to realize us that we had to get together to do this or do that or do the other, right. Speaker 1: When you were in Chicago, what was your church home there, in Chicago? Speaker 2: I didn't have one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I should have had because, you know, it was Chicago. Speaker 1: I must not--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But it was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church though. Speaker 1: Okay, but you were an A.M.--were you an A.M.E.-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was A.M.E. at that time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --ordained? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, before I became a Baptist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause--did you go to Quinn Chapel [Quinn Chapel A.M.E. Church, Chicago, Illinois] over there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I went to Quinn Chapel. Speaker 1: That's one of the oldest--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And, and I was going to--I was trying to think of the name of one of the oldest, one of the guys that was an outstanding preacher, known-- Speaker 1: An A.M.E. minister--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in Chicago? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I wish I could (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, see, 'cause it was in the '40s [1940s], and, and going into the '50s [1950s], yeah, but '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just don't know. I--you know, I wish I did. Story_ID: 672383 Speaker 1: So during the '60s [1960s] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was in town, you're working with the Urban-- Speaker 2: Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission]. Speaker 1: --Training Center (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, actually, that started some of my best work as a, because I was not really with Martin then. I had left Martin. See, I woke up one morning in Selma [Alabama], I woke up one morning and I knew that what I needed to do was to have--to do what we had done nationally, do it in each city. You see what I mean, is that, see, at the Urban Training Center, we brought everybody into Chicago [Illinois], right, and so did twenty other places, right--twenty-one really, places, right. In fact, Canada--no twenty places in the country. Canada, Canada had cut--what's the name of their urban training center, right. But, but--let's see, urban training, let's see. Speaker 1: Okay so you were trying to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Canadian, Canada urban training--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. But you were trying to organize locally in Chicago, the ministers of Chicago into a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I didn't really try that, being--it just happened that I was doing a case where--but, but what happened is, that--that's when I was with Martin, see, the Chicago thing happened. But, but the--see, but the guys, the guys in Chicago that was with it, listen, when you make, when you start an organization like Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] did, right, when you start an organization and in less than a month you've got ninety-some ministers, you can bet that Daley [Richard J. Daley] was paying 'em (laughter). You see what I mean. And that's what happened to me, right. And so I got rid of it because I knew that--but one of the head guys was, was a friend of Martin's, see what I mean? And, but, but, you know, Chicago is just Chicago. I don't care which way you cut it. You're, you're, you're--it's something--it's gonna be something funny sooner or later if you're doing anything of value. In fact, o- the major thing I did in Chicago, actually, was started--and I--I and Vince Harding [HistoryMaker Vincent Harding]--not Vince Harding, but Archie Hargrave [J. Archie Hargraves]. Speaker 1: Archie Hargraves, right. Yeah, I know him--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, see, I knew you'd know Archie, right. It's just good to hear these names, isn't it (laughter)? And that Archie Hargraves and I and one other guy that I keep, not able to think his name. When he left us, he went to Chicago, and he was, pretty soon he was on the school board. But I can't think of his name. But anyway, the three of us started, started an organization in Chicago, and I can't even think of the name of it now. It had C-O-C-C-O [sic. Coalition for United Community Action (CUCA)], something, right, but it wasn't the one that Martin came in for [Coordinating Council of Community Organizations], that it was something like that, right. Speaker 1: Yeah Archie Hargraves was still doing organizing in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In the 1990s. I know that 'cause I met with him a few times and-- Speaker 2: Remember-- Speaker 1: He was also like a great traveler to Africa and had all these African artifacts. Speaker 2: At that time, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Huge collection. Speaker 2: --precisely right. Is that, I tell you when Archie was--his wife died, and after that--and then his house burned. But it wasn't just his house burning. It was--well, right before his wife died, but it wasn't just his house burning. All of this material that he had saved over the years, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And all of his notes and everything else. Speaker 1: Yeah, he had a museum there, pretty much. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the point, and it all burned down, right. He built, he built a new house and it burned down. Story_ID: 672384 Speaker 1: Archie Hargraves [J. Archie Hargraves] had just left Shaw and come back to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Now, you say he was president of Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] when he came back--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was president of Shaw University. Speaker 2: So he came back--that's before he--before--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well he--yeah, I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was--his movement started--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But let me, let me, let me start with Archie in, at Shaw. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right, because no sense in leaving that out. Archie was called into Shaw, and he became president, right. They asked him to come to be their president. Well--oh, but I should have done stuff before, but anyway, it's easier to do it this way. So that Archie and I had just come back from Holland 'cause we had, we had--I should do it--let me do it the other way. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Is that--'cause where did we leave off? Speaker 2: We were just talking about you and Archie Hargraves and another fellow had-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but I mean where did we leave off before-- Speaker 2: Well, we were in '66 [1966] when Dr. King came to Chicago. That's what we were talking about. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, is that--but see, I was then, and Archie also--you're right. Archie and I--Archie was with the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission]. Story_ID: 672385 Speaker 1: Jim Morton [James Morton], who was head of it, called me one day and, as I was in Selma [Alabama]. I had just awakened that morning with the idea that somehow I should do for these various towns where I had trained guys, right, to, to bring, bring them to the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission], right. And so in doing that I was, I was making--and I was thinking about it, right. I was doing what was already being done, but through a different path, and that was the Urban Training Centers. The Urban Training Center called me and said, "Vivian [HistoryMaker C.T. Vivian], we would, we'd like for you to join us." And, and he told me what was going on. Well, the point is, he says, "The black guys are not here, and we don't have the money from their denominations," and says, then, "We'd like for you to come because," and says, "we voted on it, and we've decided you're the guy we want to come to join us and bring, bring black guys to the Urban Training Center." Speaker 2: Yeah, bring, bring the other ministers in seminary and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, the ministers, right. And, and the seminary thing was just mine. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They didn't care as long as they were ministers, right, as long as they had something to do with the, with the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So they were trying to attract the black ministers in Chicago [Illinois] to the Urban Training Center. Speaker 1: That's right because they wanted them to go back to the city to do things and to work with other guys who were Urban Training Center people so you'd have a good, solid workforce to get things done in, in each one of these towns. Well, as I said at the time, there was only two, one in New York [New York] and one in, one in Chicago, right. And so they called me, and, and I'd just had that dream, the morning or two before, right. But, and I, I was, wanted to really say no to them, but I said, "Okay, I'll let you know, Jim," Jim Morton who had called. And said, "I'll let you know, Jim." And so I was going across the Midwest, giving speeches or something, right. And, and I was thinking about this other thing that I dreamed that we needed to give them all the skills that the Urban Training Center could, could give them, could give them, right, the same guys, that I was thinking about going, having their towns. How could I get them into it, and here--and the next thing I know, it was all dreamed up on me, right. So I was, I was--and it was about the same time that Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was in Chicago. Remember when he got, got hit in the head in the little town-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Cicero [Illinois]. Yeah. Speaker 1: Cicero, right. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, he was staying with Reverend Shelvin Hall [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Shelvin Jerome Hall], remember him? Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, very much so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was host. And he got him an apartment on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. We interviewed Reverend, Reverend Hall. Speaker 1: You know, I'd forgotten about Hall. So I'm glad you said that. See, I need to keep notes too (laughter). But, 'cause, you know, it's all so good, it all comes together in a way. And so that, that when I did, I said to the guy who was driving me across the Midwest, making speeches and stuff, I said, "Stop at this--," in those days, there were, you know, there were telephones on every corner, and every, and every corner had a filling station and all that sort of stuff. And so I, I had him to stop, and I called Jim Morton and said, "Okay, Jim, I'll come," because I figured how that fit into the dream, see. And I said, "I'll come." He said, "Oh, goody. I could, I could wet on myself." (Laughter) He didn't say wet, but (laughter), but, and Jim, boy, Jim loved it. And he put together a strong program. Story_ID: 672386 Speaker 1: And see, what they gave me was the, was the--and so, but when I saw--and I told him I would and all that kind of stuff, right. But the first meeting we had, I was looking at what they expected me to do. And I said, "Hey, Jim [James Morton]," I said, "I can't bring anybody with this." I said, "You'll get very rare, guys who are gonna stay," 'cause they had to stay there a, a month--well, a month to three months according to which one, you know, program they were (unclear) with [at the Urban Training Center for Christian Mission]. And, and I said, "And no black minister is coming," (laughter)--I love the way you shake your head 'cause that was it. I said, "I can't get nobody to come here and, and stay for, for any length of time." And so I said, "I'll take the job if you allow that, that the money that you're--they're having for rent and all that kind of stuff, you know, and then, and (unclear) stuff that you rent for the weekend, give it to me with whatever we need to give to the guy to travel with, right, so he can go back to his home church for the weekend." And so that was the compromise, and it worked. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And it really worked. Is that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So how long would they stay at a time? Would they stay a week or something? A week maybe--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, yeah, stay, stay, stay during the whole week, but go in--almost a whole week-- Speaker 2: But then go back home to-- Speaker 1: Then they'd go, they'd go home to, to preach, come back on Monday morning, Tuesday morning, right, Tuesday morning--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. 'Cause if they stayed three months, they wouldn't have a church, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's exactly right. That's what I told Jim. I said, "Jim, you know that's--," (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Somebody else would be at the pulpit--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's exactly right. That's what I said, and, and probably his assistant (laughter). And so, and so Jim, Jim said, "Oh, yeah." And so, and went over to the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] and walked away with a quarter million dollars-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and--to get started. And every time I needed it, they'd come up with, you know, another quarter million-- Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: --to, to make everything happen, right. Speaker 2: And you said the most successful churches involved in that were the Episcopal ones around the country? Speaker 1: The ones that were (unclear), that created the program. Speaker 2: Oh, created the program. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No, I was asking what the most successful churches were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --of the ministers that came to be a part of it. Speaker 1: Well, it's hard to tell--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: What, what--or what were, just give us some examples of what some of them did? Speaker 1: Well, see, most of the major churches that you can think of--and if the Episcopal church is involved, you know, (laughter) to get, to get Episcopal (laughter), to find the number of them (laughter) is that--but it was, but all the major denominations were involved. Speaker 2: Well, for instance, did St. Edmund's Episcopal [St. Edmund's Episcopal Church] in Chicago [Illinois], were they a part of it 'cause I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well see, I don't know their particular names, see, 'cause--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now, they were a big church on 61st Street, all the celebrity black doctors went to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, I, I remember that. Speaker 2: Remember them--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and because that's the only Episcopal church I heard of. I know there were others--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. There were some others in Chicago that, but that was the big one--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but that was the big one. Speaker 2: St. Edmund's, and they had a long history in the black community--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: And they even--the reason why I'm asking about them specifically because it--when you said Episcopal, it kind of triggered the fact that they actually built housing around there, too, you know, so they might have been one. I don't know. I thought that they might have been. Speaker 1: It could have been, see, because that was the--that would have come under the New York [New York] group. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You, you see what I mean? Speaker 2: I know there was a Reverend Daniels [sic. Wilbur Nathan Daniel] over there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, no, but, no, in Chicago group--see, New York had its own group, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and Chicago had its own group, plus--see, everything around it, see, 'cause the white guys, they, they came in and stayed, stayed a whole month, see what I mean. And they came in and, but the black guys, I knew that wasn't gonna work. And see, and, and so, that's why I did it the way I did it, right. And, and I had the money for them to go and come. And, and they, you know, and they liked that. I mean they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now I know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --knew I had it. They, you know, it wasn't no guess work and-- Story_ID: 672387 Speaker 1: Do you remember Reverend John Porter [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Kwame John R. Porter] in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. In fact--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Was he a part of it? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--no. He wasn't really a part of the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission], but, but Porter, I remember because, for another reason. He said, he came talking about that, that they're going to, tear out part of, part of Chicago's South Side, and, and I remember, you know, I re- only remember me talking, you know, back to him, right, but there's probably a gang of us, right (laughter). But, and they were saying, "But what can you do?" And when we found out the plans for it had happened twenty years before, I mean really twenty years before. The plans were that they're gonna tear up this, this, you know, that what they were gonna do to that part of, of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah it had been Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] in his case--it would have been Englewood--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, see, that's the kind of stuff, right. And so, yeah, Englewood, yeah, and, and he, and we said, "Look, you know, bro, you know, like the fact that you wanted it to happen, but I'm glad the fact that you told us about it." But there's no way you can stop something in Chicago that was set twenty years ago, and it has Daley [Richard J. Daley] on its side (laughter). You can forget that, right (laughter). They even got solid reasons for you not to get it, right (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, there's another reverend over there, Reverend Daniels [sic. Wilbur Nathan Daniel], he's a Baptist-- Speaker 2: Oh, Daniels, yeah, he was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Antioch Baptist [Antioch Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], yeah. Speaker 2: --he was, not only was he a Baptist, he was a Baptist preacher. And not only was he a Baptist preacher, he walked the--I mean he went up and down-- Speaker 1: The aisles (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, but not only up and down the aisles, he jumped from one--the thing you sit on. Speaker 1: (Laughter) One pew to the next? Speaker 2: Yeah, one, one pew to the next, all the way back to the church, right. And, and he'd jump down and he'd jump back up and all that kind of stuff, right. And (laughter) and at that period, they loved him. I don't know ever what happened to him, really, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think he retired several years ago. Did you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I'm glad he lived that long. Story_ID: 672388 Speaker 1: Reverend Brazier [HistoryMaker Bishop Arthur Brazier] in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Brazier. Now, Brazier, Brazier was somebody else. I've been back to preach for Brazier a couple of times, but that was it. In fact, my first, my first preaching in Chicago [Illinois] among the big guys was his church. My wife [Octavia Vivian] and I went because--who, who was the great white community organizer? Speaker 1: Oh, Saul Alinsky. Speaker 2: Saul Alinsky. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The first time Saul and I met, we talked 'til three [o'clock] in the morning, all right, and, and later at the Urban Training, when I was at the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission], he was trying to get me to come and join his staff, right. And I, I, "Nah, nah, nah, nah." Speaker 1: You didn't join it? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I said no. I let that go. And, and I did, of course, but I liked Saul. And Saul liked me. He invited me to come, you know, to join his staff, and, in fact, and that was that first time we met, right. But later, he was giving a speech to the guys at the Urban Training Center, and, and we met each other coming in and out. He was coming in and out of the class. He was, he was giving a speech too and working within--I was, he was right at the top of the stairs. I remember it very clearly, even. And, and he said, "Why don't you join me, Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian]?" (Laughter) I said, "No, doc," (laughter) and then, and then, it's even better than it was. I don't have intentions (laughter). And so we let it go. Speaker 1: Yeah, Saul Alinsky, he wa- he codified community organizing, basically in--yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. In fact-- Speaker 1: TWO [The Woodlawn Organization, Chicago, Illinois], I guess was an organization that was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, TWO was his organization--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --founded out of his. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, The Woodlawn Organization. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's, it's just good to remember this stuff because you, you don't even think about losing and not remembering it, but you do. You don't remember, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So you were in the thick of all this then when you were in Chicago, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. In fact, actually, the biggest thing that I really did in Chicago was the job thing where we created twenty thousand jobs for young, black guys. Speaker 1: Was it Job Corps? Speaker 2: No, no--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Not Job Corps. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't any of that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --official stuff. Archie [J. Archie Hargraves] and I and this other fellow I was talking about-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we organized, we organized an organization [Coalition for United Community Action]. First, we won against the Red Rooster stores [Red Rooster, Inc.]; and I remember going back five years later and there was, there was a thing growing and blowing in the wind. And it was one of the roosters from the five, from the, from the Red Rooster stores (laughter) because we closed them up. That was one of our first victories. We had another real victory too, but--and then we went big. And we started organizing all the gangs. Story_ID: 672389 Speaker 1: About this time, you wrote a book called 'Black Power and the American'--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: 'And the American Myth' ['Black Power and the American Myth,' C.T. Vivian], right. Yeah. Speaker 1: I knew you knew the answer (laughter). Yeah, what was it about? What was it about? Speaker 2: Let me see, what was it (laughter)? Speaker 1: Playing with (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, it was really about how are we going to move forward in that time. It was--community development type stuff, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and it was published by Fortress Press of Philadelphia [Fortress Press, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Augsburg Fortress, Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, okay. Speaker 2: Fortress is a really good press. In fact, the wife [Octavia Vivian] did a book for, for them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, for, for Fortress too. The, it was called 'Coretta' ['Coretta: The Story of Coretta Scott King,' Octavia Vivian]. My wife did it in remembrance of Coretta King [Coretta Scott King]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now this-- Story_ID: 672390 Speaker 1: One of the issues that you dealt with in the, in 'Black Power and the American Myth' [C.T. Vivian] was the relationship between Christians and Muslims. This is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, but I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --this is topical today, but. Speaker 2: Yeah, just, just--but it's not, it's, you know, I knew very little about that. The point being is, I did it because it was the thing at the time; and, for instance, the wife [Octavia Vivian] and I used to go over to, to--they--the old man-- Speaker 1: Elijah Muhammad's mosque [Temple No. 2, Chicago, Illinois]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, had started, had started a restaurant in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh the--okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Remember, and he was, he was building, he was doing businesses up and down that street, right. Speaker 1: Oh, on Cottage Grove [Avenue]? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah, he had Salaam Restaurant [Salaam Restaurant and Bakery, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: That's right, remember. Speaker 1: And Your Supermarket [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that, yeah, that--I think, Your's, too, supermarket, right. Well, we would go over to the restaurant and the wife and I would have breakfast there every, every Saturday morning because, as our way of, of showing our concern for them to be successful. In fact, I went to their publishing house one time, they didn't know but I had been at the Sunday School Publishing Board in Chicago [sic.] (laughter), you know what I mean. Pardon me, for me--Sunday School Publishing Board in, what's the name of my cities. And, in fact, that's how I first came to--boy, that's strange, no, it's that I'm old. That's what it is. Speaker 1: You just can't remember the name of--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to, but, I can't remember the town. Speaker 1: I hear you, yeah, it happens to me sometimes you know now. Speaker 2: I can give you all the details of what I'm about to say, but-- Speaker 1: Well, somebody can look it up if you--you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It's no problem. Speaker 2: But I can see the, see, see the corner on which the publishing house was on. And I know the reason that it--all the publishing houses--Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Oh, Nashville, oh yeah the Christian publishing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Right. That's right. A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] lo- their publisher [AMEC Publishing House, Nashville, Tennessee] is there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that's right. In fact, and the head of the A.M.E. of publishing and I during our movement in Nashville, we did a news, a newspaper [Nashville News Star] for the city because there was a black guy [Henry Allen Boyd] that had a black newspaper [Nashville Globe]. But it was of nothing 'cause he was afraid to scare white people. And he was--but he, you know, he was right. But he just had to make the decision, right. And his was to produce a newspaper that was all white ads, but nothing else. And, and we produced a newspaper that met the needs of every black person in town quote, unquote (laughter). But we didn't sell nearly as much as he did (laughter) 'cause he had the money (unclear) and the ads, we didn't have, right. But I was just trying to think of his name, that was, is the guy. But there was three of us. He came up with the money. I did all of the, the writing and so forth, and, and the other guy sold ad- sold, sold ads and stuff, right. So we had a good little team of three guys (laughter), is that--well, and, and a sister, a youngster, right who, who typed all the stuff. But we changed, we, we changed the, the typewriter--I forget what the official name of it was, but we changed it so that it would, it would type, so it typed like a, like a press-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --would produce, right. And, and she knew how to do, do, do it so that two--she typed it twice, and that second time was it, right. See what I mean. It was just like it was a press, an official press. And like everybody else had, right; at least it looked like what everybody else had (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, it was a Ebony, your book was a Ebony Book Club selection. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Which didn't hurt it. Story_ID: 672391 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, you became the director of Seminary Without Walls at Shaw [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina]--can--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah in fact, I created it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, and that was the idea, was, and, and then had to go to find out, I had to sell the idea that it could be, that it would be a seminary that would be accepted by the official, official authorities, right. And I did it. I mean we had to go into where the, where the office that, that gave accreditation to both Canada and the United States. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to go there three or four times, but, and, but it worked out (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you, so did you have to move to Raleigh [North Carolina], or? Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time I was in Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Nashville, okay, all right. All right. Speaker 2: But when I, when I went with--but, but when I went with what's his name, the urban, the ur- to create-- Speaker 1: UTC? Speaker 2: --who was we talking--who were we talking about that, the minister that was so well liked and his house burned down? Speaker 1: Oh, Archie Hargraves [J. Archie Hargraves]. Speaker 2: Archie-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --so that, that was, that was the time right there when we were-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --Archie and I were, and see, he'd gone to, he'd gone to Shaw. And then right after--well, in fact, they'd burned the building down that all my stuff was in for the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission]. But, and, and so that I had to give it up because we didn't have any more money. But the Urban Training Center was, was built--see, do you know what the Urban Training Center was? It's a good idea. I hate to tell anybody-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: --because I need to do it. And one guy that was with me forty years ago is still with me. We do other stuff, but he was a sound man. Story_ID: 672392 Speaker 1: I did Seminary Without Walls [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina]. I had the twenty best guys in the, in the--teachers of various theological stuff. And I got everybody finally except--what was, who was the great preacher in New York [New York]? Adam Clayton--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor]? Speaker 1: No, no, Gardner Taylor. Speaker 2: Gardner Taylor. Speaker 1: Gardner Taylor, except for Gardner Taylor. Gardner told me, he was, "Yeah, I was gonna do it." He was, "Yeah, I was gonna do it," and finally, he said, "Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian]," he says, "look, I have dealt with preaching so much, I don't wanna deal with it anymore. Could you forgive me?" And I said, "Yeah, Doc." Anybody would forgive him for anything, right (laughter) 'cause he, he was the greatest preacher. Do you know what, you know what they did in, in, in Down Under? Speaker 2: In Australia? Speaker 1: In Australia. He went there to preach. They asked him to come to preach. He came to preach, and they said, "Greatest preacher in the world," they gave him a thing with greatest preacher in the world on it. And he--and that's the first time they'd heard him. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: But let me tell you, when I was at the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission]--no, when I was at the church school stuff, right, I, I--it was the first time I heard him. He, I was, you know, I was at the--no, I was at the--the church, the church school, right, right, is that, and so we had to go to this big meeting where everybody was meeting, all the Baptists were meeting. And so, I, you know, naturally, I went because you had to go in the first place, but I liked it in the second place 'cause it was always worth it, right. And so I go there, and, and this big meeting, this big, big place. And nobody, there--very few people were there, right. And so finally, the woman wanted to start it. And, and so she wanted to start it. So she said to Gardner Taylor, "Would you, would you do the introduction?" He looked at her as though, I'm not supposed to be doing anything. I'm just here, right. And, but he thought about it, so he did it. Let me tell you. We--I'll tell you where we were, were. We were right across from New York [New York] where the, where the ocean meets the shore. What's that town? And named after the planks and so forth. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh (unclear). Speaker 1: After the--it's got the Broadway--no--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Atlantic City. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And we were, and so we were in Atlantic City, you know, huge kind of place, right. And, and so she said, "Doctor, would you, would you rise and start this meeting for us?" And he looked at her as though, what's wrong you, right. You know, I didn't intend for this. But he got up and let me tell you, when he started talking, I could, I (gesture) got blinded. I mean I, I could, I could feel, I could see everything he was saying. I mean I could actually see the water hit the shore. And, and, you know, and we were--he, he--when he preached, it was something else. In fact, I had a friend in New York that every now and then I'd go stay with him because I had to go back and forth out of New York. And, and he lived across--he, he taught at a seminary in New York, right. And, but it doesn't matter about that, is that, so, so I--he, he--I wanna deal with Gardner Taylor, but now I'm--its--things come that way. Story_ID: 672393 Speaker 1: Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was, was preaching, and I could see everything he was saying. I could see it, right. And the water was coming, 'cause it's, it's known, as, you know, that is a, is a ocean town anyway [Atlantic City, New Jersey], right. But I could see it. And I'd never been there before. It was like I was familiar with it all. But Gardner Taylor was a great preacher. The, the first time I went to New York [New York], I preached for a buddy of his. And so he came, right. And we went over to the highest building in New York at the time-- Speaker 2: Empire State Building [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Empire State Building. And that evening and it's, and it's--I haven't been to the Empire State Building since. And that was years ago, and I was much younger, right, as--but should have, you would think so. But, you know, I go in and out of New York all the time, and, and don't get anything done but the one thing I got to do, right. I got, just, just a funny kind of thing 'cause you, you want to get more than that done in a, you know, in a major city. Speaker 2: But Gardner Taylor, what was--did you have any more reflections about him and what he meant to-- Speaker 1: Basically, yes, because Gardner wanted to--Gardner was moving around the world so much at the end of his, his, you know, real life as, as a minister, right, that he just had to stop it all and refuse, and refuse people all over the world. And he was truly that great. And, and I had a fellow named Washington [George Washington (ph.)] that I would sometimes stay with when I was in New York, and, and he, he's--his first name is George, and he lived right across the George Washington Bridge in New York (laughter) right. And, and we would listen to Gardner Taylor, right, until two in the morning, just such a great preacher, doc, all right. Story_ID: 672394 Speaker 1: Where I was going with that was (unclear) made, had each one of these guys to make tapes. I had--I called a meeting of, of about ten of 'em, right, and I asked them to choose the guy that was going to do the tapes for me on, on their subject. And so--and these guys did. I mean they were very honest about it. They--you would think they would be arguing about it, right. But they didn't because most--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So they, they understood that they had specialties--that they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's it. See, and, and so when I asked 'em and knowing what everybody else had to say about them, right, then automatically, they were willing to go along, right. And so that they ended up then cutting, cutting full semester tapes, right, on, on their subject. Those, those tapes that I made was, the, it was the basis of the, of the--and that they agreed upon, right. It was the basis of the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission], see, because then guys could call in and buy tapes, write a letter and buy tapes, right. But the funny part of it is, they got so they were buying tapes just to preach from--not really to, you know, to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Not to complete a course, sort of stuff--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's it. And, and so finally, though when I left the Urban Training Center, I tried to keep it going, and, but couldn't because they wanted it to preach from. But it reminded me that earlier days at the, at the, at--we would go to the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]. And when you went to the National Baptist Convention, there were already, already tapes for sale. And (laughter), and everybody wanted certain guys who were, who were real good preachers, right, they wanted their tapes. And that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now were these the days where people would actually study the tape and then try to do the sermon themselves or some--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we, oh--not try (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They would--I see. Speaker 1: Yeah, in fact, when you, when you went down in, at the--where all the, where all the clothes were that you wanted to buy and all that kind of stuff-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and, you know, and robes and all that, well, you also had all these-- Speaker 2: Tapes for sale? Speaker 1: --tapes and stuff down there, right. And, in fact, and there were guys like one here in Atlanta [Georgia]--he's dead now. But if he didn't like the way that the crowd received him, he'd tell 'em how they ought to (laughter). He would--he'd tell 'em how they ought to, and then, then he did everything but cuss 'em out because they didn't think he was the greatest thing in the world (laughter). And, and (unclear) I had more fun at the Urban Training Center. I enjoyed everything going on, in, in--during the Urban Training Center. Story_ID: 672395 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now in '74 [1974], you took a trip to, took a group to Kenya, right? How--how did that take place? Did it happen like that, or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I was with a group that went to Kenya. Speaker 1: Oh, you were with a group, okay. Speaker 2: And, and what happened, the whole thing was a failure because they, the guys themselves, the guys themselves-- Speaker 1: That organized it? Speaker 2: Yeah, had not properly put it all together, and it had created problems. But the other thing that was so good about it is, for me, I met the president of Kenya, all right. And so, and-- Speaker 1: Who was it at that time? Was it-- Speaker 2: If you give me--I can-- Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, not Jomo Kenyatta, was it, or? Speaker 2: No, oh, no, no [sic.]. But--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Mboya [Tom Mboya]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But Jomo Kenyatta had a, had a farm--and I got a picture, a great drawing of Jomo at the house. But he had a farm right across from this guy who was president. Speaker 1: Yeah I'm just--can't--I'm sorry. I can't even think of the--if it's not Mboya. No, Mboya wasn't the president. He was the secre- under--who came after Jomo Kenyatta? I'm trying to think. I can't think of it, of who it was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, because--I can't either 'cause I've been there, you know, a couple of times since--different (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But, but the trip--you said it didn't, it was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but it was a--the trip didn't work out, but, but he, the liking of the president. He and--we shook hands, and I said, "Look," I said, "I wanna do something for you. I don't wanna slap hands and all that." I said, "I wanna do something for you." He looked at me as if to say, do you really? (Laughter) And I said, "Yeah, I, I want to really do something, and what are your two favorite subjects?" And he says, "Right now what we need is new materials in education. And we need to do superior farming," all right. So I, I come back to Atlanta [Georgia], or wherever I was, and, and start, start working on it, right. And so he--I went--he had me to come back, and I went all across Kenya to all of the--and tea is their big thing, right. And, but, but that's just one of them 'cause they had all these farms, right. And, and he, he gave me one of his top guys, and his, and his big car, and we cut across, across the place. You know, so much tea is grown in, there at a certain level, right, 'cause you have to have a certain level for it to grow. Speaker 1: Altitude, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that it, it takes you an entire day to drive across the tea, the tea section of (unclear), right. And you, and you always have to get, stay overnight because you can't, you can't get out of the, out of the jungle, right (laughter). You've got to--and, but I made a good friend in there and, and had a fellow who was good at agriculture. I was in Iowa 'cause I was doing workshops and so forth in Iowa, and I put the two together so, so that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Well let me move on, I'ma move on to another subject here, now in 19--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure, 'cause it's, yeah, this is--you want more than this. Story_ID: 672396 Speaker 1: In 19--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah this is--you want more than this. Speaker 1: --seventy-nine [1979], you co-found the National Anti-Klan Network [Center for Democratic Renewal]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right. Tell us about that. Speaker 2: The idea was how are we going to get rid of these Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] types, and the--and so we created an Anti-Klan Network, and, and people joined it across the country. And, and we, we bore down on, on the Klan. Louisville [Kentucky] is the one I remember so well because there was a, a white woman in Louisville. She was so against Klan that--she was the head of an organization of black and white. And she would not be--and she really deserved to be president, but she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now is this Anne Braden? Speaker 2: Yeah, Anne Braden. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Anne Braden de- she deserved to be president, right. There's nothing like Anne. And, and, but she would not be, she would not be a president of a organization that had, that had a black leader. If, if the guy could do it, she wanted, she, she would always not prefer to be president. Speaker 1: Yeah, she'd defer I guess to--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's right. And, and she did all the time. In fact, she died when I didn't expect her to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was caught off guard. I just couldn't quite deal with that stuff--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now you-- Story_ID: 672397 Speaker 1: You worked on the Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] campaign in '84 [1984] too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I just closed down my real workshops, right, for six months to help Jesse. Now I knew he wasn't gon' win, but that wasn't the point. And what I was about was, is that anybody who wanted to run--any black person who wanted to run for president, I wanted to help 'em. And Jesse--I tell you, I'll tell you exactly when it was. I can't come up with the date, come up with the events. It was--remember, Jesse brought a pilot [Robert O. Goodman] back from one of the European countries. Do you remember? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I think it was Iran [sic. Syria]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I think it was-- Speaker 2: It could have been. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I think it was Iran. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think so, or-- Speaker 2: Well, Jesse brought the guy back, and, and I was there at--the wife [Octavia Vivian] and I both were, were there and to, to--when they came back and were in the, what they called--what do they call the, the yard that they have for stuff like that? And so, and then Jesse came over after--to me, right afterwards and said, "Could you be at the meeting with me tonight?" Says, "Because I want you--I am running, and I want you on my staff." So I did, and my wife decided to go home, and so we took her to the airport and so forth. And the, and, and for week after week after week, I was going somewhere to sell, sell Jesse to, to, and answer all the questions that people had, right. And, and I always have thought deeply about it. I wasn't happy about everything that happened, but I was really, I would--I was, really wanted to do anything I could to help at all. The story that stands out for me, a woman in Atlanta [Georgia] said that she always--right after Christmas, she would ask the kids, "What do you want to be?" And the, and this is the first time anybody said, "President of the United States," two, two black guys. And that was worth my being--that was worth my going up and down the country (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah this is 1984, the Run, Jesse, Run campaign--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah that was the slogan then. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: It did catch people up--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --people got caught up in it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, doc, because remember the first woman, the first person we really had to run for president, who was a woman-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Shirley Chisholm. Speaker 2: --Shirley Chisholm, right. And, and I knew nothing really about it 'cause it was a New York [New York] type thing, and, and it was years before I knew New York well enough to, to really relate, you know. But when there was a guy, I said, "Let's go." Story_ID: 672398 Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] campaign? Speaker 2: Oh, goodness. I, I went everywhere they went, and, and would, and would do it yet. Somehow something got in my way. I should be out--I should, right now, I should be somewhere in the country, all right, because everybody should be doing something to make certain of this--and, and I'm one of those guys who I--I've got to do more than, than vote. I want to (laughter), wanna build something, you know (laughter), do something that, where, you know, that is so, that's so important it's, it stands out, never forgotten. In fact, actually, as we had the museum, I--he had me sitting--he and I and [HistoryMaker] John Lewis as sitting right behind he and his wife [Michelle Obama] that evening, right. But it's--I, I'd do anything for him. In fact, there was a New York Times [The New York Times] article--they caught me off guard. I didn't know that they'd been there. We had a meeting of about fourteen of us with him, of course. I mean, he called the meeting. And, so, as--he came in late, but when he came in, he asked something we were thinking about, you know. I don't know what it was 'cause I got out of, I just got, I got--it sounds strange. That's what makes it so slow coming, but I got teary eyed, right. And when he, when he walked in. And see, and what I was thinking about was we had Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and we had, now, we had a president, right, is that--and what will the next be? What could it be, right? But, and, and thanking the Lord, right, all the time. This is, this--it's, it's, when you really think about how great all this is, that in a short length of time--and I didn't think we'd have a president for another hundred years. I really didn't. And it sounds strange now, but, so when he walked in, and we started around the room, and I started, I started just talking about how it was gonna be like when he wasn't president anymore. Story_ID: 672399 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Money. I, I was just chairman of a bank [Capitol City Bank and Trust Company, Atlanta, Georgia] that we lost, right. And it hurt me, but I didn't know enough, right. And the, but we kept it open for twenty-two years. And a former president of, of Atlanta [Georgia] called me and said, "Don't worry, Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian]," says, "don't let it hurt you." He says, "For twenty-two years you got to make certain that people who might not have started a business, people that may not have been done this or done that, right, was able to do it because you guys at, at the bank could, could loan 'em the money." I remember the first big sale we--(laughter) sale? The first, the first big client we had was a guy wanted to borrow seven, seven thousand--seven hundred thousand dollars. And we were just opened. And we didn't have that much, and the Feds are really rough on you, man, and they should be. I mean they're rough on all banks, you know, and, not, not just yours. And (laughter) they're rough on all of 'em, right. And so he said, "Don't worry about it, Vivian." He said, "My, my father couldn't have put us through college," he and his brother, says, "had it not been for a bank like yours. And they struggled like you did," and he says, "and you, for twenty-two years, you made it last." Well, I really hadn't thought of it that way (laughter), but it, but when I heard it, it made you feel so good. Story_ID: 672400 Speaker 1: But now, we--there's a guy in town [HistoryMaker John Hope Bryant] that--and I can't think, I can't put his whole name together. But he's, really knows money (gesture), and he's written a book on how we can save, how, how our poor people can save the rich ['How The Poor can Save Capitalism: Rebuilding the Path to the Middle Class,' John Hope Bryant]. They need them and how to make both of them work for each other, right. And, and it's that kind of saying. But I, I left because we went--I mean I'm thinking about Douglass, Frederick Douglass. You know, Frederick Douglass was cheated out of what would be about two hundred thousand dollars today, right. And, and as a result--but he, he swallowed it and let it go. But, but this guy wanted to rename the, the building that the federal bank's in [Freedman's Bank Building, Washington, D.C.] and was able to do it. And I and, he and I, and, but--one other guy, who was with Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] as well, is that we, we went in and made certain it all happened. And now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: This is Frederick Douglass' bank [Freedman's Savings and Trust Company] I mean? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--well, it's, it's got the name that he was working under on it now, right. But it's the building, right. And, now but, but the, the good thing about all this, as I began to think, see, that bank that they started was a bank that, that was the bank for every black person in America, right. Now, they probably taught you that, right. But I don't know, I don't know, but I'm just--I was just guessing, right (laughter). But is that, and now, that's what I want. We have enough guys that could lay aside a meaningful amount of money for, to create a business, if not this bank, but a business that, that we could buy anything and back it that we would like to have in black America; and have, have a board that everybody trusted, and, and go raise it, right--have everybody drop at least a thousand dollars in, that we know can afford it. Get my point. And, and why I say make a business out of it, is that make it so that you can also take fifty dollars, a guy can buy fifty dollars' worth of stock. You see what I mean, so that no matter--it's just like with the bank that we started here. We had a lot of success out of the--our real opening successes were with average people, and it was later that people that really had some money could come in (laughter) and lose it, right. Story_ID: 672401 Speaker 1: When you think about your long life of service and all the things that you've been able to do, and the people you've been able to interact with, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My what? Speaker 1: Legacy. Speaker 2: Oh, another good project and finish it (laughter). That would, that would really be it, boy, is that--and this is why I'm thinking about this, this thing. What if you could do something in the name of Douglass [Frederick Douglass] that had money in it and reestablish--in fact, when, when the idea came to me out of the fellow we were working with, I, I got a first edition of his, of his biography, right. And oh yeah, as it, and it looks bad though (laughter). It doesn't look pretty. It looks bad, but I don't care. It--this is it. And I'm holding it, right, and (gesture) it's about that thick, right. And I'm holding it, but-- Speaker 1: So somebody's working on this now, on a book about your life's--your life? Speaker 2: Yeah, doing a biography, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which is going to be my-- Speaker 1: Is there a tentative title to it? Speaker 2: No, I--we haven't decided yet (laughter). And it, but she's something else though, she [Susan Williams Smith] says--and a minister, and, and can preach. And, and not nonsense, but can preach. And that makes me very happy, boy, to know somebody like that can also--what's the guy's name--she did another biography of another minister. His name doesn't come. But, but he's the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: From SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and that background--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, not from SCLC, but from one of the, of the more acceptable organiz- I tell you who it was. Remember, remember the guy that said, "And God's gonna damn," but they, everybody said he was cussing, he was cussing out God, you know, "God Damn, America." Speaker 1: Oh, Reverend Wright. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, Wright. Reverend Wright. Speaker 1: Wright. Speaker 2: Reverend Jeremiah Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What's his first name? Jeremiah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Jeremiah. Speaker 1: Jeramiah Wright. Speaker 2: Well, they named the book 'Jeramiah' ['The Book of Jeremiah: The Life and Ministry of Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.,' Susan Williams Smith] that he did the biography of--she did the biography of him, for him. Speaker 1: Oh, so she's working on your biography now? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't, I'm not pushy so it'll be a while (laughter). Speaker 1: It's still being written in other words (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's still being written, yeah. That's exactly right, right. And maybe next time I can say, "Here it is" (laughter). And you won't have to take it down (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, I hope so. We're, we're at the end of this half hour--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I tell you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So thank you once again. All right. Okay. All right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, my brother, it's good, it's good...